Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 3 February 2011 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Statements by the President
I would like to make several remarks in connection with the opening of this part-session .
Our eyes are turned , today , towards the European Union 's southern neighbours .
The groundbreaking events of recent days in Egypt have put new heart into societies across the region .
We admire their courage , determination and aspirations for democracy .
This stance has already brought significant changes , which we fully support .
We regret , however , that this has not taken place without loss of life .
We call on all the governments in the region to open up to dialogue with their citizens .
We want an end to every form of harassment of peacefully demonstrating people and the abolition of years-old states of emergency .
We call for the restoration of full freedom of speech .
The voice of the people must be heeded .
This is also an important objective for the entire European Union and for all of us .
Let us remember that in 1989 , many European politicians were afraid of the changes in Central and Eastern Europe , so let us not be afraid to be fully involved politically and economically .
Let us help our neighbours achieve their democratic aspirations , so that they will want to live in their own countries and be able at last to do so with dignity , and not be forced to emigrate .
Let us work towards this objective together as a true community .
( Applause )
In relation to the events in the countries of our southern neighbours , I would also like to draw attention to the fact that some of the European Union 's Member States have become the objective of a significant number of migrants from that region .
The Union should act quickly and in concert to support those Member States which are experiencing an increased influx of refugees .
In the European Union , we also share this obligation and this responsibility .
The next piece of information is that on 12 February , we observed the International Day against the Use of Child Soldiers .
It is estimated that there are currently 200 000 to 300 000 children directly involved in armed conflicts in over 20 countries around the world .
The European Parliament is actively involved in the fight against the shameful practice of using children in armed conflicts .
Finally , shocking figures are reaching us from Iran .
Since the beginning of the year , three times more people have been executed there than in the same period last year .
Particularly alarming are the death sentences being handed down to political dissidents .
I call on the Iranian authorities to impose a moratorium on carrying out the death penalty and , in the future , to remove it from the list of punishments prescribed in Iran .
Signature of acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 20 January 2011 , pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday
No amendments have been proposed .
Tuesday
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have requested the inclusion on the agenda for Tuesday morning of a statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the rule of law in Russia .
First of all , I would like to call upon Mrs Harms to speak so that she can give the grounds for this request .
The floor is yours , Mrs Harms .
Mr President , I take the view that , in the light of what has happened in the Khodorkovsky case , we absolutely should debate the state of the law in Russia .
However , given the Duma elections still to come in the autumn , we have good reason to concern ourselves with the situation in this , our major neighbour in the east of this continent .
Of course , we are all repeatedly confronted at the moment with the question of whether we are actually doing enough in our neighbouring countries to help bring about human and civil rights and freedom .
Many of us have also certainly asked ourselves self-critically whether we actually always debated what was necessary when it came to Egypt and to Tunisia .
I do not want us to allow ourselves such negligence in the east of our own continent and I therefore call for us to deal with the question of ' The Rule of law in Russia ' without fail this week - or , more specifically , tomorrow .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I want to support this request by Rebecca Harms .
I also want to tell you that , since we formulated this request in the Conference of Presidents and now here at this plenary session , we have received more and more pressure from the Russian side not to do it .
Mrs Kristiina Ojuland , who organised a seminar a few weeks ago on the rule of law in Russia , was visited by a representative from the Russian Foreign Affairs Ministry saying : ' do not push for this ' and ' do not push for a resolution in the European Parliament on the rule of law in Russia ' .
I do not think it is up to the Russians to decide the agenda of the European Parliament : it is up to us ourselves to do that .
( Applause )
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , as a standing rapporteur on relations with Russia , may I inform you that we have already launched a very thorough process in order to deal with all the serious matters which are important in our relations with Russia .
We have already had a hearing with the representative of the External Action Service and a representative of the Russian Government .
On 2 March , we are going to organise another hearing with experts which will deal with all the important aspects of relations with Russia .
In the second week of March , we are planning to have a comprehensive text , including a recommendation , which will be open to discussion and amendments and which will wind up with a debate in plenary with the participation of the High Representative , who , to our knowledge , is not available this week .
So therefore , without neglecting or denying the importance of this topic , it is much better to allow this process to continue and reach its end in such a way as to have a wide-ranging debate which will lend credibility to our decision .
( FR ) Mr President , there is something that I do not understand .
Last week , during the Conference of Presidents , you said that we would be holding a debate on Russia in March because Baroness Ashton would be present .
Secondly , during the Conference of Presidents , you said that we needed to organise a debate on Russia because Mr Putin was going to visit the Commission , or rather Mr Barroso .

According to the information I have received this afternoon , Mr Putin is not coming to see the Commission .
Do you have any information on this issue ?
The debate was requested last week only because Mr Putin was coming .
However , a debate on Russia , together with a resolution , is still scheduled for March .
I should now like to receive some information concerning what we discussed .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
The statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the rule of law in Russia will be included as the third item on the agenda for Tuesday morning .
The deadline for tabling motions for resolutions falls on Tuesday , 15 February at 10 : 00 .
The deadline for tabling amendments and joint motions for resolutions falls on Wednesday , 16 February at 10 : 00 .
However , the deadline for tabling amendments to joint motions for resolutions falls on Wednesday , 16 February at 11 : 00 .
So , after 11 : 00 on Wednesday , 16 February , no more additional motions or amendments will be accepted .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is one more request concerning Tuesday .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has requested the inclusion on the agenda of a Commission statement on the situation in Lampedusa .
The reasons for this request will be given by Mr Mauro .
Mr Mauro , you have the floor .
Mr President , as you have rightly remarked , we are in the presence of epoch-making events that are shaping an extraordinary increase in the flow of migration into Europe .
Although today it may be Lampedusa that is overrun by this extraordinary flow of migrants , it is nevertheless the whole of Europe that will be involved in the process of destabilisation and change being faced by the whole of the Maghreb .
We therefore consider it to be a matter of the greatest urgency for the Commission to take the floor to respond not only to the humanitarian implications but also to those of a more profoundly strategic nature which we must resolve in order to review our policy as regards the Mediterranean .
Accordingly , given the urgency of the matter , we are asking for a separate debate to be held on Tuesday afternoon with Commissioner Malmström , by reducing question time to the Commission by half an hour .
Mr President , we in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament also wish to table a motion of this nature .
However , I would like to recommend to Mr Mauro and the House that we formulate it somewhat more precisely .
After all , we have to deal with an enormous influx of people .
I am sure that Italy , like every other country on the Mediterranean , is overstretched in trying to deal with the current problem alone , and she is not the only country facing this massive flow of refugees .
We can assume that Malta , Greece and Spain , too , will be confronted by this problem in the foreseeable future .
We would therefore ask that the title of the debate be very precisely worded so that , specifically , we obtain a statement from the Commission on immediate measures on the part of the European Union to support Italy and other affected EU countries in dealing with the influx of refugees .


Mr President , I want to speak in favour of Mr Schultz 's proposal because this issue is much broader than Lampedusa alone : there are 5 000 kilometres between Morocco and Syria , and with each kilometre , the humanitarian risk grows larger .
It is not a question of knowing if the European Union will help the Italian Government but to know if we are ready to act as a continent to face a continental risk .
This is the task that we face .
We now have to establish a title for this debate .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has suggested the following title : ' European Union measures for Italy in relation to migratory movements ' .
If I am not mistaken , Mr Schulz would like to table an amendment .
Mr President , I will attempt to formulate this very precisely once again .
We would like the Commission to issue a statement about immediate measures on the part of the European Union to support Italy and other affected States in dealing with the current influx of refugees .
I see .
The proposed title is as follows : ' Presentation by the European Commission of measures in support of Italy and other Member States affected by exceptional migratory flows ' .
( Parliament approved the title )
Wednesday
No amendments have been proposed .
Thursday
The Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group has requested the inclusion on the agenda of its oral question to the Commission on the use of the European Arrest Warrant in the Julian Assange case .
Who wanted to speak on this request ?

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , this oral question is not about the guilt or innocence of Mr Assange in the rape accusations against him in Sweden .
It is about the procedures of the European Arrest Warrant and whether it is being misused for political purposes .
The European Arrest Warrant allows any European citizen to be judicially surrendered without a court being allowed to consider the prima facie evidence against them and with almost no power to refuse surrender .
The European Arrest Warrant has tremendous potential for abuse and for use against political dissidents .
Is the Assange case about the crimes allegedly committed in Sweden or is it about the desire of the United States of America to extradite him from a compliant European country ?
Discussing the procedures is key to understanding this case and deciding if the European Arrest Warrant is being misused and abused .
We need to have a full debate in this House from all sides of the political spectrum .
Please vote in favour .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , in 2004 , an Irish citizen caused a fatal accident in Hungary .
It was only last Friday that we received the decision by the Irish authorities that the man could be sent back to Hungary to stand trial .
Therefore , at European level , this procedure has to be stronger than it is today .
Otherwise , victims will have to wait many years , not only in this case , but also in other cases .
This procedure has to be much stronger , so we are , of course , in favour .
Mr President , I would like to ask for a clarification of the Rules of Procedure .
I do not know whether the European Parliament is able to hold a fundamental debate about the European Arrest Warrant ( EAW ) .
One may be for or against the EAW and its implementation , but whether we here in Parliament are able to discuss it in relation to criminal proceedings that are currently under way is something that I venture is doubtful under the Rules of Procedure .
If that were the case , I would also have another couple of cases to bring up that we could happily discuss .
However , I would urgently advise , at this point , that we do not make legal proceedings currently under way the subject of a fundamental discussion here in the European Parliament .
Implementation of the Services Directive ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Gebhardt , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on implementation of the Services Directive [ ( 2006 / 123 / EC ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here in the European Parliament , we have been debating the Services Directive for a long time , and we have expressed many concerns in our debates about how it should be implemented and how we can ensure that service providers have free movement within the European Union .
This was an important piece of policy .
That is why we , as Parliament , decided that we not only wanted to make the legislation , but that we also wanted to monitor how the Services Directive is actually transposed in the Member States .
It is in our interest that the directive be transposed properly , correctly and well .
The European Commission also agreed to help us in this regard .
I would therefore like to thank Commissioner Barnier , who has provided us with valuable information in this connection .
We have particular concerns about four specific areas , namely , the evaluation procedure , the points of single contact , administrative cooperation and the scope of the directive .
On the first point , I have the following to say .
Mutual evaluation is one of the core items where we , as Parliament , and I , as the then rapporteur , said actually , we are opposed to this , as this means an awful lot of bureaucracy in the Member States .
I am also hearing from the Member States today that there are indeed complaints about the bureaucracy .
In that regard , however , I would quite simply like to make it very clear to the Member States once again that they were the ones that wanted this , not Parliament !
They inserted it into the legislation and , as such , they should take the responsibility for it themselves even if , for example , local communities are beginning to discuss what Europe has done to them again .
On the question of the second point - the points of single contact - I would say that this is the answer to what we have done in the political sense .
We said quite clearly that the principle of the Services Directive is not the country of origin principle but the country of destination principle .
That means that service providers must respect the law of the State in which they operate .
That makes it all the more important that they obtain from the points of single contact not only the information about the laws that they have to respect , but also the necessary assistance to enable them to really apply that law properly and consistently in the Member States .
I therefore find it very regrettable that , while these points of single contact have been set up in many Member States - although not all of them as yet - this has only been done in a very unsatisfactory way .
In some cases , they are merely Internet portals .
That does not satisfy us , the European Parliament - there needs to be much more behind these points of single contact .
There need to be people behind them who can provide real assistance for the service providers in this area .
One issue here is the language that is provided .
It is not enough to offer the local language and perhaps English .
In my view - and Parliament has spoken in similar terms - it is important for service providers that the language of the neighbouring county is also spoken .
I say this with one eye on our Polish President - in the border area between Germany and Poland , German should be offered in Poland and Polish in Germany so that the information and assistance are actually really good , so that even the small businesses , which are not all competent in English , can really get involved in cross-border activities .
Administrative cooperation is another important point and it is an area where we are heading in the right direction .
In this regard , the Member States still have an awful lot more to do in the area of cooperation and of the education and training of officials , so that this system can be really well used .
Finally , we come to the scope , in which connection I would like to make it quite clear , once again , that we excluded all services of common economic interest from the scope of Article 16 .
I expect the Member States to respect that .
If they want to include these services in the scope of the Services Directive , that is their right , but in that case , they must not sweep it all up as part of the Services Directive ; rather , it is their own political statement of intent and something that they should also assume responsibility for themselves .
That is what I demand of the Member States in this context .
Mr President , thank you for your welcoming remarks .
I , too , am delighted to be back here with you , as I am every month .
I should like to thank Parliament , and Mrs Gebhardt in particular , for their impatience and their vigilance .
I can understand why Parliament is being demanding with regard to the proper implementation of this directive , which was adopted just over four years ago .
Mrs Gebhardt spoke of lengthy discussions here in Parliament .
Discussions took place before that ; they took place outside Parliament , too .
I can recall some of the heated debates on this subject ; they were often interesting and , at times , slightly irrational .
Moreover , I have not forgotten , Mrs Gebhardt , the vital role that Parliament , spurred on by you and Mr Harbour , played in improving the Commission 's initial proposal and breaking the deadlock that we found ourselves in at the time .
It did so while preserving the overall structure of the directive , which is aimed - and this is obviously one of the main issues at stake in the internal market - at boosting growth and employment , because it is clear today , ladies and gentlemen , that nine out of 10 new jobs created in the European economy are created in the services economy .
I can also tell you that I am very keen for new jobs to be created in the industrial sector .
This obviously raises other issues with regard to the European policies that we ought to promote in order to maintain an industrial manufacturing base .
However , services are a key source of growth and employment .
With Mrs Gebhardt 's new report , Parliament has once again confirmed its commitment to this matter , and Mrs Gebhardt herself has shown that she is very single-minded , if I may say so .
I personally am glad , on this occasion , that she is single-minded when it comes to monitoring the transposition and the proper implementation of this directive , which is a prerequisite for completing the internal market in services .
As I stand here before you , four years after the adoption of this directive , it has already produced tangible results .
We have received , ladies and gentlemen , more than 1 000 notifications of changes in legislation within the Member States .
At times , it has been global or framework texts that have themselves introduced sectoral changes within each country , or even each region .
In fact , several thousand changes in national or regional legislation have already been made as a result of the impetus provided by this directive .
We believe that there is still a great deal of potential , and we must therefore press ahead .
Mrs Gebhardt raised a very important issue , which concerns one of the tools of the Services Directive - the points of single contact .
I fully support the ambitious approach that Parliament is taking to ensure that these contact points very quickly become genuine administrative portals enabling companies to complete all their procedures and formalities online - and this includes , Mrs Gebhardt , ladies and gentlemen , those that go beyond the scope of the Services Directive alone .
With this in mind , we are working with the Member States on the cross-border interoperability of electronic signatures .
I shall also be presenting you , probably by the end of this year , with a text on electronic signatures and on the cross-border interoperability of electronic identities and documents .
I also agree with you on the importance of providing points of single contact that are genuinely multilingual - an essential part of their added value - so that people can use them in their own language and can receive a response in their own language , including across borders , and so that we can therefore make this tool - the points of single contact - accessible , in particular , to small and medium-sized enterprises .
Moreover , one of the keys to facilitating this administrative cooperation and developing the points of single contact , as you wish , is for us to improve the quality of electronic translations at the same time .
We shall perhaps discuss this later on with regard to the patent .
I myself am engaged , within the College , and with my colleagues who are in charge of these various programmes - because they are split between several Directorates-General - in stepping up the research into , and development of , electronic programmes .
This is to ensure that we have the highest quality , most sophisticated translations as soon as possible not only for the patent , but for other uses too , such as the points of single contact and the Internal Market Information System ( IMI ) .
It will make a big change for all of us here , who have to work in more than 23 languages , to be able to have a perfect translation thanks to these computerised and electronic programmes .
I also share Parliament 's view concerning the need to train national officials so that they develop a true culture of administrative cooperation , where they do not already have one .
Mrs Gebhardt , we will also continue to promote the use of the IMI , which I mentioned just now .
Today - I reviewed this matter recently - nearly 5 000 European authorities are registered in the IMI , and my aim is very simple : I want to turn the IMI into a kind of administrative Facebook , if I can use that expression , with a translation facility .
Ladies and gentlemen , my portfolio includes three very important tools for bringing Europe closer to the citizens and closer to small and medium-sized enterprises .
They are : the points of single contact , the IMI and the Internal Market Problem Solving Network ( SOLVIT ) .
Therefore , you can count on me ; I shall even be working specifically on these three tools so as to provide them with resources , in particular , translation resources , but others too , and to ascertain how they are being implemented in each country .
Moreover , I am not content with just explaining matters to you here ; I am also going to explain them in each of the capitals , and so , just as I promised , every week , I visit a European capital , and in each of those capitals , I hold a workshop with the national officials in charge of implementing our directives : on professional qualifications , services and public contracts .
Each time , I ascertain how and by what means these tools - the points of single contact , the SOLVIT centre and the IMI - are being implemented and used .
Thus , I was in Luxembourg last week and I shall be in Slovenia this week , to carry out this check with its officials , whom I need in order to ensure that the internal market functions properly .
We are therefore going to continue to work in this spirit with the Member States and to verify that , as well as simply being transposed , the Services Directive is actually being implemented properly .
Moreover , depending on what is covered in the debate that we are going to have now , I remain at Parliament 's disposal to provide it with other more precise answers concerning the monitoring of the implementation of this Services Directive .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the aim here is not to review the implementation of the Services Directive worked on and subsequently adopted by this House in 2006 .
It is still far too early for that .
Many States have still not transposed it fully or correctly .
That is precisely the reason for this own-initiative report .
Firstly , it stresses the importance in both economic and social terms of this opening up of the services sector in Europe .
As you said , Commissioner , the activities covered account for 40 % of EU GDP and jobs , and the potential for growth is estimated at 0.6-1.5 % of GDP .
As you said just now , Commissioner , nine out of 10 jobs translates into a real economic impact .
Secondly , the report highlights the fundamental elements of the directive 's transposition .
I , for my part , will emphasise two aspects which you yourself emphasised , Mrs Gebhardt .
Firstly , the points of single contact .
We must remember that our aim is , of course , to facilitate the provision of services across Europe .
In practice , this means that entrepreneurs who wish to set up a business abroad or provide cross-border services should be able to use a point of single contact .
It will explain all the formalities and procedures they must complete in order to set up their business , and it will do so in their own language .
These points of single contact are the key to the success of the Services Directive .
They must be easily accessible , both physically and electronically - as has been said - and they must be effective and interoperable .
It is important not to create a crippling administrative burden for our entrepreneurs , who are more often than not SMEs .
The second aspect concerns the scope of the directive .
The directive excludes a number of fields from its scope because of their specific nature .
This is the case , in particular , with non-economic services of general interest , since economic services of general interest have , in principle , been covered .
In my view , all of this lacks legal clarity , and we must closely monitor how the Member States apply these rules .
Lastly , I believe that we must hold a genuine political debate at European level on what we mean by services of general interest and on the rules that we wish to apply to them .
Mr President , the Member States have had three years to implement the Services Directive in their national legislation .
One year on since this deadline , we can assess its implementation and outline the perspectives for greater progress .
The report of the European Commission clearly reveals the variety of legal and administrative requirements in the Member States , the different approaches and varying degrees to which the directive has been implemented .
Developing a single market for services is very important for creating new jobs .
That is why I believe that the Commission and the Member States must be more proactive in eliminating all outstanding legal and administrative barriers .
Additional support must be given to small and medium-sized enterprises .
Applying the principle of multilingualism at individual contact points and the more widespread use of the benefits of e-government would make life significantly easier for suppliers of services .
Mr President , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur for our very good work together and her openness to compromise .
I can safely say that the Services Directive is the key to a properly functioning common market .
If it is not implemented properly , we can forget Jacques Delors ' vision , and many of the Single Market Act 's initiatives will be left as empty promises .
Therefore , on behalf of my group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I appeal most emphatically to the Member States to catch up with outstanding work on implementation .
Now that we have come through the crisis , we need the Services Directive more than ever .
The report which we have adopted in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection attaches great importance and , in my opinion , the greatest importance , to the points of single contact , which , from the users ' point of view , are still not working adequately .
In some cases , many procedures are still not available in electronic form .
We want the points of single contact to be comprehensive centres of electronic contact with the authorities .
We should not forget , however , that the starting points for the various Member States were different .
In some , the points of single contact have been set up based on existing structures , and others have been built from scratch .
However , we want them to help service providers in the same way in every Member State .
Therefore , it seems to me imperative that the Commission develop a set of best practices which would help Member States in further work on points of single contact .
Finally , I would like briefly to refer to the recently published report on mutual evaluation .
The report of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection has already included the statement that Member States have not been sufficiently ambitious in terms of regulatory simplification , often deciding to replace one requirement with another .
Unfortunately , a reading of the report on mutual evaluation confirms these fears .
We are still facing situations in which Member States are trying to apply rules which , at times , do not appear to find justification in the provisions of the Services Directive .
I hope that further work on the directive will move towards eliminating this phenomenon .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Services Directive was the subject of unprecedented public political debate when it was being discussed in Parliament .
Thanks to the efforts to reach a compromise , which were led by Mrs Gebhardt , whom I congratulate , the text that Parliament succeeded in adopting in 2006 was one that reconciled the need to stimulate the internal market in services as a source of potential growth and job creation , and respect for social rights , labour law and the specific nature of services of general interest .
In order to maintain this very fragile balance , the directive had to be transposed with the utmost care .
This caused problems for many Member States , such as difficulties in implementing the points of single contact and the mutual evaluation process .
Right now , I am concerned about and question the choice made by France ; it is very much a minority choice and will result in provisions being split up between a whole series of laws and decrees .
I also regret the very restrictive interpretation of the concept of authorising the provision of services .
It will create legal uncertainty for social services relating to the care of young children and the disabled , even though derogation and exclusion possibilities were provided for in the directive .
Parliament is playing , and will continue to play , a full part in monitoring the successful implementation of this directive , which is key to ensuring that the single market creates jobs and is closer to the citizens , and that Europe is experienced on a daily basis as something positive , not something negative .
I therefore call on the Member States and the Commission to step up their efforts to guarantee a completely transparent process for European citizens .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , in 2006 , I am sure there were few people who realised that we were adopting a tool that would be very important for lifting the EU out of the crisis that was just around the corner .
With the potential to increase the EU 's GDP by up to 1.5 % and create a great many new jobs , we have to say that , by adopting this tool , we have made a quantum leap towards free movement for services .
Today , in 2011 , everyone can see that we are experiencing rather an extensive crisis , and for that reason it is , of course , particularly regrettable that several Member States still have not implemented important parts of the directive .
This report has therefore come at a very opportune time .
It defies common sense to counteract the lever for growth that this represents , and it is the good pupils in the class - those that have seen the sense and benefit in implementing this swiftly , efficiently and properly - who suffer , and that includes my own country .
So much for the reprimand .
Now on to the glimmers of light and , of course , these are , by and large , what we should concern ourselves with , and indeed what we did concern ourselves with in this report .
With this report we have , I think , succeeded in avoiding the political conflicts of the past , and clearly that is important because we have a great many other things on which to focus our energies .
Allow me to name just three of them . Firstly , it is important to take advantage of our experience with regard to the screening process and the mutual evaluation process , both of which are beneficial because they can be used in connection with other directives in the future .
We therefore need to have a higher degree of transparency in relation to the process , and I hope that the report can contribute to this .
Secondly , it is , of course , important to promote administrative cooperation , particularly through the Internal Market Information System ( IMI ) , as has been mentioned a couple of times .
Thirdly , it is important - as most people have already mentioned - to develop the points of single contact into comprehensive e-government portals that can lighten the administrative burden for service providers seeking to provide cross-border services .
Finally , I would like to express my thanks for the exceptional cooperation with Mrs Gebhardt and the other rapporteurs on this matter .
I think we have succeeded in reaching some sensible compromises on a difficult text .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Gebhardt , in 2006 , my group , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , voted against the Services Directive , and today , we consider the report assessing the implementation of this Services Directive , previously known as the Bolkestein Directive , to be equally unsatisfactory .
The Verts / ALE Group will therefore vote against this report .
I should like to make it clear , Mrs Gebhardt , that you did everything you could to achieve the best possible compromises .
However , I believe that some red lines have unfortunately been crossed in this report , which means that we cannot vote in favour of it .
I should also like to state that you took great care to point out that we should not confuse the various responsibilities , and I certainly do not wish to confuse the responsibilities of the Member States with those of the European Union , either .
If France , for example , transposed the Services Directive and chose to include day nurseries in it , when almost all of the other countries chose to do the opposite , it is clearly the responsibility of the French Government and not of the European Union .
Therefore , the Verts / ALE Group is certainly not voting against this report in order to criticise the way in which the directive has been transposed in France .
It is doing so on account of two key points .
The first is that we asked time and again , during the discussions , for the Member States to assess the impact that the initial transposition of the Services Directive had on the quality of jobs and services .
Unfortunately , that assessment of the impact on job and service quality could not be integrated into the report .
We also called for an assessment of the cost impact for public authorities .
Every time we try to take steps to regulate the financial markets , for example , we are told that it will cost a fortune .
Here , we have a very high cost for public authorities at a time when budgets are tight , and no one wants to assess it in order to weigh up the pros and cons of the Services Directive .
My final point is in the form of a question to Commissioner Barnier .
Unfortunately , we have been unable to obtain an assurance in this report that the European Commission will finally take note of Article 14 of the Treaty of Lisbon and present a proposal for a directive on public services .
Can you tell us when the Commission will finally face up to its responsibilities on this point ?
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , this is an important debate tonight with the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , to demonstrate that the Services Directive - into which we put so much effort in the last Parliament under Evelyne Gebhardt 's leadership , with many colleagues , including myself , being involved - is absolutely indispensable to the creation of future growth and jobs in the European economy .
I say to Mr Canfin and others that there has been a huge amount of investment in time and resources , and indeed in systems like the points of single contact , in order to generate those jobs and growth , but they now have to come .
The issue with this report is the fact that we have done a huge amount of work already , but we now need to see the pay-off from that work .
One of the issues that I know the Commissioner is very much aware of , and which is reflected in some of the ideas in the Single Market Act which we will be bringing back to Parliament in two months ' time , is the fact that Member States need to start using and deploying these new instruments and encouraging businesses to use them .
Colleagues will remember that this is targeted very much at small- and medium-sized enterprises .
They are the ones , as all the work in the previous Commission showed , which were discouraged by the administrative barriers they encountered at all stages from going to set up and deliver services within the European Union , which , of course , is a right they have under the Treaties .
We now need to really make that work .
Part of that is to overcome all the ingrained suspicion and problems that they have had , and to make it clear that what we have achieved here is probably the biggest single set of deregulatory measures in opening up markets that has ever happened as a result of one single directive - we have heard about the thousands of measures that have been changed - and similarly the first major investment by Member States in promoting the single market to businesses .
That is what the points of single contact are all about .
They are actually about providing the simple information that a business needs if it wants to go and deliver a service in another country - that essential research before they start .
This is just the first of many reports and many investigations that my committee will continue to make , because this is a long-term project .
We are just at the beginning of something absolutely crucial for the future of the European economy .
Mr President , when Parliament voted on the Services Directive , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left voted against it .
This was because we believed that the core of the Services Directive was based on the EU 's liberal market freedoms , where freedom for companies and the free movement of services are more important than trade union and social freedoms .
When trade union rights come into conflict with the rules of the internal market , it is the rules of the internal market that prevail .
We have seen the consequences of this in the Laval ruling and several other anti-union rulings .
The country of origin principle was clearly replaced by the freedom to provide services , but we needed a recipient country principle , in other words , for the rules in the recipient country to apply .
We tabled a proposal to this effect , but unfortunately , we did not manage to get it through .
I know that the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , wants to protect trade union rights .
She writes that the directive must not undermine general welfare services , but this is not enough to enable the GUE / NGL Group to support the report .
This is because the anti-union rulings are not mentioned in the report , despite the fact that they have changed labour market policy completely and reduced workers ' rights .
Neither does the report mention the demands agreed on previously by the GUE / NGL Group and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , namely , that we need a social protocol where the trade union and social freedoms are not made secondary to market freedoms .
We regret the absence of this in the report .
When the Commission comes to review how well the directive has been working , trade unions have been ruled out as a contact point , whereas , in my opinion , this should be an express requirement .
Unfortunately , therefore , the GUE / NGL Group cannot support this report .
Allow me to finish simply by saying that trade union and social rights and collective agreements must never be viewed as administrative barriers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Services Directive has always been surrounded by inexplicably optimistic language .
It seems that Europe expected that , with this directive , an extraordinary opening up of the market would follow , accompanied by no ill effects and heralding solely positive developments .
Now , when it is still to be fully implemented in all countries , we already know that these expectations have , at least in part , been betrayed .
There are certain sectors in which the directive will fail to improve the market or the quality of the services offered , let alone create more jobs .
I could quote a host of examples , including local markets and travelling salesmen , who are an important component of regional tradition and identity in some Member States , including Italy .
This is a sector that , in my opinion , should be excluded from the application of the Services Directive .
For this reason , I hope that Parliament will ask for the Services Directive to be reviewed so that its scope may be amended , because , as it stands , there is a serious risk that it will penalise sectors that are fundamental to the economy .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , reports on implementation represent an extraordinarily arduous task and they promise little media attention , but they are of major significance for the shaping of Europe 's internal market , particularly in the present era .
I would therefore like to start by expressing my sincere thanks to all those who helped produce this report , in particular , the rapporteur and our shadow rapporteur , Mrs Handzlik .
The Commissioner made reference to the fact that 90 % of all newly created jobs in Europe 's internal market are in the tertiary sector , which is to say the service sector .
In my view , and that of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) at least , this means that the delay in implementation that has admittedly taken place and is taking place in only a few - but nonetheless in some - Member States must be brought to an end without fail .
We ask the Commission to truly take serious action to ensure that the Services Directive , which has already been in force for some time , can be genuinely ready for use immediately .
Since 90 % of all jobs are created in this sector , that also means , secondly , that the Commission must regularly review the scope and examine whether there is not a need to incorporate further sectors - admittedly possibly very small ones - into the scope .
Thirdly , I would like to point out that the creation of the point of single contact - which has been mentioned in various ways already - represents the nucleus of a European administrative law .
Obviously , I therefore do understand the odd complaint from the Member States here or there about bureaucratic processes in the mutual evaluation - as Mrs Gebhardt made reference to .
However , if you want a single market , ultimately you have to work to ensure its functioning and success .
For that reason , Commissioner , I am extremely pleased to see that you have in any case already received a thousand draft notifications setting out amendments made by the Member States to their national laws .
I hope that you continue to receive them .
All of this must not serve to burden local communities with layers of bureaucracy but is instead designed to ensure that the single market for service providers is viable .
( SV ) Mr President , implementation of the Services Directive has been a complex process for many Member States .
In many ways , it has led to a more open internal market with all that that entails , but we have also seen examples where it has not worked so well .
As a Swedish Social Democrat , I have to mention our own situation , where , following the government 's transposition of the directive into Swedish law , there is absolutely no requirement for foreign companies to have a representative in Sweden with the right to negotiate and enter into collective agreements with the competent trade union federation .
This is a typical problem associated with implementation , as the directive does not contain any ban on laying down corresponding requirements and we have several examples of countries that have succeeded in solving the same problems without ending up in the same situation .
The Swedish labour market model is based on the social partners taking joint responsibility for regulating wages and working conditions .
A worker working in Sweden without a collective agreement is therefore at risk of experiencing poorer conditions and a poorer level of protection than other workers .
It is therefore of the utmost importance for rules to be in place which ensure that foreign companies have a representative present in Sweden and that this representative has the mandate to negotiate and enter into collective agreements .
I hope that this type of problem , which is a result of over-implementation rather than under-implementation , will also be addressed in the report that is provided for in Article 16 ( 4 ) of the Services Directive and that is required to have been produced before the end of the year .
Mr President , I would like to thank our rapporteur , who has being doing an excellent job for a number of years now .
She said that the transposition of the directive has to be correct .
I agree , but it also has to be timely .
In June 2010 , only about half the Member States had implemented the directive - more than half a year late .
Where are we now , Commissioner ?
Today , more than a year after the deadline , have all 27 Member States implemented the directive ?
If not , I think that is pathetic .
The obstacles to implementation are not of a technical nature ; they are a lack of ambition and political will .
The Services Directive was , in itself , a very meagre compromise and less than the bare minimum needed to bring about a true internal market .
Now , Member States are dragging their feet and implementing only reluctantly and late .
That is short-sighted .
At times of economic crisis , we cannot afford to waste opportunities for growth and job creation because , while the European Union is navel-gazing and preoccupied with our internal borders , the rest of the world moves on .
It is not waiting for us .
If we want to make EU 2020 a reality , the Member States will have to step up implementation of the Services Directive .
( CS ) Mr President , I am pleased that you have mentioned the thousands of changes implemented by individual countries .
It is more than a year since the Services Directive should have been transposed into the law of all EU Member States .
Unfortunately , however , these thousands of changes are clearly not enough .
In an attempt to apply protectionist measures in their domestic economies , some states have failed to regard the implementation of this directive as a priority .
Paradoxically , however , the consistent application of the Services Directive and the removal of barriers to cross-border service provision might work as a catalyst for the economic growth of the entire EU , enabling the crisis to be overcome more rapidly .
In connection with the implementation of the directive , I am very concerned that the points of single contact , which are supposed to make life easier for entrepreneurs by providing information on doing business in a given country , as well as in other Member States , are functioning in only 14 countries so far .
Commissioner , knowing you as I do , I believe that you and your colleagues will continue the effort to implement the ' Single Market Act ' , and that you will be making consistent representations to Member States to transpose the Services Directive into law , including implementation on the ground .
The successful implementation of this directive is a fundamental precondition for creating a unified internal market .
You can count on receiving support from our IMCO committee .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , much has been said this evening about technical issues relating to the implementation of the Services Directive , but I believe that it would be far more helpful if we were to actually assess its application together .
Why not admit today , when the global crisis is unfolding before us , that all the instances of deregulation are exacerbating the crisis and damaging the services provided to citizens , and that this is happening everywhere , both in the European Union and worldwide ?
Mr Barnier , you said just now that there had been some irrational debates regarding this directive .
However , you are surely aware that , right now in France , an industrial dispute is taking place within a transport company because Polish and French drivers are being pitted against each other in the name of the country of origin principle .
Furthermore , services of general interest are being destroyed or privatised everywhere .
Now , the aim is to further extend the Bolkestein Directive , together with the Single Permit Directive , which you want , incidentally , to force through this House , even though the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has been unable to give an opinion on it !
Now you are going to force European workers to compete not only against each other , but against immigrant workers , too .
Moreover , the situation concerning social services of general interest has still not been cleared up .
Healthcare , housing , local communities and childcare must not be treated as commodities .
It would therefore help if we had some real assessments of the impact of the application of this directive in terms of employment , regional life and also consumer prices , because everyone can see that energy prices , like transport prices , are increasing all the time , even though we were told that competition would bring them down .
Mr President , the Services Directive has been consistently opposed by my party .
This non-legislative report emphasises that this directive has the potential for further integration of the EU economy .
The report recognises that the directive 's impact on the economy , businesses and citizens cannot be evaluated until it has been transposed in all Member States .
The report therefore calls for closer , thorough monitoring by the Commission , with regular implementation reports .
It envisages appropriate funds in its draft budget for 2012 to launch an EU-wide awareness campaign , plus training schemes for officials .
The proposals contained in this report outline more regulation , more supervision and more expenditure at a time when the peoples of Europe are being asked to accept more austerity .
This is just more unreality , more bureaucracy and more dismay .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the adoption of the Services Directive represented an important achievement in attaining an essential objective for the European Union , namely , the creation of a single market in services .
I hold with the view that its full implementation will enable us to unlock enormous economic potential and create jobs .
I should like to highlight some aspects that I think deserve to be picked out .
In the first place , full and precise transposition of the directive into domestic law must remain an absolute priority for us .
In this respect , I think that Parliament should play a greater role in monitoring its implementation by the Member States .
This is both because of the significant contribution that it has made to the directive 's long and complex legislative passage and because , given the importance of the subject matter , it is proper that the views of our citizens be represented and taken into consideration in a proper and fair way .
Moreover , the questions of interpretation put by some countries concerning the scope of the directive 's application deserve to be clarified without delay so as to ensure the certainty of the law and the effectiveness of the directive .
The implementation of single points of contact for services must take place with ever greater use of IT , by providing services online with easy access , primarily , for small and medium-sized enterprises , which will guarantee interoperability with other portals in other Member States , thereby avoiding the linguistic barriers that have to be overcome daily .
As far as the mutual evaluation process envisaged by the directive is concerned , this can be really useful , if properly carried out , for identifying best practice that can function as a stimulus for those countries that are more backward in transposing the directive and encouraging convergence in laws .
( CS ) Mr President , the European single market in services is still not fulfilling its potential .
The aim of the Services Directive should be to eliminate barriers to service provision across Europe , and it should bring dramatic improvements .
Unfortunately , this is not yet happening .
I therefore welcome Mrs Gebhardt 's report .
I agree with the view that there is a need to put effective pressure on Member States to speed up the incorporation of the directive into national law , and to complete this fully .
In my opinion , however , it is just as important for small and medium-sized firms to know that there are places capable of assisting them with their business activities in the area of services .
I therefore consider it vitally important to boost awareness of the points of single contact .
For this reason , I have mainly focused in my amendment proposals on the need to upgrade the information campaign in support of this project .
The campaign should be aimed at all those involved , including public bodies .
The EU may have the best intentions , and it may prepare the best legislation and support measures , which all of the countries might even implement to the best of their ability , but if firms and entrepreneurs are not aware of this , the outcome will always be mixed .
In this act on the single internal market , we are trying to adapt Europe not only to its citizens and consumers , but also to firms and entrepreneurs .
Let us therefore listen to them but , above all , let us give them sufficient accessible information .

( FI ) Mr President , the basic issue behind this implementing directive is this : what has been the significance of the Services Directive for businesses , consumers , citizens and GDP ?
What interests me especially is how smaller enterprises have fared .
To its credit , the report does refer to SMEs , their needs and their special circumstances .
It makes no deep analysis , however , of what the Services Directive has ultimately done for enterprises of different sizes and different sectors .
I would like to have much more precise information on this .
There is no information , for example , on the extent to which small and mediumsized enterprises have increased their crossborder activities .
As smaller businesses have had all the obligations of the Services Directive thrust upon them anyway , it would be good to know how they , in particular , have benefited from the directive .
( CS ) Mr President , the Services Directive should doubtless be of key importance for opening up the development of services in the Member States , and especially the cross-border exploitation of a far greater range of opportunities for both entrepreneurs and consumers .
The problem is that protectionism still persists in many Member States .
Today , as we debate the implementation of this directive after several years , I would like to express disappointment over the fact that it took us five years before the original Bolkestein directive finally entered into force , following abridgement and the addition of a series of items here in Parliament .
Now we do not even have clear evidence that it achieved what it was supposed to achieve , the reason being that many Member States still misunderstand the philosophy and meaning of the single internal market .
I very much regret the fact that five countries do not have points of single contact in operation , although it is much more worrying that a decent level of interoperability has still not been established between the points of contact in the other Member States .
As the previous speakers have already pointed out , the issue is that small-scale entrepreneurs in particular do not yet have enough information about what the points of contact can do for them , and in some countries , these points do not even exist .
What I do consider beneficial is that Member States themselves are actually assessing each other .
Perhaps this will result in some kind of desirable outcome in the future .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and also the shadow rapporteur , Mrs Handzlik , for producing an essentially accurate description of the situation facing us here .
I would like to draw your attention to Article 36 , in which the report notes that Member States must carry out risk assessments and ensure that companies do not encounter pointless obstacles when performing the necessary procedures electronically .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that the European Union does not have the best reputation .
This often results from the fact that workers do not feel that the balance between freedom and security is protected or that it needs to be restored in many areas .
This can be seen , for example , in the Services Directive , since it is an important driver of the internal market but also throws a spotlight on the limitations of that market at the same time .
The review is therefore important .
It is a complex task , and one to which Mrs Gebhardt has provided absolutely outstanding answers .
There are still some challenges to be overcome , however .
The Services Directive must not , under any circumstances , undermine the fundamental principle of equal pay for equal work in the same location .
We must therefore carefully ensure , through all the monitoring opportunities that have been made available to us , that cross-border services , too , do not violate this principle .
The point of single contact must provide fair access to the market of the country in which the service is to be provided .
However , this is not only for the service providers themselves and the companies , for whom in my home city of Essen , for example , there are six officials - for four towns - who feel responsible .
It is also for the workers .
In that regard , it is absolutely crucial what language these points of single contact speak .
In the Committee on Regional Development , we had a fairly hopeless discussion on this .
In my view , the languages of the neighbouring countries should be used .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , like many other Members , I , too , recall the great effort required of all of us to overcome the numerous obstacles before we could finally approve the Services Directive .
Today , four years later , we are faced with evaluating what has been done , and I believe it is necessary to do so .
I believe that all possible instruments must be applied to achieve full and precise transposition of the directive in every Member State , verifying that amendments to the law are in operation also and , above all , at regional level , in particular , in those countries where federalism is more marked .
To this end , I consider it absolutely important that all of them take determined action to ensure that the directive is implemented in sufficient time so as not to nullify the efforts made by those Member States in which implementation is more advanced , and which would therefore be faced with serious difficulties in accessing an internal market , one of the most important components of which would be obstructed .
The difficulty of making all the new developments and facets of a directive as substantial as this known therefore requires governments to organise information and communication campaigns through the competent authorities on a systematic basis to the extent contained in the text of the measure .
As of now , these campaigns have yet to be organised .
I should like to conclude on a dissenting note as regards the merits of the mutual evaluation procedure , which has proved itself to be extremely useful , by allowing for greater transparency in national regulations and creating a structured dialogue between Member States .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , may I start by congratulating the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs on the report and on the spirit of cooperation which they demonstrated .
The main problems with the application of the directive , despite the fact that most Member States have made considerable progress , are basically due , as the report makes clear , firstly , to the lack of information for companies about what applies in each Member State and , secondly , to the unnecessary administrative burden in the form of time-consuming procedures .
These problems constitute a serious barrier to cross-border trade in the services sector and to equal conditions of competition on the market , with all that implies .
That is why it is vital , if the directive is to be applied correctly , for points of single contact to function as e-government portals , thus allowing procedures and formalities to be completed remotely , while , at the same time , providing information on labour law and , more importantly , on taxation .
However , if we are to complete the market , promote growth and create new jobs , I believe that the Member States should not only speed up the application of the directive , but should also take immediate action to address any obscure points in the directive , in order both to benefit society as a whole and small and medium-sized enterprises and to protect workers ' rights .
( GA ) Mr President , may I say , firstly , that I am grateful to the group for giving me the opportunity to speak in this debate and may I commend the rapporteur and Commissioner Barnier , in particular , for their excellent and important work .
Since I came into the European Parliament , I have been hearing all the time about the need for more Europe .
I certainly embrace that concept .
The recent economic crisis has brought that idea home to all of us , especially in my own country .
We have an election going on in Ireland at the moment , and it is very interesting that there is more talk about the EU than there is about local issues ; this is obviously part of the result of the IMF-EU bail-out .
Nevertheless , Ireland 's leader has spent two days in Europe , which is unprecedented - one with President Barroso and today with Chancellor Merkel .
This all shows an engagement with Europe that we might not have had before .
On this point , the directive has the potential to help us all across Europe to get out of the economic crisis and create prosperity .
Unfortunately , many countries , including my own , have not transposed this directive into law .
Hopefully , that will change with the new government .
Particularly where SMEs are concerned , there is great potential .
It has not been availed of because they are not aware of it , because of difficulties with language , etc .
The first thing is certainly to transpose the directive into law .
Secondly , the EU needs to impose barriers and penalties on countries that do not abide by the deadlines .
It has been far too easy up to now .
If we are to have progress , this has to be done .
If each SME had one more employee , unemployment would cease in Europe .
This is a great opportunity , as Mr Harbour and others have said .
We cannot afford to wait .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , first , I would like to point out that the Hungarian Presidency attributes great importance to the successful conclusion of the mutual evaluation process examining the quality of the Member States ' transposition of the directive .
However , it cannot be emphasised enough how important it is that we increase the access to information , competitiveness and , thus , the mobility of businesses , and , in particular , of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Naturally , we can also contribute to this by facilitating the cross-border activities of SMEs .
Multilingual single contact can , and indeed does , play a highly important role in this .
The Hungarian Government has always respected , and will continue to abide by , the deadlines in order to transpose all elements of the Services Directive into Hungarian law and practice .
In my opinion , the directive is appropriate , but in order to achieve its objective , it is important that all Member States follow and comply with all elements of the directive in time and observe the deadlines .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the free movement of workers , the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services are vital pillars of our internal market .
Of course , these must not act as a gateway for social dumping .
Service providers must respect the law of the State in which they operate .
The country of destination principle must thus also be enforced consistently .
For that to happen , all the Member States must also do their homework .
My home country of Germany has not done its homework in this regard , as there is quite clearly a lack of framework conditions for fair mobility and social security .
There are no binding wage floors in many areas , the monitoring of undeclared work is inadequate and we have fictive self-employment as a common way of circumventing labour law .
As Mr Geier already said , we also need advice centres in different languages for posted workers , not just for companies .
If the freedom to provide services is also to benefit workers , there is still some homework to be done .
( RO ) Mr President , the Services Directive establishes a general legal framework for Member States , public administrations and local authorities aimed at simplifying procedures and harmonising provisions concerning the right to establish and provide services .
It also sets up points of single contact intended to offer assistance to service providers and , in particular , SMEs .
We call on Member States to turn points of single contact into an e-government portal which will offer a complete range of online services to service providers wishing to set up an enterprise or offer cross-border services .
Member States must ensure that points of single contact are accessible , including the opportunity for any formalities and procedures to be completed remotely by electronic means .
To ensure the electronic interoperability of the points of single contact and mutual recognition of electronic signatures , we call on the Commission to speed up the review of Directive 1999 / 93 / EC on electronic signatures and the adoption of a legislative act on the mutual recognition of e-identification and e-authentication in order to facilitate the provision of cross-border public services in the single market .
Mr President , a Hungarian computer technician can legally go to the Czech Republic to work .
That is great .
Of course , he went in the past too , but on the black market .
One of our greatest achievements is that one can now move legally .
Only eight per cent of SMEs make 15 per cent of their turnover in the European markets .
If we simply doubled this , so that 20 per cent of SMEs made 30 per cent of that turnover in the internal market , we could achieve what we want .
After one year , we are on the way to doing this .
I would like to say thank you to all those who worked on the Services Directive in the past and those who implemented it in the Member States .
It has a great pulling effect on each single government to change to e-governance and use new ICT technologies .
The minor problems with the languages have to be looked at carefully and this we have to improve , but the great success of the Services Directive is that it will have a great impact on the European economy in the coming years .
Beside the austerity programmes , this is the achievement , so I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and those who participated .
( DA ) Mr President , I would just like briefly to add something to my first speech .
Many of us who have spoken today have mentioned that there are countries that have still not got their points of single contact in place , so I would just like to make a direct appeal to the Commissioner to intervene personally when you now visit all of these countries , and ensure that you emphasise once again to the Member States that these points of single contact must be provided .
Proper conditions must be in place .
I will not claim to be an expert in how to put more pressure on those Member States that have not done this , but I very much hope that , as Commissioner , you will personally do your bit to put pressure on these countries .
I think it is quite simply scandalous that , after 14 months , we still have countries that have not implemented this .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is both useful and necessary to remind ourselves here of the struggles fought by workers in various countries against this directive , struggles which came together to take on an expressive dimension on a European scale , struggles that allowed some of the more negative aspects of the first draft of the directive to be deleted or amended .
However , this discussion clearly demonstrates that the causes for concern and the motives for the struggle have not gone away .
This is primarily because all the areas in which the states can and must perform their social duties through public services have not been clearly excluded from the scope of the directive .
As we well know , the concept of public services has been distorted to offer a narrow view of it .
Why has the Member States ' ability to intervene in safeguarding their uniqueness and defending their productive and business fabric been limited ?
It is because freedom of establishment and the free provision of services continue to take precedence over social and labour rights , which are increasingly degraded as this single market is strengthened .
Mr President , Commissioner , a genuine contribution to defending the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises would be to put an immediate stop to the so-called austerity plans that are stifling them , as is happening in innumerable countries such as Portugal .
( DE ) Mr President , you will have observed that there are many , many MEPs wishing to use the catch-the-eye procedure because this subject is so ridiculously important to us .
I come from a country - Austria - where the Services Directive has not yet been implemented .
The reason for this relates to constitutional law - the requisite majorities were needed in order to pass a Federal Constitutional Act , and they are not easy to obtain .
I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , not only because she has shown such commitment to this subject for so long , but also because she attempted , together with the shadow rapporteur , to accommodate both the principles and the practical in this report .
Those principles included emphasising how important it is to exclude social services and health services .
The practical included , for example , the ability to find what you are looking for and obtain the necessary information via the Internet .
The main reason why I wanted to speak was in order to express our disappointment with the fact that , even on implementation of the Services Directive , it has still not proven possible to get a grip on wage and social dumping .
( EL ) Mr President , I come from Greece and , unlike Austria , Greece started to apply the Services Directive just a few months ago , in 2010 , when it was transposed into national law .
We are very proud of this , because we achieved it at a very difficult time for Greece , in a period of crisis , and the fact that we achieved it is very important , because the first to be supported by the Services Directive , especially the points of single contact , will be small and medium-sized enterprises , which we need in the European economy above all else .
I would like to reiterate two things said by another Greek member who spoke .
Mr Poupakis of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) said that it is very important to have information and it is also very important to remove the administrative burden .

Finally , I honestly must thank Evelyne Gebhardt from the bottom of my heart ; like a mother , she has nurtured this child , by which I mean the Services Directive , since the last legislative period ; she has raised it and I think that , in cooperation with the ' daddy ' , Commissioner Barnier , they really will be able to raise the directive like their child , for the benefit of European citizens .
Mrs Rapti , I gave you a little more time because birth always takes a little more time .
I hope the baby is well !
Mr President , it is true that Mrs Gebhardt and I have a real rapport , but that does not mean that we always have to agree with one another .
I have no other comment to make apart from to say that we must work together intelligently , Mrs Rapti .
I was also struck by what you said , Mrs Rapti .
I myself was able to see , during my recent visit to Greece , and echoing the concern expressed by Mr Harbour about the potential for growth found in this directive , that , if it is used intelligently , within the limits laid down but to its full potential , there clearly will be potential for the services economy , which is so very important - I will say it again : other agri-food and industrial economies should be equally important or more important - to grow .
Moreover , this directive , if used properly , will be an opportunity for open economies such as the Greek economy , in which services , especially tourism services - the tourism industry - are so important .
I would like to say to Mr Schwab , and to Mrs Gebhardt also , that they are right to point out Parliament 's role in improving this directive and to confirm that Parliament will be vigilant in ensuring that it is implemented properly .
As I have often said to Mr Harbour , I personally am keeping a close eye on its implementation .
Today , almost all the Member States have opted to adopt a horizontal legislative act .
Mrs Vergnaud and Mr Canfin pointed out - they were sorry to have to do so , but they have a responsibility to give their opinion - that France , and Germany too , had preferred to integrate principles from the directive directly into their existing sectoral legislation .
People may question or criticise that approach , Mrs Vergnaud , as you yourself have done , but we believe that it is clear and valid in the European context .
I would also like to point out to Mrs Hyusmenova that 23 Member States have already adopted their horizontal transposition legislation .
Mr Kelly mentioned that Ireland was the very last country to do so .
In two other Member States - Mrs Regner spoke of Austria and Luxembourg - the legislation is currently being examined by their parliaments .
I would also like to point out to Mrs in ' t Veld that infringement proceedings are still open with regard to seven Member States that have failed to communicate their transposition measures .
Therefore , as you can see , ladies and gentlemen , the spirit is one of agreement and proactiveness .
I myself am visiting the Member States , as was noted earlier .
Mr Løkkegaard mentioned my visits concerning these issues in particular .
However , you will see that , if necessary , we can be even more insistent by opening infringement proceedings to ensure that this directive is implemented properly .
Mrs Auconie , Mrs Handzlik , Mrs Sehnalová , Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Harbour stressed the importance of multilingual points of single contact .
We share this view of the importance of multilingual services , of services that are also very interoperable , electronic and accessible from the wonderful tool that is the Internet - Mrs Comi and Mrs Roithová mentioned this , as did Mrs Herczog just now when she spoke about these points of single contact .
I would also like to point out to Mrs Handzlik that the Commission is working with the Member States to exchange good practice on issues such as the Internal Market Information System ( IMI ) and the Internal Market Problem Solving Network ( SOLVIT ) .
We have a group of experts tasked with facilitating this exchange of good practice ; we have begun a study to check how things are going and , at the end of 2011 , we will organise a conference on the practical operation of the points of single contact , in the same spirit as the forum on the single market that I would like to organise - this was a suggestion made by Mrs von Thun und Hohenstein and Mr Harbour .
It will be an annual single-market forum enabling us to take an approach that is more human , more practical , more citizen-based and closer to this market , with businesses and with professional organisations or trade unions .
Mr Løkkegaard and Mrs Gáll-Pelcz , who reminded us of the commitment of the Hungarian Presidency , mentioned the mutual evaluation process .
This is another new method which , if we can make a success of it , will , I hope , be useful for other European texts .
I am paying close attention to this constructive mutual evaluation , which is a modern tool consisting of a case-by-case evaluation , before applying it to other legislative instruments .
Mr Harbour mentioned the performance tests that we have begun .
Why have we begun these performance tests for each service to see the positive or negative interactions between certain European texts ?
Because we realise that , in order to apply the Services Directive properly , we need to have regard to other texts , and I would offer the example of an architect based in Belgium who works with clients in the Netherlands and who , depending on the circumstances , may be subject to the Services Directive , the Professional Qualifications Directive , the E-Commerce Directive , the Consumer Protection Directives , and other instruments besides .
This is why we need to ensure - and this is what we are going to do with the performance tests - that these different European texts tie in well together .
I would like to conclude , Mr President , by raising a highly political point , which is important to me too , ladies and gentlemen , and which Mrs Gebhardt was the first to raise : this directive must be applied for the purposes for which it is intended ; it must not be applied to other matters .
I will therefore be as vigilant as you with regard to the temptation of certain Member States to use this directive for purposes other than those for which it is intended , in particular , for issues that might relate to services of general economic interest .
Mrs Auconie raised this point , as did Mrs Svensson and Mrs Bizzotto just now .
I would also remind Mr Canfin , who questioned me , that the Commission is honouring its commitment by working on a text that will clarify a communication on public services , on services of general economic interest .
My colleague , Mr Almunia , the Commissioner responsible for competition , is , for his part , working on updating the Monti-Kroes package .
Therefore , you will have two tools , in communication terms , which should clarify matters and prevent ambiguities and , at times , controversies or misunderstandings .
The communication on services of general economic interest or public services will be produced sometime this year .
I would also say to Mrs Geier that the Services Directive should not affect workers ' rights , because the directive does not deal with this issue .
Indeed , it does not deal with the issue of rights or the issue of the posting of workers .
Lastly , I should like to say to Mr Le Hyaric , whose criticisms I listened to carefully just now , that transport is not covered by the Services Directive , and neither is healthcare .
This directive does not stipulate that public services must be privatised in any way ; I will pay extremely close attention to that , and to other matters besides , in the communication that we are preparing on services of general interest .
In other words , ladies and gentlemen , I know that this directive has provoked debate .
I would remind you that it has been greatly improved , that it is now fairly clear and that we can use it to create jobs and growth , which the citizens are waiting for .
I want us to be demanding - and you are right to be so - but I would also like us to be objective with regard to this directive and to build this single market in services together , in the spirit of partnership and using partnership methods .
In any case , that is what I am determined to do - and what I promised you I would do - over the next four years so as to enable this directive to realise its full potential .
Mr President , this debate was very interesting and illuminating .
There was one observation I have to make , though , and that was that there are still people who continue to have in their heads the old Bolkestein proposal , which actually provided for liberalisation and deregulation , despite the fact that that really is a thing of the past and that the Services Directive , as constituted at present , is about enabling people to use their qualifications to offer services across the European Union .
That is what this Services Directive is about , and it is important to keep saying so .
I would like to stress that once again and we have also made that change quite clear .
In addition , I would also like to remind you all that we absolutely do have a social clause in the Services Directive .
This is because we have included , in Article 1 , a clause whereby the labour and social law of the Member States cannot be jeopardised by the application of the Services Directive .
Thus , if something like that were to happen in a Member State - and I did say this at the beginning - that would be an incorrect implementation of the Services Directive .
If you want to speak of the Rüffert case and others , that has no relevance to the Services Directive .
Such cases relate to the Posting of Workers Directive and its implementation and to the public procurement directives .
Please do not fall into the trap of comparing apples and oranges .
While apples and oranges perhaps both produce a good fruit stew , that is completely the wrong approach to take in politics .
We therefore really need to very closely monitor what happens .
I repeat my call for us to ensure that the Services Directive is correctly transposed in the Member States and not used to take rights away or to deregulate - that is not the job of the Services Directive .
Of course , it remains a quite clear demand for us that we in the European Union in any case need a legal framework to protect services of general economic interest .
I am eager to see what the Commission will produce for us in this regard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday tomorrow , Tuesday , 15 February .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The market in services represents two thirds of the gross domestic product and two thirds of jobs in the European Union , but even so , only a fifth of total intra-EU trade .
All the same , I can only agree with the priorities enumerated by the rapporteur and , in particular , as regards the completion of the points of single contact and the strengthening of administrative cooperation .
As things stand , the first generation of points of single contact exists in 22 Member States .
This would appear to afford us some comfort , were it not for the fact that in only 14 of them is it possible to complete the process online .
On the contrary , it is essential that points of single contact become an integral part of greater e-government in the EU , making the offering available in different languages .
Finally , it is essential to strengthen administrative cooperation so that the whole of this communication-based system can function efficiently .
The Internal Market Information System ( IMI ) has already become a vitally important tool .
It supports the work done by administrations , enables different administrative methods to be coordinated and deficient information to be supplemented .
In spite of this , monitoring will , in future , be necessary to make sure that this system is not only used but also , and above all , correctly applied .
Enhanced cooperation in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection ( debate )
Τhe next item is the recommendation by Mr Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision authorising enhanced cooperation in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection [ 05538 / 2011 - C7-0044 / 2011 - 2010 / 0384 ( NLE ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing with the subject of enhanced cooperation here for a second time .
A few months ago , we decided on enhanced cooperation for the first time under the Treaty of Lisbon in relation to the field of family law .
Now we are to do so a second time .
It is a purely procedural decision that is to be taken here .
I want to make that clear , because at this point , we will not be debating the content of the issues in question .
That will take place at a later date .
Let me start by observing that I have been very pleased to see that the Hungarian Presidency is also present here today .
This is a first , you might say , as I believe this is the first time in the history of the European Parliament that the Presidency has been present on a Monday evening .
This also shows , perhaps , how important this portfolio that we are debating today actually is .
We have been debating the issue of the European patent on the basis of a proposal from the Commission since 2001 .
Within the framework of the Palacio report , Parliament took a very specific position , including in relation to potential solutions , in respect of first reading .
It proved impossible to reach agreement about the patent in the Council , which was essentially due to two problems .
One of the problems is the courts issue - which courts are to be competent for which disputes - but there was also the language issue .
The courts issue will possibly be resolved soon through a decision of the European Court of Justice in an opinion at the beginning of March , at which point we will know precisely what can and cannot be done .
When it comes to the language issue , no progress has been made .
Last autumn , the Belgian Presidency had to concede that it was clearly impossible to reach a solution on the language issue , or at least to do so and also meet the requirement for unanimity as envisaged under the Treaty of Lisbon .
There is quite simply a diametric contrast between the principle that the European Union has 23 official languages that are supposed to be equal and the fact that a patent can give rise to enormous costs , specifically through translation .
Against this background , there is also always the problem that , if we have a patent translated into all the languages , this patent is of no use to small and medium-sized enterprises as it is much too expensive , irrespective of the risk of the legal disputes that may exist in the various Member States .
This type of patent in many languages under the current European Patent Office system is actually only for large companies rather than for small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is something that surely has to change .
Since 2000 , the European Parliament has , on dozens of occasions , called in its resolutions for progress to finally be made on the European patent - with a view to the Lisbon process and the new 2020 process .
I think it really is enough now .
The Belgian Presidency asked the Commission to bring forward a specific proposal for the enhanced cooperation process .
The Commission has taken on this initiative .
The Council has formally asked us for our assent .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has emphatically given its backing , by 16 votes to 5 .
In the meantime , 25 Member States are now behind this proposal .
It is now quite simply time to take a step forwards and to give consent from our side - Parliament 's side - to this procedure so that there is finally some light at the end of the tunnel .
I have one more point to close with .
We do not have many resources in Europe .
What we do have is our intelligence , our creativity and the ideas that are born on this continent .
It is therefore also of critical importance for us that these ideas are also protected .
I ask myself , how can we actually turn round to China , India and many other major developing countries in the world and tell them that they must protect intellectual property rights when we are not even in a position to do that here in Europe ?
We therefore need this qualitative progress to a European patent now .
That is why I am backing this proposal for enhanced cooperation and why I am calling on you all to support it .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , it is a privilege and an honour for me to address this distinguished audience today .
As Mr Lehne has just mentioned , the presence of the Presidency on a Monday bears witness to the importance of the issue .
First of all , I would like to thank the European Parliament for its constructive approach with regard to the Council 's efforts to improve conditions for obtaining patent protection in the European Union .
I also wish to extend our gratitude to the former Belgian Presidency for its relentless efforts to further the cause of the creation of a unitary patent protection .
Second , I would like to report that this morning , the Council decided , by an overwhelming majority , to request your consent for the authorisation of enhanced cooperation in this field .
Subject to your consent , the Competitiveness Council on 10 March is expected to give its authorisation .
The Hungarian Presidency attaches particular importance to improving the EU 's competitiveness and to supporting small- and medium-sized enterprises operating in the EU .
It is our joint responsibility to help them with innovation , which is one of the driving forces of competitiveness of SMEs both at European level and globally .
It has been clear from the outset that one of the key elements in fulfilling this objective would be the creation of an EU patent , which has been delayed for more than 30 years .
Maintaining the status quo is not an option .
Millions of euro are spent every year on translations and on administrative paperwork to obtain patent protection in the 27 different legal systems in the EU , while in the US , an inventor can acquire a patent for the entire US territory for an amount equivalent to EUR 1 850 .
In the EU , it costs EUR 20 000 for only 13 Member States .
According to calculations , European enterprises suffer a loss of seven to eight hundred million euro because of the lack of an EU patent .
Needless to say , this amount could be put to much better use if channelled , for example , into technological research .
There is currently no internal market in terms of patent protection .
The applicant is obliged to work with 27 separate national legal systems .
As a result , in practice , protection is often sought only in a certain part of the EU territory , thus creating serious problems in terms of the free circulation of goods , which are protected by a patent in some jurisdictions , but can be freely produced in others .
Our clear preference has always been the creation of a truly EU-wide patent that would cover the territory of all 27 Member States .
We profoundly regret that negotiations relating to the linguistic regime have resulted in a stalemate , with no prospect of reaching the necessary consensus in the foreseeable future .
I also need to stress that EU decision makers are under pressure to make rapid progress in this field .
The freshly released Innovation Union Scoreboard confirms that there is already a yawning gap between the innovation performance of the US and Japan and that of the EU , and the major emerging economies are rapidly catching up .
Although patenting rules are not the only factor determining innovation activity , their importance is obvious to all .
Each year , we keep on working with the current set of rules , our fragmented system becomes less attractive and competitive .
Under these circumstances , the overwhelming majority of the Member States consider that the creation of unitary patent protection within the framework of enhanced cooperation is the only way forward for the time being .
27 Member States have submitted official requests with a view to establishing enhanced cooperation .
Their clear expectation is that visible results be achieved within a reasonable time .
As the Presidency-in-Office , we will do our utmost to make substantial progress in the field .
On the other hand , the Presidency has to pay attention to the objections and reservations voiced by Spain and Italy too .
Let me turn now to address the distinguished Spanish and Italian members of this House in their mother tongue .
( ES ) Firstly , I would like to address the honourable Members from our partner , Spain .
We are confident that , through enhanced cooperation , with the creation of the unitary patent protection system , we are taking a significant step towards an ideal situation in which the unitary patent protection system covers all the Member States and the whole of the European Union .
( IT ) I turn now to our Italian friends .
In order to avoid any doubt , I must stress that no business and no individual , regardless of the country of origin , will be excluded from the benefits of a future unitary patent .
Mr President , thank you for your patience .
I very much look forward to working with Parliament in the future on this subject .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by giving your support to this enhanced cooperation , as Mr Lehne is proposing , you will be taking a decisive step , if you like , towards making the lives of European businesses and inventors easier , thanks to what is at last unitary patent protection in Europe .
The inability to provide better and more affordable protection for inventions and creations , particularly in the industrial sector , is an incredible and , I believe , unacceptable weakness in terms of the competitiveness of our continent , which is up against extremely tough international competition .
That is why , at my hearing before you on 13 January 2010 , and on many occasions since then , I made a commitment - a vow of sorts , really - that I would move this dossier forward so as to ensure that I am the last EU Commissioner to raise this issue .
We made a proposal .
Thanks to the Belgian Presidency 's proactive and intelligent approach , the proposal was supplemented , enhanced and improved , but , as you know , we failed to receive the unanimous support that I had hoped for on this matter .
That is why and how this idea of enhanced cooperation , within the context of the new Treaty of Lisbon , was born .
The Commission quickly responded to the request for enhanced cooperation that was initially submitted to it , as Mr Lehne said , by a dozen Member States .
At this moment in time , ladies and gentlemen , 25 Member States have given their consent to the introduction of this enhanced cooperation .
The Hungarian Presidency has taken over from the Belgian Presidency , and it too is showing great resolve , for which I thank it .
It wants this cooperation to begin from March , and I am very grateful to Parliament and , in particular , to you , Mr Lehne , and to the members of your committee , for the pivotal role you are playing , with the Committee on Legal Affairs , in order to make progress in this work and to produce results quickly on this matter .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission wants as many Member States as possible to be involved in this enhanced cooperation , and I personally hope that all the Member States will ultimately be able to support this proposal , which , I shall say it again , is politically acceptable to all the Member States , and financially necessary for all businesses .
The broadest possible support - indeed , unanimous support if possible - will ensure that this advance provides the maximum number of benefits for European businesses and inventors .
In my capacity as Commissioner responsible for the internal market , I shall take care to ensure that enhanced cooperation remains compatible with the treaties , and with the rules on the functioning of the internal market in particular .
That means , ladies and gentlemen , that unitary patent protection - as Mrs Győri explained very well in Italian and Spanish - will be accessible to all businesses in the EU , no matter which Member State they are based in .
There will be no discrimination .
Moreover , the benefits of this unitary protection will be the same for all inventors and for all innovative companies in the EU , and this applies both to procedures , which will be streamlined , and to translation costs , which will be reduced .
An analysis of the global impact of this project has already been carried out , and we are currently working on an in-depth assessment of its economic impact .
To conclude , the Commission , which regrets that an agreement among the 27 has not yet been possible , will do its utmost to establish this enhanced cooperation quickly - as soon as the Council of Ministers has given its opinion in March - by presenting the draft regulations necessary to establish it , so that we can very quickly bring this real added value to European businesses .
Thank you for your attention , and thank you , in advance , for your support for this proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with exceptional speed and dynamism , this Parliament is about to consent to the first instance of enhanced cooperation that specifically concerns the internal market .
The accepted justification for this is that the discussion on a European patent has been on the agenda for many years .
We should therefore do well to specify that the draft regulation on the translation regime was not adopted by the Commission until 30 June 2010 and that the Council took note of the lack of unanimity and the difficulty of reaching a unanimous decision in the near future in November 2010 .
I shall gloss over , then , the pace at which we in Parliament have dealt with the dossier , which I hope will serve as an example for the future , because we have broken records of some significance in favour of a speedy and efficient legislative passage .
Nevertheless , since it is not my intention to act solely as a spokesman for the interests of my country , which is currently opposed to enhanced cooperation , and since I believe that the subject of the patent is fundamental to the development of industry and the European entrepreneurial system , I should like merely to raise certain questions that I consider to be important for the exercise by this House of its legislative functions and for the future treatment of regulations on the patent .
First and foremost , we should do well to recognise that a vote in favour of enhanced cooperation will systematically legitimise the application to the development of the internal market of an instrument that should instead have the quality of a last resort .
We are therefore creating a precedent that could be used in all areas of the internal market .
Furthermore , I believe that this Parliament can , when we are faced with other subjects , subsequently state its view in a manner that is exhaustive and autonomous , and that individual proposals are at the centre of users ' and businesses ' interests rather than those of individual groups of countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the explanatory statement from the rapporteur is quite correct and needs no amplification .
For this reason , my group will give its consent to enhanced cooperation .
There were also some contrary opinions among us - this is quite legitimate and these voices should be heard .
However , what the rapporteur , Council Presidency and Commissioner have had to say shows that the time has really come and that we cannot drag our feet any longer .
It is not the case , as some people claim , that this has all been agreed in haste without any discussion - like many of the other arguments , this is patently untrue .
The language issue did not just become the subject of debate when the Commission presented its last proposal last year ; this has been under discussion for a decade or more .
There is nothing new about it .
Anyone who looks at how different models have been presented and discussed in recent months cannot say that there has not been sufficient discussion .
It is time to cut the Gordian knot !
The second argument always used here is that we risk destroying the internal market .
The fact is that we do not have an internal market where patents are concerned , so we cannot really destroy it .
If - as has been the case for a long time - we are clear about the fact that the internal market really does need a uniform patent process in order to reach completion , then the entire internal market cannot be destroyed by this move .
In the worst case scenario , things would remain as they are .
I do believe that we will make progress , however .
The third specific argument used is that Parliament would weaken its rights by consenting to enhanced cooperation : none of this is true .
I would advise you to take a look at the Treaty of Lisbon and our Rules of Procedure .
We will not relinquish a single right .
We are now approving enhanced cooperation and , when this begins , we shall all have our individual rights .
With regard to the language regime , of course this is simply a matter of consultation , since unanimity is required here .
Codecision should apply to the actual patent regulation and the approval of patent jurisdiction , however .
We are not relinquishing a single right , quite the opposite in fact .

Mr President , I would like to begin by expressing my thanks to Mr Lehne for the fine work that he has done on this issue and also to Commissioner Barnier , who is efficiently and successfully taking this matter forward .
This issue has , as we have heard , been under discussion for many decades and it is now clear that the Council is not going to achieve the unanimity required by the Treaty in order for a decision to be made .
Many Member States have therefore asked to enter into enhanced cooperation in this area .
I would like to emphasise that this is an open form of cooperation that all Member States are welcome to join if they so wish .
The matter that we have to decide on today is therefore whether or not Parliament should grant its approval to the Council 's request for this enhanced cooperation .
It is my opinion and that of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe that the European Parliament should approve this request , in line with the recommendation of the rapporteur , Mr Lehne .
Receiving protection for an invention or scientific discovery is extremely important for converting innovation and knowledge into useable , useful products , which , in turn , will create growth and jobs .
At present , it is difficult for an individual inventor or a small company to get patent protection across the whole of Europe .
It is quite simply too expensive and complicated , as we have heard .
An American patent currently costs around EUR 1 800 , whereas a European patent costs more than EUR 20 000 - 11 times as much , which is clearly unreasonable .
Multinational companies with large resources and legal expertise will always cope with this , regardless of what the system is like .
It is Europe 's individual innovators who are paying the price in the current system .
It is high time that they , too , received protection for their achievements so that they grow and become the major employers of tomorrow that our Union so desperately needs .
We need this now .
We have no time to lose .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a European patent regime would probably improve the situation for some areas of business and science .
However , I must say that the hopes placed in this patent are somewhat over-optimistic .
We need to keep a sense of proportion here .
I am opposed to enhanced European cooperation .
We recently dealt with the issue of divorce in the context of enhanced cooperation .
Now , directly following on from this decision , we have the next issue relating to enhanced cooperation on the table .
If we simply wave this approval through , we will be encouraging a situation where soon , enhanced cooperation will be the only mechanism for reaching agreement because it is too difficult to reach agreement at Council level .
This was not the intention of the convention when we discussed enhanced cooperation .
Good governance , something we talk about a lot here , means transparency and clarity among other things .
However , transparency and clarity are not promoted by enhanced cooperation in its multiplicity of forms in a wide variety of areas .
I believe we will be establishing a major problem for the future if we constantly have different subgroups of states coming together to agree on a particular issue .
Of course , it is all very well to say ' The invitation is open to everyone ' .
The question is , under what conditions ?
I would have thought that this time - unlike in all the preceding years - we actually would have had a chance of reaching agreement if only the negotiations had gone on longer .
I do not believe that enhanced cooperation is the right path for the issue of patents .
For this reason , I do not intend voting in favour of this regulation .
Mr President , for several years , discussion has been taking place in Europe on the introduction of unitary patent law .
Economists and business people are of the opinion that its introduction would significantly reduce the costs of patent protection for businesses throughout the European Union and would allow cheap , effective and improved protection .
This is particularly important , especially for the small and medium-sized enterprise sector .
The recommendations and proposals of the European Commission also point in this direction .
However , notice should be taken of certain controversial proposals which are the subject of discussion in this matter - this has already been mentioned in the House today - namely , the questions related to translations of patents made by the European Patent Office and the proposal that these translations be made into only three languages .
This is something which requires further thought and consideration as to why it should be those three languages and not other ones , particularly because this would give a certain advantage to business people who use one of these languages as their mother tongue .
I think we should give more thought to this .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the European Commission has already tried to create an EU patent law , but failed in June when this was rejected by the Council , which failed to achieve a unanimous vote .
The Commission , however , wants to forge ahead with this .
The fact that it does so is just another example of EU empire-building .
The proposals are unnecessary and will impose yet more administrative and cost burdens on innovative companies .
So exactly who is in favour of this ?
It is being driven forward by 12 countries that include the United Kingdom .
It should surprise no one that the British coalition government is a prime mover in this , just as successive British Governments have been prime movers in most EU projects , while pretending to do the opposite .
If the Conservative Party had ever thought to patent lies , deceit and hypocrisy , they would have made a fortune in royalties and would perhaps be in a position to pay off the national debt !
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , that human beings have wondered about life and death since the dawn of time is something that I can understand , but the European Union 's failure , since the 1970s , to overcome the difficulties of the European patent is really quite hopeless .
Firstly , I would like to commend the work and perseverance of Mr Lehne in this undertaking , and to thank him for the attention he had paid to our Spanish and Italian colleagues .
I , too , listened to their arguments , and I completely understand them .
However , we are not here today to resolve a linguistic issue .
The European Commission proposal of 1 July 2010 is based on the language regime of the European Patent Office , which has proved its effectiveness .
However , once again , this linguistic debate is not on the agenda .
Today is about enabling those 25 Member States that wish to make progress by establishing enhanced cooperation to actually do so .
Today is about responding to the request of European businesses , which pay 11 times more for their patents than US businesses .
Today is about showing that the European Parliament is mature enough to rise above petty squabbles .
We will have plenty of time to debate the sensitive political choices ahead of us .
However , let us stop stalling and let us instead move forward by giving our support to Mr Lehne 's recommendation on this long , long road towards the European patent .
( CS ) Mr President , US President Obama , in his annual State of the Union Address , called for the US to be strengthened in the area of innovation .
He referred to innovation as ' our generation 's Sputnik moment ' .
I am pleased that the EU is sending a clear signal through the ' Union of Innovation ' programme regarding the importance of innovation for maintaining the economic position of Europe in global competition .
In my opinion , one of the key instruments for the success of the ' Union of Innovation ' project , and for maintaining a lead against innovation tigers such as China and Brazil , is the establishment of a single EU patent .
The single patent would help to give a considerable boost to the competitiveness of European businesses .
I therefore feel very frustrated that the creation of such a key instrument for the development of innovation in the EU is being held up by some countries over secondary issues such as the protection of language .
I therefore back the proposal to enhance cooperation , even at the expense of some Member States not participating .
We must not allow ' our generation 's Sputnik moment ' to slip away .
( ES ) Mr President , the European Union is founded on values such as equality , solidarity and respect for all languages .
We all share these principles .
As Spanish Members , we support the idea of having a patents system for the whole of the European Union , and I congratulate my colleague , Mr Lehne , on that part of the report .
We support anything that improves and expands the internal market .
However , for such an important matter , a course has been chosen that is provided for in the Treaty - enhanced cooperation - which should be the last resort and fulfil a series of conditions .
In our view , enhanced cooperation , on which we will vote tomorrow , is contrary to Articles 118 and 326 of the Treaty .
Moreover , I believe that in the Council , the rules of the game have been changed , but my government will deal with that .
The new Treaty is an unquestionably useful tool for the EU , but it cannot be used to establish a multi-speed Europe .
Many countries that currently support enhanced cooperation will soon suffer the consequences themselves and , if the Council and the Commission continue to use enhanced cooperation in this way , ultimately we will all lose .
Spanish is spoken by 850 million people .
Out of the three languages proposed by the European Commission for the patents system , only one of them is comparable to Spanish in terms of size .
What criteria were used ?
Efficiency ?
Are we talking about EUR 1 850 ?
Then why not use only English and leave the other two languages , so we will also save by doing it three times rather than 20 times .
Is it about timing ?
It was not Spain that opposed a patent in the past , it was other countries , which are now rushing to have one .
Is it to do with politics , as I suspect ?
Care should be taken with bureaucratic manoeuvres that distance millions of citizens - and thousands of businesses that use Spanish - from the reality of the European Union .
The system proposed by the Commission is contrary to the right of Europeans to express themselves in their language , it prioritises one language over others , it is clear discrimination against competition , it fragments the market and creates legal uncertainty .
This battle has only just begun .
Due to the haste of some , we are going to be faced with a legal action lasting several years in the Court of Justice , as my government has already said .
The three institutions will have to give an account of the procedure followed and of why the warnings were ignored .
This situation can be remedied if we return to the spirit and the letter of the treaties , which Spain has respected .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the absence of a European patent can no longer be tolerated .
Businesses in Europe are being penalised when it comes to patenting by costs 10 times as high as those faced by their US and Japanese competitors .
Besides , the fragmentation of copyright in patents is one of the causes holding back economic recovery .
The Commission is offering us enhanced cooperation with a specific language regime , something that we do not welcome .
Nevertheless , there is something new .
25 out of 27 states are participating .
The political framework has changed .
Positive development may be possible , with an enhancement even of the proposer 's language , for example .
We must all now work to achieve better respect for all .
Besides , we want the Italian language to be protected and enhanced , but our government has cut funding and is very neglectful of this aspect .
It is on this other ground that we shall be urging it on , but we must achieve a European patent .
( ES ) Mr President , let us not delude ourselves .
This procedure is a set-up so that French and German come before Spanish , a language that is not only spoken in Europe , but by 700 million other people in the rest of the world , as Mr López-Istúriz White quite rightly said , which is more than the number of Europeans .
They would also be coming before Italian - as has quite rightly been said - because Italian and Spanish were already recognised as languages for trademark registration .
The procedure is loaded with uncertainties that are concerning the large technological companies of Digital Europe , such as Blackberry , IBM , Nokia , Philips , and Siemens , the manifesto for which I hope will reach everyone , despite the regrettable attempt by a European Commission Head of Unit to block it .
We do not know what the judgment will be , nor what the jurisdiction or tools will be .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us remain calm .
Let us make use of the enhanced cooperation in the Treaty , without a mad rush that could detract from and prevent its consolidation .
It should also be done without the despicable rush this morning , which meant that the Education Ministers in the Council only glanced at it .
I am grateful to the Hungarian representative for speaking Italian and Spanish ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , we are all aware that multilingualism is a reflection of the cultural and linguistic diversity to be found in the EU and , as such , is extremely important .
However , the dispute over the language used in EU patents has been going on for more than 30 years .
Over the course of these 30 years , European countries have had to cope with high translation costs and , in some cases , competitive disadvantages on the global market .
There is no denying that it is hard to put a figure on intangible fixed assets like trademarks and patents .
However , these are used to secure loans and are also taken into account in ratings .
In this context , the new patent law drawn up through the process of enhanced European cooperation , which is valid at least in parts of the EU , only requires patents to be translated into German , English and French , which will certainly make matters easier in bureaucratic terms .
This is particularly the case because English is used as a universal technical language in some sectors , such as IT and medicine .
Last but not least , the consistent use of the three working languages - German , English and French - would make it genuinely possible to reach a majority of the population .
On a personal note , I am pleased to see that the new regulation also strengthens the position of the German language , which is still the most widely spoken native language within the EU according to a survey from 2006 .
( PT ) Mr President , the creation of a European patent is stimulating innovation and scientific and technological development in the EU .
I feel it is fundamental that we resolve the issue of the European patent .
However , I do have reservations about the languages to be used .
In my opinion , the best solution would be to use English alone ; however , if other languages are to be included , then Portuguese should also be considered .
Competition is global and Portuguese is the third most widely spoken western language , after English and Spanish .
Mr President , knowledge creation within the European Union is always a priority , which we manage successfully .
However , knowledge management is not so well dealt with in the European Union .
I was very sorry to hear that the Belgian Presidency could not finish the Patent Directive as planned , but I hope that the Hungarian Presidency will be committed to doing its best in the coming months to get to the next phase , which is enhanced cooperation .
Time is the only resource which is not renewable .
The time we lose never comes back .
We cannot experience Europe solely through austerity programmes .
We need exploration of knowledge , we have to expand , and therefore it is of critical importance for Europe that patents , whether with enhanced cooperation or with the common European directive , get off the ground .
I would like to wish great success to those who participate in this and to those who are in favour of it .
Being Hungarian , we will lose the Hungarian language , but that is a small price to pay compared to the advantages we will all benefit from .
( NL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Barnier for being so brave as to raise this issue in this way , because he promised during his hearing to tackle the European patent during this term , so thank you for that .
I would also like to thank my fellow Member , Mr Lehne , for his approach .
Now , we need only to decide whether we should agree on enhanced cooperation .
That is the first thing that has to happen .
However , I regret that a distinction has been made between the importance of language and identity as a cultural phenomenon and what actually happens in practice .
Because , in practice , the system which is now being proposed has been used by all Member States for 35 years , and I think that we can be a little more prudent economically about the way in which this is being proposed .
I regret that the debate is getting bogged down to some extent in the conflict about languages and I hope - and this is also what Parliament has expressly requested - that the Member States that are perhaps not involved at this stage will be able to join up at any time .
That , I believe , will help us put an end to this debate and enable us to finally get a European patent .
Mr President , when I first came to this Parliament in 1999 , the single European patent was on the agenda .
I remember working with Klaus-Heiner Lehne on Mrs Palacio 's report .
I am pleased that we are starting to make some serious progress on it .
We cannot underestimate the importance of this proposal to the competitiveness of the European economy .
We are currently debating a very imaginative new plan from Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn called the Innovation Union .
This continent - the European Union - needs to be more inventive .
We need to create more inventions and exploit them more .
It is absolutely indispensable that we have a competitive patent system .
This enhanced cooperation move is an imaginative one to move the debate forward .
I hope our Spanish and Italian colleagues will come into it , but we cannot leave this waiting any longer , because the whole world is after the innovation market .
( PT ) Mr President , this process is very revealing , both in form and content , of the new conditions under which the directory of powers of the European Union is attempting to assert and defend its interests in a wider cross-section of areas .
These new conditions are provided by the Treaty of Lisbon and this mechanism of closer cooperation , and I would point out that we gave due warning of their consequences .
In this case , and let us not lose sight of key issues relating to the EU patent concept and its objectives and implications for one second , the objective will be to impose a privileged status for English , French and German on the patent register for no other reason than the one I have just mentioned .
Other languages such as Portuguese , the third most widely spoken European language in the world , will be devalued on the way , thus damaging the interests of these other countries and limiting any chance of affirming their languages also in the fields of science and technology .
If these intentions are put into practice , it will be another - not the only - dimension of the attack on multilingualism in the European Union , which insidiously continues making its way through the door of cost containment .
( SK ) Mr President , Commissioner , the European Union has been pushing since 2000 for enhanced Member State cooperation in the area of patent protection .
The final round of negotiations , however , which took place in December last year , confirmed that many Member States have serious reservations over the proposed translation arrangements for EU patents , which are based on the current language regime of the European Patent Office .
It is therefore impossible to achieve the positive unanimous decision of the Council necessary for further joint progress .
In such a situation , it is therefore natural and logical that those Member States which see the need to enhance Member State cooperation in protecting intellectual property are responding by trying to establish enhanced cooperation between themselves in the area of creating unitary patent protection , by means of the process under Article 20 of the EU Treaty .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I firmly believe that the European Parliament will not be an obstacle to enhanced cooperation between those Member States that wish to cooperate .
( DE ) Mr President , we have heard a lot of good arguments today .
I would just like to deal with a few important points .
We should support the call made by Mr Lehne and accept the proposal put forward by Commissioner Barnier .
At this point , I would like to draw attention yet again to the successful work of the Belgian Presidency of the Council .
This Presidency has achieved a great deal in other areas too .
The issue at stake here is a procedural decision .
Mr Lehne has already pointed this out .
The question at issue here is not which European language is spoken by how many people worldwide or which is the most aesthetically beautiful , but rather a procedural decision that the Council is anxious to take .
I would agree with the previous speaker from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance when she said that we should exercise care when considering this procedural decision .
However , we are not faced with the desire of a subgroup within the European Council of Ministers to establish a language regime , but rather the wishes of 25 out of 27 Member States .
It is for this reason that I believe that , even if the decision to approve enhanced cooperation is to be made with caution , this is something that the European Parliament can agree to .
( PL ) Mr President , the European patent is intended to support innovativeness .
In which case , why can the patent itself not be innovative ?
We are only talking about patent law , but we ought also to be talking about what would be the best form for the patent , for we have short-term patents and long-term patents , but the latter are certainly not necessarily better as patents or better written .
I think we should create a form of patent and a procedure for describing inventions which will make best use of the Internet and electronic methods of registration , and therefore also of language .
I think the cheapest form , which would not need to be translated into other languages , would be a European e-patent .
( CS ) Mr President , I have long supported the single European patent , as it will make it more attractive to invest in innovation , enable companies to better protect their know-how , speed up the transfer of knowledge from research into practice and perhaps better protect us against the influx of counterfeits onto the internal market .
It is also a great challenge .
Our competitiveness will be undermined by the fact that , after 10 years , the Council has achieved nothing more than enhanced cooperation .
I welcome the fact that the Czech Republic has reassessed its position and has decided to join the negotiations .
At the same time , I recognise the sensitivity of the precedent set by enhanced cooperation , particularly for some of the large states , as it involves a language regime .
However , I believe it will benefit all researchers in the EU .
It is important for patents to be as inexpensive as they are in the US , and I therefore hope that the Council will carry out further simplifications .
It is important to have a new judicial system for European patents , which should clarify a number of questions to do with software and biotechnology patents .
I support the proposal for enhanced cooperation .
( PL ) Mr President , much has already been said , today , about how Europe and European enterprises need a patent , and I agree with those voices .
Without patent legislation , it will be more difficult for our firms to compete with the increasingly dynamic and innovative enterprises of emerging economies .
We should not forget , however , that enhanced cooperation on patents is not , after all , the most advantageous solution from the point of view of the common European market .
As a supporter of a strong common market , I prefer market barriers to be removed and not created .
Therefore , I appeal to all those involved in developing the form of patent legislation to provide solutions which will benefit the whole of Europe .
I am thinking here chiefly of the languages to be used , because in my opinion , we must not discriminate against people who do not understand French , German or English .
I think that basing the system on one language would be the best solution .
Mr President , I will reply to your last comment , Mrs Handzlik , so as to point out , before I come to the procedure , the substance of the matters on which we have worked so hard , as has been said , with the Belgian Presidency and , over the last few weeks , with the Hungarian Presidency .
If a Bulgarian , Slovak , Latvian or Portuguese company wishes to apply for a patent in its own language , it can do so under the proposal we are discussing , and the cost of the translation will be refunded .
If there is a dispute , the company will receive a manual translation in its own language .
If , before receiving that translation , it fails to comply with the patent because it does not understand it properly , its good faith will be protected .
In other words , it will not have to pay any damages .
So that we are all clear about what is being discussed here , I would like to remind you , ladies and gentlemen , of what has been or will be proposed .
I have proposed that a company wishing to apply for a patent may do so , including in its own language .
Legal protection will be guaranteed in one of the three languages of the Munich Convention , which is part of the history of the European patents .
I did not invent that convention ; it has been around for a long time .
There are three languages .
One of the three - English , French or German - will be used to automatically guarantee legal protection throughout the EU .
Under the Belgian Presidency , we added a proposal , which will doubtless be discussed .
It was to use two other languages with manual translation , in addition to one of the three languages for legal protection .
Those two languages will have no legal value , but they are of great value in terms of providing information about and communicating what is included in the patent .
English , for example , can be used if so desired , as can Portuguese , Latvian or Dutch , with a translation in one of the three languages .
Moreover , the translation will also be free of charge - its cost will be met .
The situation , then , is as follows : one of the three languages will be used for legal protection and two other languages for information and communication .
I would add one last time that no European companies will be discriminated against , and that includes those located in a Member State that is not participating in enhanced cooperation .
In other words , if a Spanish company applies for a European patent , it will be able to use it without being discriminated against if Spain does not participate in enhanced cooperation straight away .
That is the aim , and that is why , ladies and gentlemen , I have worked hard on this matter , as I pledged to do .
I have worked on it seriously ; I have not been ideological or biased , and I have taken account of all the obstacles and been anxious to make progress .
That is why I believe that the proposal is politically acceptable to the 27 Member States and financially necessary for all EU companies .
Mrs Herczog made the very good point - as did Mr Harbour and others too , such as Mr Schwab - that this issue is important from an economic point of view .
We need to encourage , stimulate , protect and remunerate creation and innovation .
This is one of the areas in which Europe has another advantage .
Let us guard that advantage ; let us strengthen and protect it .
Many small businesses are no longer financially able to protect their inventions , because they do not have this European patent .
And what happens ?
Mrs Roithová mentioned the word ' counterfeiting ' just now .
If the patent is not protected because there are not the means to protect it throughout the Union , will it be protected in two or three Member States ?
And will counterfeit goods be able to enter all the other Member States ?
Once they have entered , they are in the internal market , and jobs are destroyed and public safety and public health are put at risk .
I am referring , for example , to inventions of medicines .
This is an extremely serious matter , which is why we have dealt with it seriously , without being ideological but simply being anxious to make progress and to find a reasonable solution , which , I honestly believe , is acceptable .
Finally , Mr President , I should like to respond to a comment made by Mr López-Istúriz White , to whom I listened carefully , and by Mrs Lichtenberger .
They said that this enhanced cooperation , which currently involves 25 of the 27 Member States , could be used to fragment the single market .
I sincerely believe that no such risk exists .
Why ?
Because we are in an altogether exceptional situation : we have a single-market law that requires unanimity .
For almost all of the other single-market regulations and laws , we have a qualified majority .
In this case , we need unanimity .
That is why I believe that there is no risk of fragmentation ; indeed , the European Commission will be vigilant in preventing any kind of fragmentation of the single market .
I should like once again to thank Mr Lehne for his determination and commitment , as well as the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
I should also like to thank you in advance for lending your support , on the basis of this objective proposal , to this enhanced cooperation .
Mr President , in my first speech this evening , I spoke in a language which is the language of the European patent and in two languages which , for the time being , are not the language of the European patent .
Allow me now to speak in my mother tongue , which is likewise not the language of the European patent as things stand at present , and is a language that is spoken by a total of only 15 million people worldwide , 10 million of them in Hungary .
Thus , I am saying to the Spanish and Italian Members in particular that believe me , we do devote great attention to the equality , importance and use of languages .
Allow me also to make a brief digression on behalf of a Member State which , in a sense , I represented until six weeks ago - because now I do not represent a Member State - but until six weeks ago , I represented a Member State that held a different opinion on the issue of the patent .
Over the last few months , the Hungarian Government has changed its former position .
This was not a simple decision .
As regards the factor that caused the Hungarian Government to change its mind , this was the very serious dialogue held with the ' business community ' , with the representatives of small and medium-sized enterprises , and they unambiguously asked the government to change its earlier reluctant , or rather negative , stance in order to enable Hungarian small and medium-sized enterprises to benefit from the unitary European patent and to make savings thanks to a functioning linguistic regime .
The situation which has evolved now - 25 out of the 27 - is far from ideal .
We all are , as Hungary has also been from the start , supporters of the single market .
We trust and believe that accomplishing this will strengthen European growth , which - as a great many honourable Members have said - is now a necessity in the post-crisis European Union .
To achieve this , we must do everything we can .
I am convinced that the unitary European patent and the linguistic regime as one of its elements must be seen in this context .
Moreover , as Commissioner Barnier has also pointed out , I believe that both Italian and Spanish companies will also benefit from the creation of the unitary European patent system .
I would also like to react to two other remarks .
One is , why this great haste and why this fast pace , because the Commission only tabled its proposal in July .
As a matter of fact , you have already answered this question as well .
Let me remind you that the debate on the linguistic regime alone has been going on for ten years in the European Union , so I believe this is not a matter of haste .
Another comment concerned the ultima ratio , whether we have actually done everything possible to find a solution that is acceptable to all Member States .
I believe that the Belgian Presidency actually did do all it could .
We only need to recall that even during the autumn , more and more new proposals were tabled with the intention of establishing this system in all 27 countries of the single market .
Unfortunately , in spite of all the efforts , eventually , 12 Member States asked in December for closer cooperation to begin and , as has already been mentioned , their number has now increased to 25 .
Thus , there was nothing more to be done here , and the Presidency was unable to do anything other than to appeal for closer cooperation , and to this end it has asked , and now I ask personally as well , for your support in the voting .
We need the single market and we need to strengthen it .
We know , as several studies have shown , that one of the principal obstacles to this is the absence of unitary patent protection and so we should act to stop this hindering our small and medium-sized enterprises in particular in innovation and in enhanced performance .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to conclude with three observations : Commissioner Barnier has already indicated that the principle of enhanced cooperation was specifically established to overcome obstacles in the area of unanimity .
According to the Treaty of Lisbon , unanimity is the absolute exception .
In other words , we only require it in a very small number of cases , This is precisely why the procedure for enhanced cooperation was established .
While we are on the subject of language : language is not the issue at stake today .
Let me repeat clearly : the issue under debate today is solely the procedure .
However , let me point out that we already discussed the fact that one language is more cost-effective than three in relation to the Palacio report .
However , as has already been indicated , we are dealing with the European Patent Convention ( EPC ) here .
The European Patent Office works in the languages agreed in the EPC .
A change in this regime would necessarily mean making a change to the EPC .
However , the EPC cannot be changed by the Member States of the European Union acting unilaterally because the EPC includes all European countries , with the exception , I believe , of Malta .
All of these countries , including Switzerland , for example , would have to agree to the change .
If we cannot reach an agreement between the 27 Member States of the EU , how can we hope to find common ground between the 39 countries in the EPC ?
If we go down this route , then the entire issue will simply be put on the long finger indefinitely .
However , we will have to discuss this question when we come to consider the material proposal from the Commission .
Incidentally , the legal services of all three institutions have expressly confirmed that enhanced cooperation is an option .
Perhaps I might add another comment on the subject of language : practitioners find it hard to understand the political battle being waged here .
That is because the practitioners - by which I mean those who register patents - in fact only operate in a single language as they carry out their research work .
Accordingly , this dispute over the principle of language is something those involved find difficult to comprehend .
I would like to conclude with some remarks on discrimination : if I have understood correctly - and I am certain that I have - this new European patent is open to all enterprises and all inventors , including those from countries that are not party to the enhanced cooperation , in other words , to every country in the world .
This is absolutely self-evident .
There is no disadvantage to those states that do not participate in enhanced cooperation .
The European Patent Convention will continue to apply for them .
In other words , if I wish to pursue a package of patents in these countries , then I must have these translated .
I have one final comment on the language dispute : there is nothing to stop anyone having all of these patents translated into all 23 official languages .
If a Member State considers its language so important that all patents need to be translated into its language , then it should simply set the process in motion .
However , this should not be at the expense of the patent holders , whose innovations help our economy to develop .
Instead , the principle should be : he who pays the piper calls the tune .
It is then up to the relevant states and their taxpayers to pay for this .
If any Member State considers its language so important that it should be used for every patent applicable in Europe , then it needs to take a consistent line and have a legally binding translation of these patents produced in the relevant language .
However , it should also pay for this itself .
That is my final point , which I hope will help to clarify this discussion .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 15 February 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Intellectual property rights represent the most tangible recognition of the work of research and innovation that European businesses undertake every day to overcome competitive challenges and create wealth for the benefit of all .
They must therefore be protected in every way and in every form .
I value the fact that the European Parliament is engaged on this matter , and I am very happy to be able to take part in the vote on this issue .
Nevertheless , ' the road to hell is paved with good intentions ' , as they say .
In other words , it is not enough to have the good will to make good law that would really facilitate the work of businesses and shield them from unfair competition from competitors making copies that cost less because they do not have to bear the burden of the onerous and drawn-out work involved in researching new solutions to various problems .
In this case , based on the knowledge I have of the area that I represent , I believe that the language barrier introduced by a patent application is an exorbitant cost for our businesses .
I have a provocative question , however .
What impact would a trilingual regime have on the work of this Parliament ?
The budget amount devoted to translation and interpretation speaks volumes more than any reply .
I have no choice but to vote against .
in writing . - I am delighted that the Council has agreed that 12 Member States will use the enhanced cooperation mechanism to push ahead the creation of a unitary EU patent .
This project has been on the table for more than 10 years and has regrettably been plagued by divisions among the Member State governments .
The lack of legal certainty and the high costs associated with the current system whereby patents have to be validated separately in each Member State is strangling the Internal Market 's potential for development , innovation and growth .
Currently , it costs 10 times more to obtain a European patent that is valid in just half of the Member States than it does in the USA .
Half of these costs are associated with translation .
A more streamlined approach is essential for the Union to remain competitive .
This EU-wide patent makes sense !
I urge progress to be made in finalising the legal arrangements as soon as possible and express the hope that in future , all Member States will see the imperative of being part of this system .
We often talk in this Chamber about the progress and development of new technologies , while the procedure for patenting inventions in the European Union is one of the most expensive in the world .
The costs incurred by inventors are too high and procedures are too complicated .
There is also no doubt that a decision on the EU patent has been blocked in the Council .
In this situation , the Treaty of Lisbon gives Member States the right to set in motion an enhanced cooperation procedure .
The ideal situation would be to reach a compromise on the question of patents at the level of all Member States , but I think a 20-year wait is long enough .
I do realise that using the enhanced cooperation mechanism gives rise to many fears .
Let us remember , however , that to use it , specific conditions have to be met , and that applications are always considered individually in accordance with the subject of each application .
I think , too , that enhanced cooperation can become an instrument which opens the way to further negotiations while also giving greater guarantee of success .
I would also like to emphasise that at the present time , we are speaking only in the context of procedure and not of anything related to patents themselves .
Nothing has been decided yet .
We have a new round of negotiations before us .
This is only the beginning of work on the structure of the EU patent and the linguistic regime which is causing so much controversy .
Therefore , I hope all of us will be fruitful and persevering in our work , so that the final result will satisfy all interested parties .
Radioactive contamination of foodstuffs ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Belet , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council regulation ( Euratom ) laying down maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and of feeding stuffs following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency
- C7-0137 / 2010 - .
Mr President , we are talking here about the safety of food for humans and the safety of feed for animals .
These are , obviously , top priorities for the European Union .
Needless to say , this is an important piece of legislation and one which will hopefully never , or never again , have to be applied , because this is about radioactive contamination .
The highest safety standards are therefore called for .
The current standards and regulations have been in place for at least 20 years .
Meanwhile , the constitutional and social contexts have evolved radically .
We therefore need a number of adjustments .
It is these improvements which , hopefully , this House will adopt tomorrow and which , let us hope , the other institutions will take into account .
First of all , it is essential - and I hope that the Commissioner shortly will be able to take note of what I am saying - that the Commission should play a key role in such emergencies , and not the Council .
It is in the interest of all citizens , Commissioner , that the situation after a nuclear accident is managed by the Commission , given that this quite clearly transcends the interests of individual national governments .
The current regulation , to which I have just referred , was therefore laid down ​ ​ in the immediate wake of the Chernobyl crisis .
That was in 1986 .
It must therefore be updated and brought in line with the new institutional environment within the European Union .
Secondly , ladies and gentlemen , it goes without saying that the Commission should update established standards to take account of technological progress , and has done that on the basis of consultation with experts , experts in the field of public health and experts in the field of food safety .
That goes without saying , but has not been spelled out as such in the current regulation .
We are therefore proposing to make explicit provision for this .
In this context , we explicitly ask the Commission to publish a report next year on the adequacy of the standards as they currently stand , on whether it is desirable , possibly , to do some more work on what is known as the list of minor foodstuffs and on whether it is still appropriate to maintain that list any longer .
My third point , Commissioner , Mr President , concerns the definition of baby food , which is obviously a very delicate matter and one which should be improved .
The current text has not really been adjusted to the recent European food regulations and it is essential that we intervene in this text .
That is a proposal we are going to present to the plenary tomorrow .
Fourthly , Parliament has proposed to provide compensation to any farmers who might be affected by such an incident .
No explicit provision has yet been made to that effect .
We ask the Commission , and we will do so tomorrow by an oral amendment , to consider this and , if it so wishes , to come up with a proposal .
Last but not least , there is the question of the legal basis .
Commissioner , this Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs has unanimously found that this question should come under Article 168 ( 4 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
After all , this is about - and here I am quoting the Treaty - ' measures ... which have as their direct objective the protection of public health ' , end of quote .
This , of course , is a fundamental change , because it means that we will have to adjust the codecision procedure , rather than resort to consultation on the basis of the Euratom Treaty .
We are assuming that the Council and the Commission will take this into serious account , in the interest of all Europeans , and that they will move with us in this direction .


Mr President , firstly , please accept the apologies of Mr Šefčovič and Mr Oettinger , who are otherwise engaged and who have asked me to represent them .
It is on their behalf that I should like to thank Mr Belet , your rapporteur , for having highlighted important aspects resulting from the need to strengthen health protection measures in the event of the radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs .
I should also like to point out that the Commission 's proposal for a recast of Council Regulation No 3954 / 87 contains only one provision subject to review .
It is a recital in the preamble added to justify an existing provision in the regulation , namely , the reservation of implementing powers by the Council .
All the other provisions , ladies and gentlemen , have been submitted for codification and therefore remain unchanged in the proposal .
The Commission is therefore unable to accept , and I say this very sincerely , the amendments tabled in the Belet report .
There are two reasons for this : the first is of an institutional nature , and the second relates to substance .
The first reason concerns the need for strict compliance with the agreement on the use of the recasting procedure concluded between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
Given this interinstitutional agreement and the very logic of recasting , the codified parts of a recast proposal cannot be subject to amendment , except in truly exceptional circumstances .
The aim is to provide a tool for , among other things , ensuring consistency when changes have to be made .
Strict compliance with this agreed rule is an important condition for ensuring interinstitutional balance and the Commission 's right of initiative .
An institution 's failure to comply with the interinstitutional agreement would actually make it impractical to use this legislative technique and would deprive the institutions of an important tool for achieving the ' better regulation ' objective that has been set as part of the objective of increasing transparency for the benefit of the citizens .
The second reason relates to substance .
The first amendment adopted by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy concerns the legal basis .
Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty would be replaced by Article 168 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Most of the other amendments relate to this change of legal basis .
The Commission believes that this amendment to the legal basis is unjustifiable .
It would even contradict the principle contained in Article 106a of the Euratom Treaty , which is that , where this Treaty contains specific provisions regulating a particular subject , it shall take precedence over the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
As you know , the validity of Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty was confirmed by the Court in its ruling C-70 / 88 .
Chapter 3 of the Euratom Treaty and , more specifically , Articles 31 and 32 thereof , also regulates issues pertaining to the protection of the health of workers and the general public against the dangers arising from ionising radiations .
Lastly , I must mention at this point the established case-law of the Court , which holds that , and I quote : ' The rules regarding the manner in which the Community institutions arrive at their decisions are laid down in the Treaty and are not at the disposal of the Member States or of the institutions themselves ' .
Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty is the only objectively justifiable legal basis for this proposal .
Those are the legal constraints , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , and it was on the basis of those legal constraints that the Commission concluded that it wished to reject the amendments tabled in Mr Belet 's report .
That is what I wished to say on behalf of Mr Šefčovič and Mr Oettinger .

Mr President , radioactivity is something of a mysterious topic and one about which people generally have reservations .
What they are afraid of , in particular , is the fact that , although radiation cannot be seen or felt , it can cause great harm to living beings .
However , it also has many positive characteristics , which is why it is used in both medicine and research , for research into materials , for sterilisation and for power generation .
If we are to take advantage of such benefits , we obviously need to respond properly to people 's fears and we need to ensure their safety .
Our rapporteur , Mr Belet , made an excellent job of that when he drafted amendments to the regulation which addresses contamination of food and feed in case of nuclear accidents .
I congratulate him on these amendments and I sincerely hope that the Commission will change its opinion and that it will pay greater attention to what our rapporteur has said .
I also hope that the Council will take more seriously Parliament 's efforts in this regard , although I am very saddened and concerned about the fact that the representative of the Council is no longer present .
I wonder whether this is a sign of ignorance of the European Parliament 's opinion on the situation in the field of nuclear energy .
I believe that the Council and the Commission will have to take into account the democratic development which has been in evidence since the adoption of the Euratom Treaty , that is , from somewhere around 1958 , and pay more attention to what acts Parliament is adopting in the field of nuclear energy .
Otherwise , we might have to open Pandora 's box , or the Euratom Treaty .
Mr President , nuclear energy , as well as the whole area of the technology for producing isotopes in experimental reactors for medicinal and other purposes , including the production of sensory measurement devices and sterilisation , requires appropriate safety standards to be developed .
Among other things , this concerns the use of safe foodstuffs , animal feedingstuffs and medicines after they have been irradiated .
In today 's world , the risk or likelihood of a radiological emergency is indeed very small , but it should always be made as small as possible .
Accidents at reactors , including the Chernobyl accident , resulted in far more stringent criteria of protection from the effects of ionising radiation , but , as was later found , those effects proved to be much less significant than had been predicted .
A minimal contamination of soil also occurred due to radioactive fallout , which contributed to a small growth in the radioactivity of forest and agricultural foodstuffs obtained from the affected areas .
However , it would seem that this was an overreaction and that the area from which the population was resettled was too large .
Villages inside the contaminated zone in Belarus which were abandoned are now being populated again .
Some experts are saying that there is even some evidence of hormesis , a beneficial effect caused by the therapeutic action of high energy radiation below , of course , a certain dose threshold .
However , it is a linear approach to the action of radioactivity , not a threshold approach , which has resulted in this quasi-administrative treatment of these matters rather than a scientific one .
The logical consequence of this is to restrict radiation exposure to doses even lower than naturally occurring levels , which means the levels of radiation to which we are always exposed .
This is economically absurd .
For in any case , every year on average , we absorb a dose of around 2.4 millisieverts , which , after around 70 years of life , adds up to a dose of around 200 millisieverts .
Medical investigation is therefore needed to study the simultaneous action of the dose from contamination following a radiation emergency and the much higher dose resulting from natural radiation , including that of volcanic origin .
In the first case , this mainly concerns foodstuffs and the effect on the thyroid ( iodine ) , bones ( strontium ) and muscles ( caesium ) , while in the second case , it concerns the effect on skin and the lungs ( radon ) .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this debate on permitted levels of radioactivity in food is timely , because this April will be the 25th anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster .
Many of us will remember how anxious members of the public were at that time and just how long the radioactive contamination lasted in certain places , such as the English Lake District , where soil conditions and heavy rainfall caused the ground to be contaminated for many years .
So it is very important to have in place a system which will give the greatest possible reassurance to members of the public in the event of a nuclear accident .
That is why we need a different legal basis and a panel of experts broadened to include independent scientific experts on public health and food safety .
This is not just a technical subject that can be left to nuclear boffins .
It is of much wider public concern .
Similarly , it is essential that the levels of permitted radiation are set in a way that means food is safe to be consumed by people of all ages .
Can you imagine the stress that would be caused if advice went out that said that carrots , for instance , could be safely eaten by adults and yet not by children ?
We need clear guidelines that everyone can have confidence in .
I therefore believe that we should follow the US model here and set the maximum effective dose limit at one microsievert per year for everybody .
It is in any case high time that the levels in the annexes were reviewed , because they do not take account of changes in diet and cultural preferences .
For example , cassava is a staple food for many people , not a minor substance .
So the Commission needs to submit a full report on maximum permitted levels .
Finally , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Belet , for the very consensual approach that he has adopted on this report .
I hope the Commission will bear in mind that Parliament is remarkably united on this dossier .
Mr President , the reason we are discussing these proposals from the Commission is that the previous regulation lapsed in 2010 .
As I worked on this proposal , I was reminded how , in the mid-1980s , I worked with my predecessor from the Green Party here in Parliament , Mrs von Blottnitz , on the fall-out of the Chernobyl disaster .
One of the biggest problems after the Chernobyl accident was a lack of transparency and the failure of comprehensive democratic controls .
To be honest , I find it astonishing that we now find ourselves having to take an almost defensive line of argument because we cannot consider this issue on the basis of the Euratom regulations alone , but that we also have to consider consumer protection , protection for the population in the event of major accidents in nuclear power plants , based on the rules of the European Treaty , so that we have complete control and a say in the final outcome .
I would like to call once again on Mr Barnier , who is from France , to ensure that things change here .
At the time , France acted as if there was no problem and the radioactive clouds would somehow take a detour around its territory .
This was a shame , as people in France have become aware in retrospect .
Otherwise , I agree with Mrs Hall that we should follow the example of the United States by adopting a very conservative approach to the issue of regulation : limit values are not set for young people and the elderly , for the strong and the weak , but purely on the basis of what children can tolerate , so that the lowest possible limit values are applicable in the event of an accident .
The recommendations in the United States are ten times lower than those published today by the European Commission , based on the advice from Euratom .
I believe that you really should follow the lead provided here by myself and Mrs Hall .
Mr President , I also would like to start by supporting those of my fellow Members who agree that , when we talk about radioactive contamination of food or the soil , we are talking about a public health problem .
This is basically the central question .
To begin with , the impact of these problems of excessive radioactive contamination is felt in health terms , particularly through an increase in cases of cancer and other health problems .
It is therefore no use having a legal basis that does not place public health at the centre of the issue .
We are all well aware of the importance of this debate .
We know this from Chernobyl , yet not only because of Chernobyl .
In fact , the importance of Chernobyl has been to show us the magnitude of this problem and the extent to which it can affect people 's lives .
It is vital that we learn the lessons that history has to teach us .
It is therefore down to us to put preventive measures and regulations in place .
With regard to the proposal that is being presented here , I feel that that the discussion today is clear .
Firstly , there is the positive aspect of attempting to bring this regulation into the public health domain , as I have already mentioned .
Secondly , we are trying to do away with certain inconsistent and sometimes even arbitrary measures .
Thirdly , the intention is to make the updating processes and the decision-making process more transparent and democratic .
The problem of the maximum levels remains , however .
We cannot continue to expose the most disadvantaged and most severely affected groups to such high levels .
The maximum levels must guarantee the safety of all citizens and we are all well aware of the fact that there are life-threatening cases like these in every country .
We have the case of Urgeiriça in Portugal , for example .
It is important that we take all this into account .
Mr President , we are about to make some important and necessary revisions to the limit values for radioactive contamination of foodstuffs .
I , of course , support the proposals that will ensure the best possible protection for citizens , including with regard to medical equipment .
Therefore , we clearly must make use of all of the new scientific data that is available and update the limit values accordingly , because it is self-evident that we must have a high level of health protection in the EU .
The Treaty of Lisbon enables the adoption of joint measures in the veterinary sector for monitoring safety standards for food and feed with the direct aim of protecting public health , and that is a good thing , because it is extremely worrying that the EU is currently operating with higher limit values than the United States .
Radioactive radiation is not less dangerous for people , animals and crops in Europe than it is in the US .
In general , this proposal demonstrates how important it is for us to establish clear procedures and to update the old standards .
I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur for these excellent and important amendments .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , regrettably , the Hungarian nation had direct experience of the serious contamination of foodstuffs due to a nuclear accident during the Chernobyl disaster .
We must do our utmost to prevent the recurrence of such a dreadful event as the Chernobyl disaster .
One element in preventing this is that existing and functioning nuclear power stations must be inspected extremely strictly .
With a view to the future , however , I believe that the acceptable solution would be to place the emphasis on renewable energy sources , and not to increase , by any means , but rather reduce the role of nuclear energy in energy supply to the fullest extent possible .
In any event , this is indispensable for the European Union from the aspect of energy security .
This is the only way we can enhance our own security .
We do not need to support and to take into consideration the atomic energy industry , but only the health of European people , our electors , and what is good and bad for them .
I believe that devising an accident scenario for a potential disaster is important , but I see our primary task clearly to be the reduction , and indeed minimisation , of risks .
This can be done : all it requires is political will and due determination on the part of my fellow Members as well .
We must tackle the roots of the problem and not await a disaster passively .
( DE ) Mr President , it is a well-known fact that the Chernobyl disaster and the subsequent radioactive contamination of foodstuffs took neighbouring countries unawares in 1986 .
Thankfully , the European Union learned lessons from this and set down limit values for similar disasters .
It is known that radioactive contamination can be significant in some foodstuffs for many years , even though it cannot be seen , tasted or smelled .
That is precisely the problem when contaminated foodstuffs , such as forest fruits , from areas that have been exposed to radioactivity for centuries , are not only consumed at local level but also freely sold as safe in otherwise uncontaminated areas .
The consequences of radioactive foodstuffs , which are particularly dangerous for pregnant women , the infirm , small children and the elderly , often take years or even decades to come to light .
Our current level of knowledge would indicate that there are no levels of radiation that can be classified as harmless with any absolute degree of certainty .
Research into the cause of a wide range of new illnesses , such as allergies , is still in its infancy ; despite this fact , foodstuffs are still being irradiated .
What is more , no one has considered the question of possible interaction with genetic engineering .
If people in sensitive categories still cannot safely eat large quantities of indigenous mushrooms a full 25 years after Chernobyl , surely the time has come not only to shut down nuclear power stations , but also to put a stop to all nuclear testing .
In the final analysis , all of this is pointless if checks on foodstuffs in and around contaminated regions do not really work .
( RO ) Mr President , I think that to achieve an appropriate level of health protection for European citizens in the event of radioactive contamination and to give democratic legitimacy to the adoption of this regulation , safety standards must be established to protect the health of workers and of the general public so as to ensure that they are applied in all Member States , in accordance with the Union 's decisions .
Member States are also responsible for monitoring compliance with the levels laid down for protection against radioactive contamination in this regulation , in particular , through the surveillance of the safety standards for both foodstuffs and feedingstuffs , as well as through monitoring environmental parameters .
This will guarantee compliance with the maximum permitted levels , safety and the management of radioactive contamination risks .
( PT ) Mr President , given its gravity and cross-border nature , a nuclear disaster or any other radiation emergency clearly requires coordination and pooling of efforts and the establishment of a set of common procedures , with a view to containing and minimising the effects on people and the environment .
This need for coordination also extends to the establishment of maximum tolerable levels of contamination in foodstuffs .
However , we cannot accept the argument that , in order to serve the interests of the citizens better through improved management of post-disaster situations , we need to limit the Member States ' involvement and room for manoeuvre .
On the contrary , it is the Member States themselves that hold the responsibility for safeguarding and protecting the health of their citizens .
This is also particularly true in emergency situations , and therefore they must be able to adopt stricter levels of protection if they so wish .
That must , in all respects , depend on their ability to adopt emergency measures , in order to safeguard the health of people and the environment .
Mr President , there are things that I can say as a politician and as a citizen , and things that I must say from a legal point of view , on behalf of the Commission .
Mrs Harms , you mentioned the fact that I am French , but I am going to go further than that .
I happen to have taken an interest in these issues for a very long time .
I had to deal with these contaminated soil issues when I was France 's Environment Minister .
I believe that I was even one of the few ministers in 1993 and 1994 to have gone to Chernobyl and spent 17 seconds under the sarcophagus .
I have not forgotten my visit to Pripyat , a ghost town , where curtains are still up at the windows and children 's toys are still lying about .
I have not forgotten that .
As a French politician , I worked on an environmental safety initiative in Europe .
I even wrote a book , an atlas of major risks in the world , describing all the risks of contamination , especially nuclear contamination , in those places in which there is an inappropriate culture of risk .
Therefore , these are issues that interest me , Mrs Harms .
I was also the French Agriculture Minister not so long ago .
Human safety and human health , the protection of the general public and consumers , and animal health , which is also important , are all subjects that interest me , and I can understand why , at this late hour , the MEPs are being attentive and vigilant with regard to them .
That is why , as I said to Mr Belet , I have personally listened carefully to the concerns that you have unanimously expressed and I will relay them to the Commission President and to my colleagues .
That , then , is what I am able to tell you ; it is what I have just told you and what I am committed to .
Then , there is what I have to tell you from a legal point of view , as well as the two points on which the Commission position , which consists of a legal assessment by our service and by my colleagues , Mr Šefčovič and Mr Oettinger , is based .

Those two points are , may I remind you , firstly , that the Euratom Treaty contains the appropriate legal basis for the health protection rules regarding radioactive contamination - and those rules take precedence - and , secondly , that the interinstitutional agreement on recasting must be adhered to by the three institutions - and naturally I say that on behalf of the Commission .
Those are the points on which the Commission based its assessment and its position as a College in calling for the rejection of these amendments .
I also wished to say to you , Mrs Harms , and to all your fellow Members , that I have listened carefully and will relay your concerns to my colleagues .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have every respect for you , particularly because of your experience from your visit to Chernobyl at the time and obviously , also because of your expertise in agriculture , but allow us , as the European Parliament , fundamentally to oppose the vision commonly shared by the Commission .
You have referred to judgments of the European Court of Justice in other cases .
Now , that is a different matter and we would like to challenge it with the unanimous , consensus-based , vision of Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs that the legal basis should be changed and brought in line with the new institutional context of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is not about a power struggle between the institutions ; this is about the health of our citizens , one of the pillars of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We therefore regret the fact that the Commission is persisting in its view .
Once again , this is not an accusation against you , on the contrary , but we do think that an enormous opportunity has been missed .
That is why Parliament is reserving the right to consider this consolidated dossier in a broader context .
Mr President , Commissioner , the existing arrangements in the event of an accident involving radioactive contamination are totally out of touch with the current institutional situation .
The proposals which we , the European Parliament , will be tabling here tomorrow , and which will hopefully be adopted with a large majority , provide a fundamental improvement to the existing legislation , which really is no longer adequate .
I will give you a concrete example , Commissioner , if I may have another moment of your attention : we are explicitly asking that the Commission evaluate the standards in the annex ; we are asking for an evaluation carried out by public health and food safety experts .
These rules , Commissioner , are ones that date back to the late 1980s , when you visited Chernobyl .
The review clause that we , as Parliament , will be demanding here tomorrow will come none too soon .
I thank you for your attention and your commitment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday tomorrow ( Tuesday , 15 February 2011 ) .
Practical aspects regarding the revision of EU instruments to support SME finance in the next programming period ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on practical aspects regarding the revision of EU instruments to support SME finance in the next programming period .
Mr President , honourable Members , the question before us is ' How does the Commission intend to help small businesses find the finance they need for growth ? '
In the Europe 2020 strategy , the Commission promised to concentrate on growth based on knowledge and innovation .
Entrepreneurs who start up new businesses and launch new ideas produce jobs and create growth .
We must accordingly direct our efforts so that such businesses can have the necessary resources at their disposal , obviously including finance , in particular , the means for innovation .
In fact , I shall never tire of repeating : there is no growth , there is no competitiveness , if there is no innovation .
First and foremost , the Commission intends in its proposals to place the emphasis on research and innovation .
As shown by the Green Paper adopted by the European Commission last week on future research and innovation funding , the Commission will be trying to simplify the management of these programmes by making use of joined-up instruments .
Joined-up instruments of this sort will simplify management and relationships with our partners and will also serve as a guarantee for greater transparency in the market .
Simplification and flexibility will therefore be the key words for our work in future , which will focus on encouraging growth and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
Programmes and common funding must , in fact , be easily accessible to all European businesses , above all , to those who have the potential for growth .
I am convinced that , in order to achieve this objective , programmes for SMEs must be reorganised in a single common programme for growth and competitiveness , taking into account the experience that has been obtained to date , particularly with a view to providing for the kind of flexibility needed to respond to changes in the markets and in our economies over the next programming period .
Secondly , in its proposals , the Commission intends to place emphasis on funding instruments , that is , to pass from a culture based on grants to one more oriented towards lending to businesses .
Obviously , this approach will favour those who are able to produce a well-grounded business plan .
One achievement we can take as a starting point is surely that represented by the guarantees and investments in venture capital provided for in the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme ( CIP ) .
These instruments have met with great success .
To date , we have helped more than 100 000 SMEs , and by the end of the programme , we shall have helped over 300 000 .
I should , moreover , like to stress that the first generation of Union investments in venture capital comprises 98 % of capital investment , which becomes even more relevant when one considers that with scarcely 2 % of funding , we have been able to help many European SMEs to grow .
Besides , another important aspect is the fact that this is not a question of bureaucratic instruments .
They are , in fact , available from banks and venture capital funds .
In short , there is no need to ask Brussels for them .
We know that SMEs appreciate the flexibility of these instruments and the fact that they are easily accessible .
I should also like to emphasise that a few days ago , the European Council invited the Commission to put in place an EU-wide venture capital scheme .
The Commission intends to do so .
In fact , we share the Council 's concerns as regards the gaps in the venture capital markets .
Moreover , we are perfectly aware of the usefulness of loan guarantee schemes , which help a great number of small businesses .
I can assure you that the Commission is convinced that loan guarantees are necessary , whether at the European or at regional level .
This is why the Commission will be representing a coherent series of instruments intended for SMEs .
We are therefore inviting Member States , who are codecision partners as regards the application of structural funds , to join us in this task .
This is what has been done as regards future financial programming .
I should , however , like to clarify the fact that in the meantime , the Commission has not been idle .
On 28 October last year , I launched the SME Finance Forum , with the aim of monitoring the progress of SME funding , promoting best practice and encouraging new solutions .
This standing forum provides a regular opportunity for small and medium-sized enterprises to meet lending institutions .
The market situation and the legal framework under which SMEs access funding are being kept under review .
There have also been discussions on ways of developing the European market for mezzanine financing and I am pleased to let you know that we are making progress from this point of view .
Finally , it is equally important to have another look at the regulatory framework .
Here , I should like to record a special ' thank you ' to my colleague , Michel Barnier , whose communication ' Towards a Single Market Act ' proposes important initiatives that make our legislation more effective , including the legislation on the single market for venture capital .
Our common objective is , in fact , precisely this : to foster the single market and to bring about the best conditions for growth , competitiveness and entrepreneurship .
As far as the capital requirements for banks - ' Basel III ' - are concerned , which are also within Commissioner Barnier 's remit , the Commission will make legislative proposals in June 2011 .
The Commission 's proposal will include a thorough appraisal of the micro-economic and macro-economic effects of such measures , which will ensure that our proposals are well thought out , in terms of their timescale and impact , and also take into account what is happening in other parts of the world .
In conclusion , it is incumbent on the budgetary authority , the European Parliament and the Council to decide how to use the limited resources available at the European level .
In this period when finances are restricted , it is clear that it is becoming ever more important to spend these resources more wisely .
I am convinced that the financial instruments will contribute to raising the European Union 's resources and mobilising private investment .
You can be sure that the Commission will continue to work to make sure that our proposals always focus on the importance that the development of SMEs has for the future of Europe , convinced as we are that all the work that will have to be done in the next few months to emerge finally from the crisis , including the restructuring of major industries , will have to take account of the role that small and medium-sized enterprises can play .
In my opinion , only they will be able to create new jobs , and hence cope with the social aspects of the financial crisis that we have faced , and they will naturally form an important springboard for initiating the new phase following the economic crisis .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Commissioner Tajani for his statement .
We have chosen to address this matter today because it is more important than ever to focus on providing finance for our small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe .
There can be no doubt that SMEs ' limited access to financing is a major barrier to the creation of growth and to new enterprises starting up , and this situation has become worse during the current economic crisis .
It has become much more difficult to obtain adequate financing from Europe 's banks .
Europe 's SMEs are highly dependent on bank financing - in comparison with American enterprises , for example .
In addition , the Basel III rules are about to be implemented ; in other words ; we have a new Capital Requirements Directive that is to be implemented .
There is a risk that this will result in even greater difficulties when it comes to the provision of venture capital for our small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is worrying that the increasingly capital- and risk-sensitive banking sector is now demanding higher collateral security and higher risk premiums .
Both of these will result in insufficient financing and lost business opportunities , which again , ultimately , means the loss of jobs .
Europe needs to become more competitive .
We therefore need to strengthen those EU instruments that can help to increase investment , innovation and the development of SMEs , and I would like to call for an increase in budgetary resources for the financing of innovation and for the instruments that are already in place .
The Commission must , of course , ensure that , in the next generation of programmes , much greater importance is attached to mezzanine financing , and that greater coherence is created within the SME support measures that are already in place , in other words , programmes like the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme ( CIP ) , the structural funds , the Seventh Framework Programme for research , and so on .
Therefore , it just remains for me to say that this is an issue on which there will be a great deal of focus in this House in the coming months .
Mr President , Commissioner , this evening I , too , would like to speak in my own language so that the small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) can follow my comments .
At the time , the legal package on small and medium-sized enterprises set three main targets for itself .
The first was to help SMEs with greater revenues , by getting into European markets and by placing innovative products on the market .
The second was to reduce costs by cutting red tape .
An excellent example of this is the Services Directive .
Our third target was to simplify and facilitate access to financing instruments for the SME sector .
Within the European Union , small and medium-sized enterprises produce one third of GDP .
If we calculate in this way , the SME sector also contributes an amount of about one third to the European budget .
In contrast , if we look at the proportion the SMEs represent in the European Union 's budget , we cannot be satisfied .
We can see that by the end of 2010 , about 100 000 SMEs received some form of bank guarantee within the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme ( CIP ) , which is a huge number , but for 23 million enterprises , this is very little .
This is likely to grow by 200 000 SMEs , but even then , this is little compared to 23 million .
We have managed to mobilise venture capital of 1.3 billion , but again , if I compare this to the 23 million enterprises and their economic values , it is very , very little .
We must succeed , Commissioner , in devising a procedural system within the European Union which , on the one hand , enables the use of instruments allocated at the EIB in a much easier and much more effective manner than at present .
On the other hand , we must succeed in ensuring , through encouraging annual reports , that the Member States themselves support the small and medium-sized enterprise sector not only with words but with deeds .
We wish to ask you , Commissioner , through our request proposed on behalf of five political groups , through our letter in which we turned to you , not to neglect this entrepreneurial sphere , as this is the entrepreneurial sphere which is trying to survive having been put in the most difficult situation after the austerity packages .
This is where an upsurge in growth can first be expected and this is where an increase in employment can be expected .
We will provide our support for this in Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission has every reason to be ambitious in view of the fact that you , and we too , are facing a very major challenge .
We have 20 million small and medium-sized enterprises , which together constitute 99 % of all European enterprises .
We often say that Europe 's small businesses are the heart of the European economy .
That is true , but it must not mean that small businesses are not allowed to grow big .
We therefore need financing facilities , which my fellow Members have mentioned and which you touched on yourself , Mr Tajani .
Among other things , we should utilise the financing facilities that are already available , and I would advocate the greater utilisation of the structural funds , for example .
As Mr Bendtsen mentioned , the problems faced by European small and medium-sized enterprises have increased .
Parliament has created a large number of rules within the financial market , most of which have been necessary .
However , these rules have increased the loan costs for small businesses .
We ought to be aware of this , and we ought to be careful when we propose different rules .
We should , in any case , be aware of what it will ultimately cost .
Mr Bendtsen also mentioned the Basel criteria , with which we are all familiar .
Commissioner Tajani , you spoke about simplicity and flexibility and you believe that these attributes should be reflected in the EU 's programmes and financing facilities .
You want us to do away with bureaucracy and complicated procedures .
However , do you really believe that this is what small businesses and their employees think that the European Union is doing ?
Is it not rather the case that we are creating more bureaucracy and complicated procedures ?
In this regard , I believe that we need a complete change of attitude .
As I said , we have 20 million small businesses in Europe , but we also have over 20 million unemployed in Europe .
We know that social exclusion and poverty are increasing , and in order to deal with this we , and the Commission too , must be able to act in a resolute way to provide financing facilities for the small and medium-sized enterprises , because that is where the jobs will be created in Europe .
Mr President , we are talking about a sector of the economy which is of absolutely crucial significance , because taken together , small and medium-sized enterprises are , in fact , the European Union 's biggest employer .
They provide many more jobs than do the larger firms .
Furthermore , SMEs , which are often family-run businesses , were worst affected by the economic crisis .
I will go even further and say that the social costs of the loss of strength in this sector are of absolutely fundamental significance .
Of course , it may be that the largest firms and the biggest industrial lobbies are more effective in speaking up for themselves , but SMEs should be protected , because this is , in fact , protection of the citizens and the taxpayers of EU Member States .
I have one further comment - I would like to emphasise very strongly that the EU 's Member States should not shift responsibility for everything onto the European Union as such .
They should themselves take care of SMEs , but to a large extent they are not doing so .
Here , I agree with what Mrs Herczog said .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the last few years , and the global financial crisis has played a role too , it has become ever more difficult for small and medium-sized enterprises to obtain loans and to have easy access to credit when it is essential .
The instruments that have been employed so far by the European Union within the financial framework 2007-2013 have proven to be seriously deficient in some areas , such as the scarcity of resources and coverage , the existence of heavy administrative constraints , let alone the fact that they are dispersed over multiple and different lines of action .
With the new financial framework , we must focus on simplifying the rules for small and medium-sized enterprises - rules that have been a major obstacle for smaller businesses in particular - and think , for example , about setting up a point of single contact for access to European funding .
It will be necessary to incentivise recourse to new funding instruments that will facilitate access to credit , provide precise loan guarantee schemes and give priority to real assistance in the difficult initial phase of development , especially as regards largely innovative and technological businesses .
We must therefore try specifically to make the route as easy as possible for a sector that employs over 100 million people and is , without doubt , the most powerful engine for growth and development .
( BG ) Mr President , I would go along with the general view I sense in this House regarding small and medium-sized enterprises and give my wholehearted support to what has just been said , in other words , that the businesses that have been hardest hit by the economic crisis are SMEs .
I am also in agreement with Mr Czarnecki , who said that these are most often small , family-run businesses from which families earn the bulk of their income .
When a major corporation is hit - because they , too , suffered during the crisis - only their profits suffer .
However , when a small business is hit , the family that relies on the business loses a vital source of income .
For these reasons , I would like to say that we should tread carefully when making changes , because both right and left-leaning measures can have a detrimental effect on SMEs , depending on where they are targeted .
I should like to say that simply doling out financial and bank guarantees will not be enough , and that we need greater legislative development - greater regulation of the banking sector , if you like - to secure funding for small businesses , and to finally stop posing the question in terms of some non-existent level playing field - for small businesses can never be equal to big businesses - but to help them to be truly competitive when a big corporation does come along .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , firstly , I would like to thank Mr Bendtsen because the CIP programme is one of the key pillars for enterprise and for funding in this area .
The JEREMIE and JASMINE programmes , as well as the Erasmus programme for young entrepreneurs , are extremely important in helping people to get to know the markets .
I would like to thank Mrs Herczog for her backing for the EIB and for the EIF , the European Investment Fund , and for her call for an increase in the available finances .
However , I would call on Commissioner Tajani to ensure that the objectives for 2020 also include a mandatory requirement for a 20 % capital base for SMEs .
This is something we already require from the banks , so the same should apply to SMEs .
This is important for both sectors .
I would also suggest that a tax on profits should only be imposed when proceeds are taken out of a company .
In other words , it should be possible to re-invest profits as equity capital .
However , if an entrepreneur or employee takes money out of a company , then this should be taxed in the normal way .
One final point that seems particularly important to me is the possibility of writing off debt of not less than EUR 5 000 .
We believe that a depreciation right should be allowed on profits of up to EUR 5 000 .
This would provide the best basis for striking a balance between risk capital and equity capital for the orderly financing of loans .
( RO ) Mr President , the ' Think Small First ' principle , which forms the basis of the European Commission 's policies on entrepreneurship , is important .
We must not forget that two thirds of jobs in the European Union are created by SMEs .
However , in the current crisis , SMEs are having difficulty in accessing loans as banks regard them as risky ventures .
Indeed , the promotion of public guarantee schemes in Member States and the provision of access to the guarantees offered by the European Investment Bank group in order to ease the financing restrictions need to be monitored .
We also notice difficulties in providing information about the terms for allocating funds and , in certain cases , even the lack of administrative capacity required locally to mediate access to loans .
During the 2014-2020 period , the European Commission must focus on greater transparency in relations between financiers and business and on access to consultancy services for providing information about the lending platforms and terms available to SMEs .
At the same time , it is the European Investment Bank 's duty , as an advocate of EU policies , to offer technical assistance to national and local administrations in order to make it simpler for entrepreneurs to access financing .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is fundamentally important to strengthen the pan-European commitment to support small and medium-sized enterprises , because , as has been said , they have a decisive weight and role in the Union 's social fabric and they are the real providers of economic recovery .
In this context , I should like to recall that between 2002 and 2008 , with the strong growth they exhibited in 27 countries , they created 9 400 000 new jobs , and already represented the driving force of employment .
Today , as a result of the crisis , they have lost a third of the jobs that were created .
It is therefore necessary to conceive specific instruments that will give small and medium-sized enterprises back their capacity to produce and create new jobs , because the whole of society will benefit from this .
Access to credit is certainly one of the key issues , the one most valued by entrepreneurs .
In the first part of 2010 , 18 % of small and medium-sized enterprises had bank loans refused .
In the previous year , the relevant percentage was 12 ; these data come from a survey carried out by the European Central Bank .
It is precisely access to credit , together with administrative simplification and access to markets , that will be among the key priorities set by the Small Business Act , which will be presented in Rome next week by Commissioner Tajani , and which we warmly welcome .
I should like finally to mention my origins in a part of Italy - the North East - that has seen enormous development and considerable growth due precisely to an intelligent lending regime , which has been able to go hand in hand with the growth of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Let us follow this example .
( SL ) Mr President , I would like to join with my fellow Members in proposing that politicians , Member States and the European Union put small and medium-sized enterprises at the heart of their economic recovery efforts .
Ninety-nine per cent of all enterprises in the European Union fall into this category and they generate more than 100 million jobs .
What is it then that a small or medium-sized enterprise in the European Union is concerned about ?
Let us not forget this question in today 's debate .
First of all , such enterprises are concerned about the non-payment of invoices , a lack of payment discipline .
Enterprises are receiving no payment for their invoices for 90 or 120 days , or indeed never .
The financial and economic crisis has greatly exacerbated this problem and SMEs are the most helpless in the face of these difficulties .
We in the European Union have adopted new legislation .
Now is therefore the time for Member States to improve their discipline , their payment discipline .
That is where it all starts and then moves down the chain .
Secondly , these companies , SMEs , are concerned about finance .
Many would not have any financial problems if their invoices were paid .
The banks have retreated into their shells and are not serving their purpose .
This is why economic growth in the European Union is much smaller than it could be .
I support the Commission 's measures advocated by Commissioner Tajani , and I call on the Commission to put small and medium-sized enterprises at the heart of its efforts .
Now is the time for us jointly to implement the recommendations of the ' Small Business Act ' .
Mr President , this is a good afternoon for the European Parliament and the European Union in terms of the topics we are discussing , which has a real impact on the real economy .
We have discussed the Services Directive , the unitary patent and now new instruments to support SMEs .
It has been said that SMEs are absolutely vital , and that if each SME created one extra job , then unemployment would cease in Europe .
For many of them , creating one extra job would not be too difficult , particularly if they get credit , but the evidence is that they are not able to get credit .
Every weekend , I meet business people who cannot get credit , particularly in my country .
I met a person last weekend who wanted EUR 4 000 for an SME as cashflow and could not get it .
So the situation in my country is chronic .
Despite the fact that the ECB has capitalised the banks , it is not being passed on .
This certainly must be looked at .
It is not good enough .
We have heard the mantra of banks being too big to fail .
We should change that to a mantra of SMEs being too important to fail .
If we give them the credit and the support , each of them could certainly create one extra job , and one extra job would get us out of the economic recession we are in .
It is not too much to ask , and this evening , by discussing the new instruments to support SMEs , we can certainly go a long way in doing that .
( RO ) Mr President , providing support to SMEs and entrepreneurs offers a way out of the financial crisis .
Ensuring access to the single market and improving the implementation of the Small Business Act must be priorities at both national and EU level .
I wish to mention that the current measures have not yet overcome the difficulties preventing the development of SMEs .
Indeed , 23 million European SMEs are expecting positive action from the Commission .
Another important aspect is also the development of alternative sources of funding .
Initiatives must be adopted with the aim of increasing access to the capital market and creating better tax incentives for investors .
Particular attention must be focused on supporting large-scale funding for innovative companies .
The Romanian Government is due to adopt a programme encouraging young entrepreneurs to start up and develop micro-enterprises .
This is a specific new measure in the government 's package of initiatives for boosting the business sector .
( LT ) Mr President , the funding of small and medium-sized enterprises remains a major problem .
In spite of the measures that have been taken , the situation today in this important sector is still critical .
I believe you are familiar with the analytical report by the international organisation Bankwatch , which analyses a breakdown of European Investment Bank lending in four Member States .
The report shows that hitherto , loans provided by the European Investment Bank were fundamentally only of benefit to the banks themselves , which were allocated EUR 15 billion and given a deadline to find companies that require this support .
There is concern that although money was received from the European Investment Bank , commercial banks tightened bank credits for small enterprises , and the money was mostly used to fund large and prosperous companies .
I believe such a situation shows that in this area , there is a need for far more stringent monitoring and control of commercial banks , and the European Commission must also play a greater role so that this aid is not misused .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Commission statement on the revision of EU instruments to support SME finance .
It is very clear that the cost , and indeed the availability , of credit remains the single biggest challenge facing the SME sector in Europe , and indeed in my own country of Ireland .
Many viable businesses continue to have difficulties in accessing affordable credit from the banks .
That is unacceptable .
I can only speak for my own country , but bearing in mind the support that the SME sector has received from the taxpayer in Ireland , that sector is the engine of growth in the economy .
It is the private sector that creates the jobs .
All that we in the Commission , Parliament and the Council do is to create an economic atmosphere conducive to investment , and we must continue to do that .
I am delighted that the Commissioner has referred to flexibility and said that access to capital should not be bureaucratic , but he is merely following through on the statement by the President of the Commission in his State of the Union address .
We must monitor what is happening closely , because the President said that we would have an annual saving of EUR 38 billion from European companies .
We must ensure that we help those small companies , because they will help to create the jobs and reduce unemployment .
( PT ) Mr President , the situation of many micro- and small enterprises is critical in many countries in the European Union , as they have been hit hardest by the economic crisis and neoliberal policies .
In Portugal , tens of thousands of small , family-run businesses , that is to say , small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , are closing down in a wide variety of sectors - industry , commerce , services and agriculture - thus increasing unemployment and poverty .
The problems of bank credit , bureaucracy and the difficulty of accessing EU aid , particularly by these micro- and small enterprises , are strangling the economic development of large areas and impeding the growth of employment .
A complete change in policy in these areas is therefore required in order to support these SMEs effectively , and the financial system must be urged to provide accessible credit for SMEs , alongside sufficient EU aid .
( DE ) Mr President , the European Union is always fulsome in its praise for small and medium-sized enterprises as the driving force behind the economy and as the main source of employment , particularly when employers do not immediately lay off their workers , even in recessionary times .
At the same time , these very enterprises have been overloaded with bureaucratic red tape for decades , also suffering disadvantage when it comes to EU-wide subsidies .
On paper , we encounter one SME initiative after another .
In practice , however , small and medium-sized enterprises find themselves unable to access capital as a result of the provisions of Basel II , and now Basel III .
Innovation is vitally important for the survival of SMEs into the future .
However , innovation also requires money and research .
Of course , it is commendable that SMEs will receive greater attention in the future under the new EU rules on public procurement and that it will be made easier for them to access EU research funding .
However , the fact is that many SMEs may not survive long enough to see these long-discussed measures come to fruition , because they will find themselves choked off by a lack of finance .
( RO ) Mr President , as you are aware , in Romania , SMEs face more or less similar problems to those in other Member States , given the specific and difficult nature of the current period .
However , there are aspects about improving the opportunities for SMEs to receive financial support which primarily derive from access to technical assistance aimed at accessing financial instruments , especially those devoted to increasing research and development capacity .
I consider it necessary to increase access to good quality information and competent services .
I should remind you that , during the plenary last September , the European Commission 's representative stated that in 2011 , an online learning platform specifically for SMEs was scheduled to appear on the Internet .
The aim of this is to facilitate SMEs ' access to research and development projects and to utilise their results by providing free online training , personalised information and making a communication forum available .
Training SME managers in how to use financial instruments may , apart from supporting the relevant procedures and cutting red tape , lead to achieving much more effective results .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Tajani 's speech was most welcome .
He laid stress once again on a factor of prime importance : that of small and medium-sized enterprises seen and experienced as a model of production , hence , as a social model , because they form the basic building block when it comes to employment .
The economic crisis we are experiencing is not transient but structural , and connected to changes in the markets as another consequence of globalisation .
Small and medium-sized enterprises account for 99 % of the entire structure of European industry .
The draft resolution spotlights certain unavoidable requirements , namely : better information , facilitated access to credit and less red tape , to make the means of access to European Union resources easier to navigate .
As the Commissioner himself just confirmed , there is a need for more simplification and flexibility , as well as more resources for innovation and research ; the need for the European Commission to develop new guidelines that are clearer and more comprehensible so that small and medium-sized enterprises have easier access to useful information ; and a need for a new perspective on lending .
At a time of crisis , it is not fair that only small and medium-sized enterprises pay while the banking system continues to make and grow its profits .
It is important to ensure that the European Commission 's new framework take account of these requirements , so that the Europe 2020 strategy is more than just an empty shell , and in fact contains instruments appropriate to achieving the objectives that it sets itself .
( RO ) Mr President , I wish to emphasise that the obstacles preventing the development of SMEs , the creation of jobs and innovation in Europe have still not been removed .
This is why I think that the European Commission 's specific strategies , measures and action plans need to be improved .
Twenty-three million SMEs are waiting for positive steps in such areas as public procurement , tackling late payments , access to vocational training , support for entrepreneurship and improvements in taxation and financing .
Providing support to SMEs and entrepreneurs offers a way out of the financial crisis .
Improving the regulations and SMEs ' access to the single market and funding , as well as ensuring better implementation of the Small Business Act , must be priorities at national and EU level .
( PL ) Mr President , the main condition necessary for a successful policy towards businesses , including small and medium-sized ones , is to ensure proper function of the internal market .
The free flow of goods means that all businesses have access to a higher number of potential consumers , although they also have to be ready for greater competition .
Legislation on the single market needs to be constantly adapted to ensure equal treatment of all firms in the Union .
It is essential to monitor Member States ' inclinations to protect their own national industry .
We all say that small and medium-sized enterprises constitute the foundation of modern European economies , that they are an essential factor in economic growth , that the sector employs two thirds of all people in work in the Union , and that it creates one third of the EU 's GDP .
Let us bear in mind that a difficult situation in SMEs affects , first of all , the fortunes of the people who work for them , because they are , to a great extent , family firms .
These firms go under only at a later point , so most of them seem to have reacted slowly to the crisis , but this does not mean the crisis has not affected their economic condition .
Finally , I would like to say that this sector requires special support to encourage the introduction of innovative methods - and this support should be forthcoming from the European Union .
Mr President , this evening 's discussion has , as could also already have been inferred from the text of the draft resolution , highlighted the perfect agreement that exists between the wishes of Parliament and the Commission to put the real economy at the heart of economic policy in order to emerge from the crisis , and to pay particular attention to small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the lifeblood of our economy .
The European Commission is absolutely committed to trying to convert a policy choice into concrete action , and it is not pure chance that , thanks to the support of Parliament and the Council , we have adopted the text of the Late Payment Directive , which is of fundamental importance for small and medium-sized enterprises .
At present , it is up to us to urge the Member States to speed up the rate at which they transpose the directive into their domestic law ( they have 24 months from this October ) , even if I personally wish that the Member States would put more urgency into transposing a directive that also has a direct effect on opportunities for recovering outstanding debts so that they can be applied to innovation .
When the directive enters into force , approximately EUR 180 billion will be released into circulation .

That is not enough , however .
As far as aid to small and medium-sized enterprises is concerned , on 23 February , the Commission will adopt the revised Small Business Act , which contains a series of important measures , including the point of single contact for access to funding , which will be one of the proposals that we shall be putting to the Member States .
What is more , we shall be inviting all Member States and all local authorities to nominate a Mister or Miss SME .
On 16 February , I shall be appointing Daniel Calleja , as Deputy Director-General , to a new office in the European Commission .
He will be responsible for monitoring and verifying the application of the Small Business Act and acting as a contact point for European SMEs on Commission policy .
In the text of the Small Business Act , which , please note , we shall be adopting on the 23rd , all Member States are invited to do likewise , just as we shall be inviting local communities with lawmaking powers to do .
As far as funding is concerned , the problem of access to outstanding debtor balances , to which we have already referred in the context of the Late Payment Directive , and of access to loans requested or wanted by small and medium-sized enterprises , can only be solved by trying to activate links between lending institutions and business , but also the European Investment Bank .
I therefore acknowledge the declarations of those who agree that it is necessary to grow these relationships , as well as to clear the bottlenecks that have , in the past , especially during the crisis , delayed the disbursement of the famous EUR 30 billion intended for small and medium-sized enterprises and which , due to the difficulty in making transfers to national credit institutions , have delayed their receipt by SMEs .
I must say that at the first meeting of the SME Finance Forum , attention was paid precisely to this bottleneck that exists between the European Investment Bank and national credit institutions .
The sherpas are at work , and at the next meeting , a series of proposals will be put forward to try to facilitate access to credit by small businesses .
We are , of course , working to simplify specific issues already , and what follows is one such example .
As regards the REACH Regulation , I have had translated into every European Union language the application rules for a regulation that is rather technical .
This has been a strong signal to small and medium-sized enterprises that they do not have to employ an expert in technical English or in chemical technology .
In point of fact , we have virtually abolished the registration fee : we have achieved a 90 % reduction for REACH registration by micro-enterprises and a 60 % reduction for small enterprises .
These are some of the specific things that also relate to simplification .
Of course , the test for small and medium-sized enterprises , which came into being with the Small Business Act , continues to exist .
We shall continue with it and apply it strictly .
The competitiveness test , known as the fitness check , which we introduced with the paper on industrial policy , which also affects competitiveness and existing legislation , will clearly and certainly also help small and medium-sized businesses .
I must congratulate Mr Rübig , and I am delighted at the invitation and the support of Parliament to commit to increased funding for the next CIP II .
Finally , I can only assure you of my commitment , inasmuch as I agree with everything that has been said .
As I have always averred whenever I have had the opportunity to state my views on SME policy , I can confirm that I shall make it my absolute priority to contrive that bureaucratic barriers , access to credit and a policy of support for small and medium-sized businesses will be the principal agenda of the Commissioner for Industry and Entrepreneurship in the next few years , that is , until the end of the current Parliament .
For me , the support of the European Parliament is of fundamental importance also because , as I said at the beginning of my reply , there is a perfect identity of views between you and me .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday on Wednesday , 16 February 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - It is widely accepted in the European Union that SMEs need better , more direct access to finance .
As highlighted in the 2020 Communication , the financial crisis has halved Europe 's growth potential .
The impact on real economic activity could be said to be more pronounced in Europe , due to SMEs high reliance on bank loans .
The way out of this crisis for SMEs would be to further support and develop equity markets and small innovative enterprises .
The establishment of an SME finance forum last May signalled a positive move towards improving SMEs ' financial prospectus and their future viability in Europe .
I believe that over 1.8 million SMEs benefited from loan guarantees in 2009 .
Let us not forget that SMEs are the bread and butter of the European economy .
It is crucial that adequate bank lending is returned to normal levels as soon as possible .
Europe must work towards creating a viable venture capital market as a priority .
As a result of the crisis in the financial markets , small and medium-sized enterprises have suffered reduced access to finance .
Particular difficulty in obtaining financial support is being experienced by new start-ups and innovative enterprises , whose operations are considered to be risky .
Economic recovery will , in large measure , depend on the possibilities for development open to SMEs which , after all , account for almost 99 % of all businesses .
Therefore , I welcome today 's initiative regarding the revision of EU instruments to support SME finance in the next programming period .
In particular , enterprises working on innovative methods should be given access to new forms of finance .
I think , too , that simplifying administrative procedures and existing regulations will contribute to increased effectiveness in the management of European programmes created with SMEs in mind , and also to significant savings for SMEs themselves , which will spend less time on administration and more on the projects on which they are working .
I am very pleased with the motion for a resolution and the debate on the revision of EU instruments to support SME finance .
Support for SMEs is important because these firms are important for the present and future of Europe .
SMEs are of key significance for maintaining our competitiveness , for recovery from the crisis , for creating new jobs and for increasing innovativeness in the European economy .
We do need to support SME finance , but the European Union can and should also take other steps to support this sector .
I refer to the need to reduce administrative and bureaucratic burdens .
SMEs must be able to operate without hindrance and to act quickly .
In the United States , there are places where starting a business takes 10 minutes .
If we want to use Europeans ' entrepreneurial potential , we have to make it easier for them to carry out their business and to free the European market from the restrictions which mean , today , that we are not making use of all opportunities for development .
SMEs represent an economic model which is very effective in and beneficial to social development .
Most poor and developing countries do not have this sector , or it is very weak there .
This is indirect evidence of the great significance of this sector for the entire economy and the quality of life in particular countries . Thank you .
It is good to see that the European Commission is dealing with the reviewal of EU resources to support small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , especially given the following programming period .
However , it must be said that SMEs have required additional help over the last two and a half years in particular , because many of them have had liquidity problems due to the recession .
To put it plainly , the banks refused to give loans to SMEs , or did so with extremely high interest rates , which further aggravated the situation of those enterprises .
Both in Estonia and in the European Union as a whole , SMEs account for 99 % of all businesses , and micro-enterprises account for 83 % of all businesses in Estonia and approximately 92 % of all businesses in the EU in total .
For this reason , it is important that financial means should be available for this particular majority , especially during difficult crisis years .
I sincerely hope that both the European Union and SMEs will shortly set the economy on an upward curve and that we will be better prepared for any future crisis .
The current economic crisis , preceded by the financial crisis , was greatly amplified by the decreased liquidity of SMEs as a result of the position of the banks in the economic crisis .
Over two thirds of business people work in SMEs and two thirds of additional revenue is created by these businesses .
This must not be forgotten , and we must therefore stand up for the wellbeing of these enterprises .
EU support instruments for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) must , above all , be flexible and as unbureaucratic as possible .
Banks continue to be unwilling to finance riskier business plans , including newly-established firms and innovative products .
Access to funding is therefore one of the greatest obstacles confronting SMEs today .
It is therefore necessary to strengthen the various methods of supporting microfinancing for companies , and to secure the better coordination and interlinking of the individual programmes that already exist .
However , the complexity , the time and money expended , and the excessive administrative demands in relation to the relatively small sums involved , also present a barrier to availability .
I also think that it is important to raise general levels of awareness regarding existing options and instruments for supporting SMEs in the EU .
Cord blood stem cells ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on cord blood stem cells .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , scientific advances over recent decades have contributed to an increase in the use of cord blood stem cells in medicines .
The use of such cells has led to positive results in treating patients with blood disorders such as leukaemia .
In future , cord blood stem cells could possibly be used to treat other conditions , in particular , genetic diseases .
Similarly , adult stem cells are also showing promising potential .
However , research still needs to bring proof of such potential benefits for both kinds of stem cells .
The transplantation of substances of human origin , including cells , carries risks of disease transmission and that is why there is a European legal framework in place to ensure the quality and safety of human tissues and cells throughout the Union .
However , let me make this very clear : Member States alone decide whether and how to use cord blood stem cells .
The EU has no competence to harmonise the use of cells .
The Tissues and Cells Directive explicitly mentions that the EU should not interfere with national decisions concerning the use or non-use of any specific type of human cells .
If , however , a Member State decides to use cord blood cells , then it must fulfil the directive 's requirements on quality and safety , protect public health and guarantee respect for fundamental rights .
I agree with you that it is important to provide accurate and objective information to citizens about the advantages and limitations of the use of cord blood stem cells .
Providing such information is , again , the competence of the Member States .
The Commission encourages Member States to take such action and some have indeed already done so .
Finally , I can reassure you that the Commission regularly monitors the transposition and implementation of the Tissues and Cells Directive .
In fact , the Commission adopted a communication on the application of the directive , which was sent to Parliament in January 2010 .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is good to see that , even at this late hour , you are taking the time to join the debate in this House on this important issue .
Ladies and gentlemen , stem cell research offers great opportunities for patients to whom we are unable to offer adequate help at the moment .
In this field , much is not yet beyond the stage of fundamental research and still uncertain , but there are still over 70 diseases for which help can be offered to the patients in question in one way or another through adult stem cells and cord blood cells .
The cord blood cells are currently predominantly used for allogeneic transplants , in other words , the cord blood can be used to help children - from whom this blood does not derive - with conditions such as leukaemia .
There are also autologous therapy techniques , however , where the child from whom the cord blood is obtained can already benefit from this today in a small number of narrowly restricted areas .
I am therefore of the opinion that policy must be oriented in such a way that , within the scope of our competences , above all , support is given to public cord blood banks .
We can encourage it ; we cannot dictate it .
That said , we should also not prohibit autologous treatment and the relevant measures .
Ultimately , the parents should decide this themselves , but State policy should inform them about the chances and risks .
We need clear standards for quality and safety .
We must be constantly vigilant , in this connection , that cells are not offered that are no longer useable at the point of use due to a failure to adhere to quality and safety standards .
We need to prioritise research in this field , as it is clear that research of this kind is something very close to the patients .
Moreover , we must ensure that parents are able to decide that the cord blood should not simply be thrown away , as it may possibly be valuable in future for other children , or even for their own child .
We should organise ourselves with that in mind , within the sphere of our competences , as I say , but there is much that we can already do in this area .


Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , wish to thank my co-authors and , in particular , Mr Liese , who spoke just now , and Mr Peterle , for this very satisfactory initiative on the donation of cord blood - a donation of life , then - which has enabled extraordinary and significant medical advances to be made over the last 20 years thanks to the transplantation of its plentiful supply of stem cells .
They are used today in the treatment of more than 80 diseases , and especially of cancers - brain cancer , blood cancer , leukaemia , lymphoma - anaemia , autoimmune diseases , certain rare diseases , and the list keeps on growing .
Despite this , just 1 % of this cord blood , which is so full of possibility and promise , is preserved in Europe , 1 % of more than 15 million births per year .
In addition , there are huge differences between countries : 7 000 registered donations in Belgium , and 7 000 in France , even though its population is six times that of its neighbour to the north .
We therefore call on the Commission to launch , in conjunction , of course , with the 27 Member States - as the Commissioner mentioned - an information campaign aimed at parents-to-be , so that these donations become a reality , if not a necessity .
Well-informed mothers in Europe will clearly want to give life twice .
That is why I , and why we , think it is crucial , over and above the uniform transposition of this 2004 directive on the quality and safety of tissues and cells , which has already been mentioned , and which is the subject of our second question , that Europe strongly encourages the Member States to simplify their maternity hospital accreditation procedures and systems .
The number of maternity hospitals authorised to preserve and store cord blood is still too small , and the figures prove it .
We can no longer allow the passionate debate - which we are not here to resolve - and controversy surrounding the purpose and use of this blood - whether it ends up in public or private blood banks - to actually stop us from talking about this technique , and this is the appeal launched by Professor Eliane Gluckman , who has dedicated her entire career to making the donation of cord blood a donation of life .
Mr President , of course , I too agree with what has been said with regard to the importance of us building up these cord blood cell banks for both research and treatment .
These stem cells are easy to get hold of if someone is prepared to do it , and I personally do not believe that this should even be treated as a transplant matter .
In fact , I believe we should simply be able to take these cells and that parents should be able to oppose this , but they should not need to give their consent .
I think that this aspect is less important .
I do , however , think it is important that - in addition to the safety measures that Mr Liese and others drew attention to - we remember that we still do not know very much about the possibilities for development in this field .
It is therefore important for us to have these banks .
I believe , first and foremost , that these banks should , of course , be public , as they are something that we should be able to use for everyone .
By far the largest area of application will be the treatment of other people .
However , it is also important that we draw attention to the fact that there are pitfalls here .
We have seen cases of attempts being made to get parents to pay a kind of security for their child by having a ' reserve store ' for the child placed in a bank . Doing so is to pay unnecessarily .
It is quite rare for someone to need to have their own child treated in this way , and I firmly believe that these banks should be established primarily for the purpose of general research and general treatment .
That should be the opening that we aim for .
I feel that we could almost be deceiving parents if they believe that they will be able to invest a great deal in the protection of their own child .
They should invest cord blood for the protection of the public in general and I very much hope that we will be able to make this more widely available .
It is a shame that such an important substance that we have available to us right now simply goes to waste because too little attention is paid to it .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would also like to say that I feel that this issue is too important for us to continue to live the lie that we have been living in Europe .
It is a lie or a false promise , whichever you want to call it , as we have been continuing to operate particularly in the area of stem cell collection from umbilical cords based on misleading information .
As we well know and as has already been mentioned , in Europe , the collection of stem cells from umbilical cords barely reaches 1 % .
However , we also know that their potential for treating illnesses may be endless - illnesses such as those that have already been mentioned : cancer , Alzheimer 's and rare diseases .
The possibilities are immense .
However , what we have allowed to happen is that a series of private cell banks have been set up and parents have been told that they can store their children 's cells when they are born , which can then be used to treat them in the future if necessary .
I think that we need to be much more responsible than this , as the probability of guaranteeing that this will happen is very low , as we all know .
This false promise that is being sold to parents costs money .
In Portugal , for example , this false promise costs three and a half times the minimum monthly wage .
The solution , then , is clearly to create public stem cell banks , as it is only with public banks that we can guarantee equality of use , equality of access , effective medical treatment and more research that is equal for all and not just treating stem cells as some sort of commodity or a business which is expanding , but is only for the privileged few .
I therefore feel that solidarity , common sense and impartial information are ultimately not things that can be classified as an extra demand .
We do not have the power to impose , but we have the power to promote .
This is within our capabilities , and I think that we need to do it in the name of equality .
( SL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am pleased that you are giving attention to our question .
What we are doing together is , in my opinion , achieving proximity , or greater proximity to citizens .
I was once rapporteur for the approval of hydrogen-powered motor vehicles and I believe that we need to pay at least as much attention to cord blood stem cells .
Indeed , you have said yourself that you were positively impressed by this fact , which is a source of excitement not only for those who are ill or for parents , but also for researchers , who are finding an increasing number of areas of application .
What you said about the European Commission encouraging Member States to take measures in this respect is very important .
It really seems to be the case that what we largely see as waste today could later become a source of our or someone else 's health .
In this context , I believe that we need a strategy .
We need to know what we are encouraging , what information we are giving to parents and other people and , of course , what research we are doing .
I am confident that we have a great opportunity here to prove to people that we are on their side and that we are supporting the right way forward .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although we are dealing with it at a late hour , I believe that what we have here is an important argument that should be highly valued , because the therapeutic use of stem cells from the umbilical cord should be upheld , just as initiatives and information campaigns aimed at making the possibility of donating stem cells more widespread should be encouraged and promoted at every level , all the more so at the European level .
You have just maintained that all this is not within the competence of Europe .
However , could the transposition of Directive 2004 / 23 / EC not define quality and safety standards for the donation , testing , preservation and distribution of the selfsame cells ?
It is , in any case , necessary to ensure that the diverse national legislation be applied coherently over the different European countries to guarantee that all European patients and parents have the same rights and are subject to identical rules .
It is particularly important that cord blood be preserved in public banks at the national and European level , so that it can be efficaciously given to all patients who really need it , thus preventing death and trying to ensure the same rights for everyone .
Mr President , during the last election in Ireland , embryo stem cell research was a hugely controversial topic .
This time , medicine is scarcely being mentioned as the elections take place .
Obviously , the economy has taken centre stage , but also medical science has moved on considerably .
We are very fortunate with the quality of medical research we have in various institutions throughout the European Union , and also with the quality of medical practitioners .
Cord blood stem cells are one example of where progress has been made .
It has been said that this research has the potential to help deal with 70 to 80 diseases .
That is something that we should encourage , and therefore it is important that this type of research and facility be made available - obviously within ethical constraints .
As you pointed out , Commissioner , much of this will depend on the Member States themselves , in terms both of application , in particular , and also of follow-up in due course .
Mr President , as many of my colleagues have already commented , this is an incredibly important debate and an issue that needs to be debated not just here in this Chamber within the European Union , but in as far spread a way as possible .
It is an issue on which I myself have yet to come down on one side of or the other .
I keep swinging between the two : on the one hand , there is my Catholic upbringing , and on the other , modern science and the benefits this can bring .
That said , for the first time probably ever , I am going to commend a Commissioner .
What he said was absolutely correct : this should be left in the hands of the Member States .
The cultural and religious differences among the European Union should be respected , and under no circumstances should this matter be taken out of the hands of the Member States .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to talk about the issue of collecting and storing cord blood , which is a major source of stem cells .
Through the collection of cord blood at birth , which , in the past , used to be discarded with the placenta , we can obtain a significant source of undifferentiated stem cells without causing discomfort to the mother or child , and these can be modulated and used successfully at any time in the future to treat leukaemia and at least 70 other conditions .
I would like to ask why it is that in Europe , we collect less than 1 % of stem cells at birth , and I would like , of course , to agree with the Commissioner , who says that it is mainly up to Member States to regulate this , although the Commission , along with the Member States , could surely help to improve the provision of information to parents concerning the advantages of stem cells , in light of progress in stem cell therapy and regenerative medicine .
I say this as a former rapporteur for the directive on advanced therapies .
Mr President , I , too , would like to thank the Commissioner for his contribution to this debate .
However , because of the concerns that have been raised , maybe one solution could be that the national registry of blood banks could be used as the registrar , the resource , for maintaining the cord stem cells for future use .
This would overcome some of the problems and difficulties some of my colleagues have already mentioned with regard to the cost of storage .
As well as that , we already have a system in place within the existing national blood banks that can regulate and control the quality of that supply .
That could be a good way of overcoming some of the difficulties .
I , like many colleagues , believe that the use of stem cells has a huge potential for future disease treatments .
However , we must also be cautious about giving false hope , because too often we have heard , not just with stem cells but also with biotechnology in other areas , of people being given false hope .
We need core scientific values and core scientific research to ensure that the results that are being proclaimed can actually be delivered .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , clearly , there is a general appreciation of the progress that has been made in the application of stem cells for therapeutic purposes .
We agree that this needs to be encouraged .
The issues as raised by the honourable Members are firstly on information and secondly on storage .
As far as information is concerned , it is important - as we all agree - to provide accurate and objective information to parents and to the general public about the advantages and limitations of the use of stem cells , including cord blood stem cells .
Providing such information is the competence of the Member States , which sometimes vary in opinion and policy regarding the advantages and limitations , as well as the uses , of stem cells .
Many Member States already have in place information campaigns and other information activities .
The Commission encourages Member States to take such actions .
As to storage , we know that private firms already offer parents the service of storing cord blood cells .
However , several Member States have established public cord blood banks based on altruistic and voluntary cord blood donation .
EU law on tissues and cells regulates all tissue establishments , whether public or private .
It specifies principles of voluntary and unpaid donation , anonymity , altruism of the donor and solidarity between donor and recipient .
In 2004 , the European Group on Ethics recommended public storage of cord blood banks to ensure solidarity access to all patients in need .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The value of the global market for cord blood stem cells was approximately EUR 3.34 billion in 2010 .
Future projections , based on an annual growth rate of roughly 27 % in the coming years , indicate that this figure will reach EUR 11 billion by 2015 .
At a time when stem cells seem to be the new ' El Dorado ' in medical research , many researchers are in a hurry to move into this niche area without ensuring that they achieve all the quality and safety standards required for these procedures .
I think that the Commission must step up its efforts in terms of informing patients and medical staff about the benefits of extracting cord blood stem cells .
However , it must also make a special effort to ensure that the minimum quality and safety standards for donating , acquiring , testing , processing , keeping , storing and distributing human cells and tissue are , and will be , complied with in all Member States .
We have heard from Commissioner Dalli the very cautious position of the European Commission regarding research on stem cells from cord blood .
This is hardly surprising .
The Commission proposed and pushed through in the Seventh Framework Programme an enormous package of support for contentious stem cell research and is afraid to admit that this research failed to fulfil expectations .
Moreover , it is now clear that the research on stem cells obtained from the bodies of unborn children did not produce anything like the results from research on cells obtained from cord blood .
Until recently , this blood was regarded as biological waste .
In light of the latest reports of successful experiments and even treatments using stem cells from cord blood , how can the Commission defend the morally unacceptable production of human embryos for research purposes ?
Also , why has Commissioner Dalli not presented us today with a concrete plan for the Commission to increase the percentage of cord blood collected at birth , instead of a meaningless opinion ?
I hope it is because his staff are still hard at work on such a plan .
I assume that the Commission will propose a mechanism in the plan which will relieve parents of the burden of paying for the collection and subsequent storage of cord blood .
I also expect that the plan will include a reassessment of priorities in the area of stem cell research .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( FR ) Mr President , we are going through the worst global financial crisis since 1929 and therefore , Europe must not stand idly by .
Moreover , the regulation of the international financial system is not a matter for the right , the left , or even the centre : it concerns everyone throughout the world .
I firmly believe that Europe must play a leading role , as it was able to do last March when it called on the Commission and the Member States to focus on the issue of taxing international financial activities .
Now , almost a year later , we must move up a gear and do everything we can to ensure that Europe becomes a source of inspiration and a force for proposals .
Hence , I call on the European Parliament to adopt a common , strong and offensive position in favour of the introduction , at international level , of a tax on financial activities .
With the French Presidency of the G20 , which has made international financial regulation a priority , Europe has a unique opportunity to pioneer a humanist vision in the face of an ever-changing world .
With such a tax , we would have a practical , useful and fair instrument .
Europe must step up to the mark , and so must the European Parliament .
( FR ) Mr President , today , 14 February , St Valentine 's Day , I would like to point out that one in five women in Europe is the victim of domestic violence .
In Europe , 40-50 % of women have experienced sexual harassment in the workplace .
We are in the 21st century and Europe has still not taken any legislative measures to eradicate violence against women .
The European Parliament has repeatedly requested it , the Council has demanded it and the Commission has promised it , but where is the European strategy to combat violence against women ?
Violence against women represents the most serious and most widespread violation of human rights in Europe .
We need a European action to overcome the huge differences between our countries where protection for women is concerned .
To talk figures , violence against women in the home - to mention just this one , unfortunately very widespread , type - today costs us EUR 1 million every half an hour .
If we want a more modern and more democratic Europe , then we need a strong strategy to combat violence against women .
( ES ) Mr President , ETA has caused a great deal of pain , and must disappear for good .
Basque society rejects its crimes .
The only political option that did not condemn them has been banned .
On 7 February , they corrected their position .
They have established a new party that fulfils the requirements set out in the Spanish laws and court rulings .
They have therefore listened to what had been demanded for decades by Basque society , its institutions and its legitimate representatives , who are also working to ensure that the suffering of victims is acknowledged and compensated .
It should also be said , however , that the exceptional criminal criteria applied in Spain against ETA have , on occasions , resulted in serious violations of fundamental rights .
Ideologies and even the Basque language have been gratuitously criminalised in the name of fighting terrorism .
I have spoken here before about the case of the newspaper Egunkaria .
There are other examples , and they should not be repeated .
For these reasons , we must support the participation of the new party in the forthcoming elections in May .

( ES ) Mr President , along the same lines as my fellow Member , Mr Bilbao , I would like to say to this House that a few days ago , the Spanish Government halted the process of recognising a new Basque political group on the Register of Political Parties .
We do not feel that this type of measure is in line with good European practice , and it would not be found in similar cases in other EU Member States .
We think it should be said that the Spanish State has been criticised on several occasions by international organisations such as Amnesty International for continuing to practise torture .
We would also like to point out that the European Court of Human Rights has criticised this use of torture on several occasions , or , at the very least , the fact it is not sufficiently investigated .
We would like to say that the fact that many ETA prisoners are kept far away from their homes is clearly out of line with the general principles of law , and that therefore we feel it is essential that the European Union be involved in the peace process .
( PT ) Mr President , the price of food has reached an all-time high and is rising again for the seventh time in a row .
There are various factors that may account for this increase , the first of which is a short-term factor .
It has to do with the coinciding of bad weather in certain countries , such as Russia and Argentina .
However , there are two factors that are structural in nature , which is why I am bringing up these two factors here .
The first has to do with the fact that some food producers and consumers that used to be exporters are now importers , as is the case of China .
The second has to do with the fact that the clout of some of the large multinationals enables them to influence prices in their favour .
Cereals are a very clear example of this : they are dominated by six large multinationals .
This situation therefore leaves farmers feeling very unsure about the price of food products .
Europe must once again do what it stopped doing some time ago , which is to protect its producers and consumers .
We cannot afford to be naïve in a world where everyone is resorting to forms of protection and where the multinationals are manipulating prices .
( BG ) Mr President , I would like to take the floor to express my disappointment at the Commission 's procedural apathy when written responses are asked for .
On several occasions , I have received an answer to my question long after the three-week deadline .
Not only is the procedure tortuous , but the answers are always vague , laconic , and of the type which say ' you are right , but it is not within my remit ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , I represent a country where 20 years ago , under a different political system , institutions passed the buck as a matter of course , and did not reply because it was easier .
This is not the right way to communicate .
It is the wrong approach , and I wonder , if the Commission is so aloof towards us MEPs , what its attitude is towards ordinary European citizens ?
And I am afraid of the answer .
Mr President , today is not just St Valentine 's Day , but also European Epilepsy Day , as St Valentine was reputed to have epilepsy .
The aim of European Epilepsy Day is to explode the myths and remove the stigmas surrounding a condition that six million people suffer from within the European Union .
In my own country , Ireland , a small country , 37 000 live with epilepsy every day .
This campaign focuses on generating more openness and more knowledge about epilepsy and addressing care issues for people with epilepsy .
At present , there is a huge shortage of consultant neurologists in my country - the worst in the entire European Union - where you have to wait for up to two years to see a consultant .
That is appalling .
There is a shocking divergence in standards of epilepsy care throughout the European Union .
What we need is research and data : we need an EU-wide data bank where we can actually share best practice and make things better for somebody who is trying to lead a normal life but cannot drive a car , cannot ride a motorcycle and cannot get on with their ordinary life , and yet is perfectly intelligent .
Some done , but a lot more to do .
( ES ) Mr President , today is also European Sexual Health Day .
Ladies and gentlemen , the statistics are worrying : the World Health Organisation estimates that more than 300 million people involuntarily contract a sexually transmitted disease every year .
In Europe , as the European Sexual Health Forum warns , there is a worrying increase in unwanted pregnancies among teenagers due to a major lack of education and information among our young people .
As the Commission says , there are even several distinct inequalities in terms of access to sexual health services between the Member States and , within them , between citizens ' levels of income .
In order to combat all of this , we need a European strategy .
Only five Member States have plans in this area , but all of them have succeeded in reducing the number of unwanted pregnancies , the number of sexually transmitted disease infections and also the number of abortions .
We need a common strategy focused on prevention through education that expands information policies , increases family planning efforts and facilitates access to contraception .
We need a cross-cutting , ambitious strategy with no taboos in order guarantee the rights of all Europeans to the best possible sexual health and safety .
Mr President , I would like to inform European citizens that last week , the deputy permanent representative of the Russian Federation to the European Union warned me that the European Parliament should neither have a debate nor adopt a resolution on the rule of law in Russia this week , and that if this should happen , it would provoke a strong reaction from the Kremlin .
Colleagues , I wonder if I am the only Member whom Russian diplomats have tried to influence in such a manner .
The actions of this particular Russian diplomat are , frankly , shocking and not in line with good diplomatic practices .
It sounds rather like a threat .
I would like to assure you that we , the Members of this freely and democratically elected Parliament , cannot - and shall not - follow the dictates of the Kremlin .
We are not to be pushed around by Putin .
We are Europeans who stand for real values and will not succumb to threats from anyone .
( EL ) Mr President , trade unions , parties and players in the Turkish-Cypriot community in Cyprus are conducting an inch-by-inch battle against Ankara 's policy which , among other things , is using politics and migration to render Turkish Cypriots an endangered species .
The saddest part of the whole affair is the disrespectful and humiliating statements made by Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan to the Turkish Cypriots ; he more or less asked for anyone who reacts against the policy applied by Ankara in the occupied part of Cyprus to be convicted .
The Turkish Prime Minister has now openly and directly admitted that Turkey has strategic interests in Cyprus and he unsuccessfully ordered the Turkish Cypriots to be quiet .
We stand by them .
Our fight is their fight .
Their objectives are our objectives .
The problem is not the Turkish Cypriots , as some people have been saying .
The problem is Turkey 's intransigent and arbitrary policy .
( HU ) Mr President , in order to implement our first security strategy and fight terrorism and organised crime effectively , high quality law enforcement training in the European Union is indispensable : law enforcement training which is able to harmonise and raise to a unified level the very different law enforcement traditions and very different abilities of the various Member States .
An eminent role awaits the European Police College , with an important task to perform .
It is regrettable that CEPOL , the European Police College , became known here , in the European Parliament , due to the suspected illegal and corrupt operation of its former management .
At the same time , it must be said - and perhaps fewer people are aware of this and fewer people are interested in this than in the scandals - that the appointment of new leaders in 2010 initiated highly favourable processes in the functioning of the European Police College .
It is therefore important to deal not only with the past but also with the future .
As regards future objectives , in a nutshell , two things are needed : to ensure the organisational legal autonomy of the European Police College and the development opportunities required for its renewed operation .
For this , I would like your support and attention .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , 14 February , is European Epilepsy Day .
This is a condition from which 6 million European citizens suffer , of whom some 300 000 are Italians .
It is therefore important that associations , including the Italian Epilepsy Association , dedicated to increase awareness of such a serious condition about which there is still much ignorance , a lack of clear information and regarding which many extremely delicate aspects remain unknown , should organise meeting opportunities over this period .
Some steps forward have been made in the last few years at European level , especially through a 2009 directive , but there is still much to do , especially to guarantee full civil rights to sufferers from this condition in the world of work and of mobility , and in guaranteeing the availability of medication during school hours .
I therefore consider days of reflection on such fundamental aspects of these problems to be very important .
( RO ) Mr President , in December 2010 , the unemployment rate in the EU-27 hit 9.6 % , reaching a figure of 23 million unemployed .
Compared with the situation last year , the unemployment rate has risen in two thirds of Member States .
Young people and women have been hit hardest by the economic crisis .
The EU unemployment rate for women in the EU-27 rose to 9.6 % , with the rate of youth unemployment reaching 21 % .
In some countries such as Spain , Slovenia and Lithuania , this figure has even exceeded 35 % .
Similarly , only 50 % of people over the age of 60 are still in work .
Jobs remain the main concern of European citizens .
I call on the Commission and Member States to take the necessary measures to make social Europe a reality .
European citizens are looking for a decent job , offering a salary which they can reasonably live off , as well as for access to good quality social and healthcare services .
I urge the Commission and Member States to allocate as a priority financial resources to the measures which can generate jobs and promote industrial development across the European Union .
( SK ) Mr President , in November 2008 , four-year-old Adam Azab , a citizen of the Slovak Republic and the European Union , was forcibly separated from his mother in Egypt .
The courts in both Slovakia and Egypt had decided to entrust the child to the care of the mother .
The child 's father , an Egyptian national , is ignoring this decision .
The Egyptian police and Interior Ministry are neither able nor willing to discover little Adam 's address .
His mother , Mrs Katarína Azab , has been in Egypt for two and a half years looking for her son with the help of the Slovak embassy .
The unrest in Egypt has forced the mother to return to Slovakia , but without her son .
She continues to live in fear for the life and health of her child .
I call on the Commission and Parliament to rapidly intervene and defend the fundamental rights of their citizens .
I ask for your assistance in returning young Adam to his mother .
( DE ) Mr President , it really is not that long ago that the rapporteur on the SWIFT agreement stood here in plenary and assured us that internal European transfer data would not be covered by the agreement .
That was not true , however , as we now know .
The reality , in fact , is that only SEPA transaction data are excluded from the agreement , while standard EU transfers and even express transfers via the SWIFTNet FIN are not .
It is thus proving to be the case that the SWIFT agreement will result in a major leaking of data and that one of the major arguments of the advocates of the SWIFT agreement has fallen apart .
Yet what does the European Parliament do now ?
Nothing .
Absolutely nothing !
There is no outcry , just an attempt to brush this new information under the carpet .
This is in stark contrast to events in the German Parliament .
There has already been a debate in the German Parliament and I also received an email today from the Social Democratic Party of Germany which very clearly argued that the European Parliament must be active in this area .
That is exactly what I want to call on Parliament to do .
I believe it is very important for us to stop this mass data transfer and to re-start the negotiations .
( ES ) Mr President , at a time of major social tension , we can only warmly welcome the major social dialogue agreement in Spain between the government , the unions and employers .
This agreement is a model for Europe , because there has not been such a milestone in a long time .
We should also pay close attention to the thoughts of Cándido Méndez , one of the principle figures in the Spanish agreement , who attended the meeting of the Economic and Social Council on Tuesday , 8 February in Brussels .
At that meeting , Mr Méndez stressed the need to extend the dialogue to European level and for unions to have a voice and initiative in this Europe of ours .
That is how it should be .
( PL ) Mr President , in connection with our recent debate on international adoption , I should like to draw attention to the institution of the foster family .
It is an alternative to residential care for children awaiting adoption or the resolution of problems in their natural families .
Foster families are an effective and desirable form of caring for children and are a particular opportunity for socially maladjusted children , whose chances of adoption are the lowest .
We should encourage the Member States to make changes to legislation which will improve traditional forms of care in foster families as well as care in foster families with many children or with specialist carers , and also ensure that appropriate financial support is made available .
Foster family organisations could be involved in drafting proposals for the legal measures which are really needed in this area .
Foster parents need , in addition , the establishment of groups made up of parents , carers , guardians and social workers , which would work together effectively and whose objective would be to give mutual help and support for parenting .
Of no less importance is general promotion of the idea of foster families in society , so that there will be more of them and that they will enjoy respect and recognition , and that their huge contribution to caring for children will be appreciated .
( HU ) Mr President , the situation of national minorities primarily depends on the constructive cooperation of the political representatives of the majority society and the minority .
Over the last 20 years , it has been demonstrated that those Hungarian minority communities outside Hungary have been successful where the willingness of the minority political leadership to cooperate encountered a constructive attitude on the part of the political leadership of the majority society , who regarded the minority as partners , whether they were involved in government or not .
There is no alternative to this cooperation .
I am very pleased that the current Slovak Government has set off on the road which one day may lead to an historic Hungarian-Slovak reconciliation .
The nationalist bidding of one country 's nationalism provoking the other country 's nationalism must be brought to an end .
I hope that forms of minority-friendly cooperation will come to compete with each other in Hungarian-Slovak relations instead of nationalism .
I trust that the historic Hungarian-Slovak reconciliation will bring major results , as there is no other alternative for the two countries .
( EL ) Mr President , the grassroots uprisings against the barbaric repressive regimes of the plutocracy in countries in the EU 's Union for the Mediterranean prove the undefeated power of the people and , at the same time , reveal the hypocrisy of the imperialists .
Now , the European Union and the United States of America are up in arms about grassroots freedoms and democracy in Egypt and other countries .
For years on end , the USA , NATO and the EU have supported and done everything within their power to strengthen these barbaric regimes and to upgrade their trading , economic , political and military relations with them , with big business and with their political spokesmen , thereby creating mass poverty , misery , persecution and massive waves of economic migrants and refugees , who are crammed into and held in concentration camps in the Member States of the European Union .
Mubarak continues to this day to hold the office of co-president of the Union for the Mediterranean .
The statements by the European Union and the United States of America to the people rebelling in the area have a single objective : to disorientate the people in their struggle .
The people should not be trapped by interventions on the part of the United States and its allies .
The Greek Communist Party calls on the people to give real expression to their solidarity with the people fighting this fight .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my intention in making this speech is to voice the concerns of thousands of fishing families from southern Italy , in particular , from the regions of Campania and Sicily , who represent one half of the small fishing fleet .
These people are suffering from an unjust and needless ban on fishing for fry ; a ban that has no scientific basis whatsoever and makes not the slightest political sense .
By acting in this way , the Union will increasingly come to be seen as the enemy of our fisherfolk , who carry on an activity important to both the national and European gross domestic product ( GDP ) .
Two or three days ago , we asked some Members , some of whom are also here in this Chamber tonight , for a meeting with Commissioner Damanaki .
Although this was promised to us , we have not received a reply since then , notwithstanding that the Commissioner committed herself to look for a better solution for the whole issue , showing great political sensibility at that time .
Yet again , it pains us to conclude that the Brussels bureaucracy has triumphed over politics .
I therefore consider it opportune that , thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , this Parliament assert itself once and for all to strike down certain types of stale and myopic reasoning .
We are therefore asking the Commissioner to address this Chamber on this question and to discuss it in the bosom of Parliament .
( ES ) Mr President , although the EU-Morocco Fisheries Partnership Agreement has been renewed for four years , the Protocol that establishes the fishing opportunities and returns expires on 28 February .
There is a risk that the activities of the EU fleet that practises mainly small-scale fishing will be interrupted , which will have a major impact on European areas and towns that are highly affected by the crisis .
There is also a risk that the development of sustainable fishing in the context of the Protocol and the flow of investment to the population of the area will be interrupted .
On Friday , the Commission asked the Council to authorise the opening of negotiations for the renewal of the Protocol , and on Monday , the Agricultural and Fisheries Council will meet .
We need to act swiftly .
I therefore ask the Council to give the Commission a mandate at this meeting , and I ask the Commission to initiate conversations in the coming week in order to secure a new protocol with all the guarantees in place , and to arrive at a provisional extension of activity in order to ensure that it continues for a sufficient period of one or two years , in order to reach a final , entirely satisfactory agreement .
( PL ) Mr President , around a billion of the world 's people are chronically undernourished or are starving .
In 2008 , food prices rose dramatically , which caused food-related riots in about 30 countries around the world .
Today , food prices are approaching those of 2008 .
The general economic crisis has also contributed to this , which means it is even more necessary to make strenuous endeavours at finding fair ways of distributing food products on a world scale .
Unfortunately , it is being forgotten in the European Union that the common agricultural policy is principally a policy intended to secure the supply of high quality food at a suitable price to all European consumers .
We must not allow further elimination of instruments which regulate the market and maintain stocks at suitably high levels , and this includes cereal stocks .
It is also essential to eliminate speculation in this market - it is reprehensible and immoral that capital groups chasing higher profits are distorting the rules of the free market and condemning millions of people across the world to suffer hunger .
( BG ) Mr President , the results of a representative study show that just 4 % of Bulgarian students take part in student exchange programmes such as Erasmus .
The main reason for this low figure is to do with financial constraints .
The only way of achieving the target of 20 % student mobility by 2020 is to review the funding mechanisms .
Two types of measures can be devised for this .
The first is credits for student mobility .
A study by the London School of Economics proposes setting up a European instrument for crediting student exchange , which will result in greater interest on the part of the students .
The second type of measure relates to increasing grants for student exchange .
Grants reduce social inequality and are the most effective investment in increasing educational standards and the competitiveness of the European economy .
More resources need to be allocated from European as well as national budgets so that students can afford to participate in European mobility programmes .
( RO ) Mr President , I welcome the civil movements in Tunisia and Egypt that have successfully toppled two dictatorial regimes which had become entrenched over several decades .
On top of concerns for the future of the Arab world , on whose stability the balance of global order is dependent , we must add a more serious concern about the welfare of citizens both inside and outside the European Union .
From the outset of the economic crisis , the priorities have been to save the financial and banking system and balance the state budget .
However , here we have a situation where the burden of recession is causing unpredictable effects with a major geopolitical impact .
In Tunisia and Egypt , the rise in food prices and unemployment increased the exasperation caused by the dictatorial regimes .
The lack of prospects and the increasingly oppressive current climate are also having an impact on the mood of citizens in some Member States , especially in the eastern and southern regions of the European Union .
I believe it is time for more attention to be focused on people 's living standards .
Otherwise , we risk seeing unexpected displays of discontent by a population which is permanently being asked to make sacrifices .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to describe the grave situation in which Italian fisherfolk find themselves because they are not allowed to fish for whitebait .
This ban is causing immediate losses to thousands of families who earn their living from this activity .
The single period for catching this species of fish , which runs from early January to 31 March , is being frittered away by the ' do nothing ' attitude of Commissioner Damanaki and her officials .
On 1 February , together with a delegation of four other Members , including Mr Antinoro , who is present in the Chamber , I personally lobbied the Commissioner to act urgently , and she promised to give us a reply in a few days .
However , as of today , we have not received any response , which demonstrates the Commissioner 's inability to react to a situation that would have deserved immediate action .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to express my concern as regards the adoption in the European Council of the agreement on a new model of economic governance .
Firstly , this model is only intended for euro area Member States .
Other Member States only have the right to assist in the coordination of this model .
This begs the question as to why only euro area Member States deserve special economic rescue measures , when non-euro area Member States also face huge economic and financial difficulties and they may also require assistance in the future .
I feel that in this case , a rather negative precedent is being set in the European Union , which risks creating a so-called two-speed Europe .
This may bring Europe towards increasingly varied rates of growth and development and dilute the idea of a single European Union and disappoint our citizens .
Mr President , indeed , I did not request speaking time , but thank you for allowing me to offer my sympathies to the families of people who lost their lives in a tragic air accident in my home town of Cork in Ireland last Thursday , 10 February .
If it were not for the rapid response of the Cork airport fire service in putting out the fire on the plane , six other lives would have been lost as well .
Indeed , two people were able to walk away from the crash , despite the fact that the plane overturned twice on the runway .
It is important for us here in Parliament , as we fly regularly ourselves , to appreciate the fact that the fire services in all the airports across the Union need to be maintained at the highest possible level of readiness to respond to this type of tragedy .
That concludes the item .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles ( debate )
The next item is the report by Martin Callanan , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council setting emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles as part of the Community 's integrated approach to reduce CO2 emissions from light-duty vehicles - C7-0271 / 2009 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am delighted to be able to open our debate today on my report about emissions from light commercial vehicles ( LCVs ) .
Before I get to the detail of the text , please allow me to express a few thanks : first of all , to the shadow rapporteurs from all of the political groups ; secondly , to the rapporteurs and members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for their opinions ; and thirdly , to the Commissioner and her team - we have had a number of very constructive meetings about this .
Fourthly , I would like to thank the Belgian Presidency for its very hard work during the trialogue negotiations ; finally , my thanks go to Jos Vervloet and Isobel Findlay from the ENVI secretariat , who have provided some incredible support throughout the process .
In particular , Isobel 's help on the complex comitology issues is very much appreciated .
The proposed legislation has been expected ever since similar legislation was passed concerning passenger cars .
Personally , I was not entirely convinced of the need for this legislation because most vans are bought by businesses , both large and small , which are already very conscious of the need for economy and fuel efficiency .
Because of this , it has been my belief throughout the process that it is crucial to have an ambitious but realistic long-term target and an appropriate short-term target that takes into account both the needs of industry product cycles and the need for environmental improvement .
It has always been the long-term target that has been the main focus throughout our debate .
The Commission 's original proposal was 135g CO2 / km , which was deemed by many sources to be simply unachievable .
The LCV sector has longer development and production times than the passenger car sector .
Similarly , LCVs , as their name implies , are used mainly for commercial purposes .
Unlike passenger cars , there is less scope to modify either their shape or their weight in a bid to reduce emissions .
The principal way to accomplish this in LCVs is through modification of the engines and mechanics of the vehicles - a much longer and more expensive process than simply altering the body or reducing the weight of the vehicle .
It should also be noted that there is already much greater penetration of diesel fuel usage in the LCV sector than in the car sector .
When the Commission published its original proposal , many of the manufacturers made it clear that they wished to settle for nothing less than 160g CO2 / km , a figure which , in turn , struck most of us in Parliament as being far too relaxed and complacent .
In the end , the package that we have all agreed on , and which is before you today , has a fairly sensible compromise position of 147g CO2 / km .
Given the higher costs of reducing CO2 in LCVs compared to cars and the longer development and production cycles needed , my personal belief is that this provides a good balance between ensuring improved environmental standards , on the one hand , and giving a realistic and achievable target for the LCV manufacturing sector , on the other .
The fact that , by reaching this compromise figure , we are being attacked on one side as being too pro-industry and on the other as being too environmentally friendly , suggests to me that possibly , we have just about got the balance right .
One area of the Commission 's proposal which all groups agreed was unworkable concerned the very complex issue of multi-stage vehicles .
Obviously , it is unfair to penalise the manufacturers of the base vehicle when they are not responsible for what happens to the vehicle at a later stage of its production .
The package that is before you today includes a very sensible proposal that the Commission will review this issue before the end of the year and sets out the basis under which this review should take place .
I believe that the package that we have negotiated , and which will be put before Parliament today as amendment 58 , is the best possible outcome .
I am pleased to have the support - I hope - of most of the main political groups .
It balances the need for improved environmental standards with realistic and achievable targets that will not prejudice manufacturing industry nor pose a risk to jobs in the Union .
Generally , I am not in favour of first-reading agreements , believing that they are best avoided if at all possible .
However , in this case , a first-reading agreement provides clarity and certainty to a sector that is still suffering in the wake of the global economic crisis , whilst also setting the bar for the tough but fair environmental standards that we all wish to see .
I hope that colleagues will join me in supporting the package today .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Callanan , and the shadow rapporteurs , on their efforts in reaching agreement on the Commission proposal on light commercial vehicles .
In the aftermath of the economic downturn , as Mr Callanan mentioned , these discussions were indeed difficult .
Let me be clear : the compromise package resulting from these interinstitutional discussions is less ambitious than the Commission proposal on a number of points .
Mainly , full compliance with the short-term target is delayed by one year ; the level of the penalty for non-compliance - the ' excess emissions premium ' - has been lowered ; and the ambition of the long-term target has been decreased .
It will therefore not come as a surprise to anybody if I say that I would have preferred a more ambitious outcome , and many of you probably share that view .
Nevertheless , this compromise still represents an important step forward .
By 2020 , it will bring down the average CO2 emissions of vans from the 2007 baseline of 203 grams of CO2 per kilometre to 147 grams per kilometre .
This will mean an average emission reduction in the van fleet of 28 % over 13 years .
In view of the expected growing demand for light commercial vehicles , the increased efficiency will represent an important contribution to the reduction of transport emissions .
The compromise will also generate lifetime net savings for consumers , mainly small and medium-sized enterprises , of over EUR 2 200 per vehicle .
Moreover , the targets will stimulate innovation in industry and enable manufacturers to take advantage of the transition to a low carbon economy and thus enhance their long-term competitiveness .
Let us not forget that this regulation should give manufacturers a first mover advantage in world markets where similar CO2 standards are likely to follow and the demand for efficient vehicles is expected to rise .
In addition , this regulation will close a major regulatory gap between cars and vans and therefore minimise potential perverse effects on the regulation on CO2 in passenger cars .
Large cars will not be able to escape the CO2 emission standards simply by changing the vehicle 's category to ' van ' when type-approved .
Finally , as you know , transport is today emitting more than in 1990 , thus offsetting to a large extent the reductions made in other sectors .
This is , of course , not sustainable .
Transport must make a substantial contribution to the EU 's overall CO2 targets .
This regulation is one more instrument that will help the Member States to meet their 2020 commitments to reduce CO2 from sectors outside the EU ETS .
I believe that this agreement is yet more proof of the European Union 's commitment towards meeting its climate goals and I hope that you will lend your support to the compromise package when you vote later today .
Mr President , the first reading should be the exception .
In this case , it was possible because we came to a compromise between the proposals of the Commission , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the most controversial topic .
The fact that we went into the negotiations with a common negotiating mandate from all the groups is the only thing which enabled us to produce this result .
I would like to thank Mr Callanan in particular for the commitment he has shown .
We can be proud of what we have achieved .
The result is identical in many areas to the proposal made by the Industry Committee .
I believe that we have launched an ambitious project which is achievable for industry and which will , in particular , give users the opportunity to buy affordable , modern vehicles with lower CO2 emissions .
This applies specifically to small and medium-sized businesses , tradespeople , retailers and micro-enterprises which use this type of vehicle .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
There is an item in my dossier for the Industry Committee which was not incorporated , but which nevertheless was adopted with a narrow majority .
It concerns the proposal for speed limiters .
This is now a matter for the Member States , which will have to establish their own regulations .
Overall , we are therefore pleased with the compromise .
The Industry Committee is prepared to support the entire package .
Mr President , it is true that transport is one of the sectors where emissions need to be reduced .
In our rush to cut emissions , however , we should not undermine the competitiveness of European car manufacturers .
This requirement is particularly pressing in view of the ongoing financial crisis , which has had serious repercussions on the European car industry so far .
From this perspective , I consider the achievement of 147g CO2 / km for the average emissions of new vans to be rather ambitious , and I am very curious to see the feasibility study which the Commission is to draw up on the basis of the updated results .
At the same time , I am following with great attention the repeated efforts of the Commission and certain other parties , for whom the proposed target seems , on the contrary , rather unambitious , to reopen the debate on this topic and to try and change this regulation in order to set more stringent targets .
I firmly believe that the economic actors need certainty that the legislation will not be changing all the time .
It is now time to give car manufacturers breathing space to work and to develop new engines so that they can adjust to the regulations and the new objectives .
In conjunction with this , I think we should keep our eyes firmly fixed on justification 24 , which considers expanding the use of speed limiters to light commercial vehicles as well .
I am pleased that we will be addressing this issue in particular and that this debate will be businesslike and not ideological .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must stick to our time slots , since we have a full programme and the vote is at midday .
Mr President , today , I am representing Mrs Weisgerber , our shadow rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , who is on maternity leave .
We all send her our very best wishes .
She has done an excellent job on this dossier .
Overall , we are all pleased with the compromise .
It was not as difficult to achieve as in the case of cars , because this is not such an emotional subject .
Nevertheless , we faced major environmental and economic challenges .
From a climate policy perspective , it is important that the load is distributed evenly along all the links in the chain and this link must make its contribution .
However , we also had to ensure that we did not grind so much off this link that we caused it to break .
What do I mean by that ?
Of course , the costs involved in measures of this kind for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) represent a significant challenge for them .
Small businesses will be considering very carefully whether it is worthwhile replacing their old vehicle and investing in a new one .
Therefore , we had to focus less on the technical aspects and more on the economic ones .
In technical terms , we could have achieved a great deal more , but the costs would definitely have been passed on to the SMEs and that would not have produced the desired results .
We will have to wait for a few years to find out whether this regulation is a good one , because that will only be the case if we actually reach the required emission levels .
If we end up imposing fines , then we will not have achieved our objective .
We must keep a very close eye on how the situation develops .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my gratitude for the way in which we have been able to work together so constructively .
We have reached a good compromise today from an environmental and an economic perspective .
Even though we could , in my opinion , have gone further with regard to the limit , the legislation that we are adopting today is still the strictest in the world for light commercial vehicles .
We must not forget that .
Mrs Hedegaard has already said that , outside the Emissions Trading System , these small sector-specific pieces of legislation which we are introducing are very important in allowing us to achieve the goals that we have set ourselves .
If vehicles use less fuel , this brings added value not only for the climate but also for air quality .
With a limit of 147 grams , which is the equivalent of 5.6 litres of diesel , vehicles will produce less pollution .
This means that the air quality in our cities will improve .
We are taking an important step forward today .
My group is voting in favour of this compromise package because it includes an important point which states that we must evaluate in 2014 at the latest whether the targets that we are adopting today have been met or exceeded and whether we need to make adjustments in this area .
This was a fundamental requirement for our group .
I have had long discussions with my colleague , Mr Pirillo , about the nature of this compromise and that was one of the basic prerequisites of the compromise package .
Some comments have already been made about the first reading .
We should make sure in future that we reach fewer first-reading agreements .
In this case , it is acceptable because the negotiations ultimately only concerned 2 grams .
We did not need to introduce that into the second reading .
However , if we adopt everything during the first reading , Parliament will be depriving itself of its rights .
There is one further point I would like to mention and that is the test cycle .
It will be very important for us to have a standardised test cycle in future which will hopefully come into force throughout the world at some point and which will represent reality .
Our current test cycles are not realistic and we need to make improvements in this area .
International negotiations are under way and I hope that they can be brought to successful conclusion , because this will mean that the legislation will reflect the actual driving cycles .
I would like to thank everyone concerned once again .
Today is a good day for the European Union 's climate and environmental policy .
Mr President , in the discussion about whether or not it is sensible to come to an agreement during the first reading , we should not stick as closely to our principles as some Members have recommended .
This should depend on the dossier .
How are the discussions going ?
How controversial are they ?
In the case of the regulation of CO2 emissions from light commercial vehicles , it is clear that the positions of the institutions were not very far apart .
Therefore , it would not have been worthwhile to start the second reading process , except in the case of an issue which is the subject of heated discussions , in other words , the long-term target .
The European Commission has never explained properly and it is also not clear from the impact assessments how a reduction in emissions from 203 grams today to 135 grams within 10 years - these are the figures just mentioned by Mrs Hedegaard - can be implemented in an economically viable way .
This represents a cut of 34 % and goes far beyond our other climate targets .
Parliament 's most important job was to bring this target back to reality and to make it feasible in economic terms .
This is what we have done .
I am pleased that Mr Groote took up my argument , because a fleet average of 147 grams is a long way from what the Commission originally proposed , but it is also by far the most ambitious target set anywhere in the world .
We should not try to persuade ourselves that a CO2 limit for light commercial vehicles will save the world 's climate .
I would like to thank everyone , including the rapporteurs , for their hard work .
I am pleased that we have achieved a large majority for this compromise .

Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Callanan , for being extremely professional and inclusive when conducting the negotiations .
However , I will not be expressing my thanks for the agreement .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance believe that the Commission 's original proposal was a good and realistic one , but unfortunately , the agreement that has been reached is far too weak .
It will not do the competitiveness of the car industry any good .
The question is where are we going to sell cars in 2020 ?
Well , we will sell them in Asia , and there they will demand extremely low energy vehicles .
So if we want to benefit the competitiveness of the industry , we should set much higher targets .
The agreement will not benefit the environment either because , even if every commercial vehicle emits 28 % less , no one believes that the amount of traffic will not increase by 2020 .
Thus , the emissions targets aimed at a reduction of 30 % , which we will presumably achieve through the negotiations in Durban in South Africa , will not be met either .
Moreover , not even the economy will benefit from this , because no one is expecting the price of petrol in 2020 to be around SEK 13 or EUR 1.30 per litre .
It will , of course , be much higher than that .
Thus , the calculations on which the Commission 's original proposal was based were much more realistic and even then they were almost too high to be able to make effective economic calculations .
So , unfortunately , this agreement will not benefit competitiveness , the economy or the environment .
On the contrary , I believe that natural technical progress will actually go further than this agreement states .
The planning horizon for the industry will be worse because consumers in 2020 will almost certainly demand cars that emit no more than 120 g CO2 / km .
It is also unfortunate that we reduced the fines for those who do not achieve the targets .
That means we will not even achieve the goal of the legislation - unless it turns out as I believe it will : in other words , that we will nevertheless achieve this by means of natural progress .
It is the same with super-credits : they fool us into believing that the emissions are lower than they really are if an electric car is counted three times .
Unfortunately , therefore , we cannot support this agreement , but I would nevertheless like to thank all those involved .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for moderating part of this debate in Czech .
However , I would chiefly like to thank the rapporteurs and the lead rapporteur , Martin Callanan , for the work they have done .
The law we are debating relates to climate change policy as we know it from the European Parliament , and this is not the place to be criticising the policy and the entire concept .
It is necessary to realise that these are predominantly unilateral steps by the European Parliament , which have no counterparts outside the EU in the rest of the world .
We must consider what would be a sensible motivation and what would be an unreasonable burden for European businesses , and I firmly believe that this report has come close to a sensible motivation .
In this case , I strongly disagree with what was said by the previous speaker , Carl Schlyter .
European competitiveness is not and will not be assisted by hobbling European industry .
All the evidence so far points to the fact that European industry is on the decline and is relocating beyond our borders .
The measures in the area of vans are far more complicated than for cars , and place a greater burden on small businesses , as has already been said here .
I would like to end by thanking all of the rapporteurs .
I regard the compromise that has been reached as an outstanding piece of work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before I begin discussing light commercial vehicles , I would like to remind you that European car manufacturers have achieved the EU 's CO2 product targets for cars several years before the deadline in 2015 , by taking the appropriate technical measures .
It is now clear that the manufacturers were seriously exaggerating during the negotiations on the time period and the targets for the CO2 reduction measures for cars when these were subsequently watered down .
The manufacturers have taken the same approach in their lobbying activities concerning the CO2 reduction targets for light commercial vehicles .
I would like to know how a majority here in Parliament can knowingly repeat this mistake and give in once again to the demands of the automotive industry .
In this era of climate change , I believe that the important issues are protecting the environment and safeguarding the future of the human race .
If Parliament would at least support the Commission 's proposal , this would put the European automotive industry at the cutting edge of technical development and , therefore , allow it to remain competitive .
The Commission proposed a reduction target of 135 grams of CO2 per kilometre .
Following a transition period , the manufacturers would not be required to reach this limit until 2020 .
In my opinion , that would have been feasible .
Instead of this , under pressure from the Council , a poor compromise was reached behind closed doors , according to which car manufacturers must now reduce the CO2 emissions of light commercial vehicles to only 197 grams of CO2 per kilometre by 2020 .
This feeble compromise is a gift to the industry .
Super-credits , phase-in periods and pooling will water down what is already a weak limit even further .
Lobbying by manufacturers among Members of this House and pressure from the vehicle manufacturing countries , namely Germany , France and Italy , in the Council have produced this poor result , which contains a whole series of loopholes .
This report is unacceptable .
It conflicts with the climate objectives of the EU and will slow down the pace of technical innovation .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left will be voting against this report .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , my father is a small businessman .
He owns an electrical company and was only given the opportunity to set up this company due to the tax breaks and opportunities given to him by the Conservative Prime Minister and true Eurosceptic , Margaret Thatcher , back in the 1980s .
Like all small businessmen , he is overburdened with red tape and regulation - much of it emanating from this place , the European Parliament .
My father 's small business remains small .
However , these kinds of businesses are the bedrock of the British economy and they amount to a staggering 73 % of all businesses in the UK .
My father drives a van , and like many small businesses , he is struggling due to the recession .
I have a grave concern that this legislation will put small businesses like my father 's out of business for ever , because we are told that this legislation will , in fact , put up to EUR 5 000 on the price of vans .
Small businessmen can ill afford this cost at a time of economic strife .
The gentleman from the Socialists said that this is a good day for climate change policy in the EU .
However , if this goes through , I guarantee it will be a bad day for small businessmen across the continent .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , why does the honourable gentleman not understand that this measure is designed to improve the fuel efficiency of light commercial vehicles ?
That means reducing the costs of driving them , mile by mile , at a time when fuel prices are at a record high .
This helps businesses , not hinders them .
Mr President , again , this place shows absolutely no knowledge of what goes on in the real world .
People are struggling out there , and what this legislation does - and it has been made quite clear to us - is put up the cost of small vans which are driven by many small businessmen across the continent .
It will put it up by at least EUR 5 000 .
That is totally and utterly wrong , and it is something that we can ill afford in a time of recession .
Mr President , as I hear discussions on ways to screw more money out of the little people in the name of climate change , I am struck by two things .
The first is how no one talks about global warming anymore .
Even the most out-of-touch MEPs have clearly realised that exposés of fraudulent pseudoscience and record cold winters across the globe have made the public , rightly , very sceptical about all the deceitful propaganda about drowning polar bears .
The second is the car park beneath us - Porches , Mercedes , BMWs , SUVs , a showroom of gas-guzzling luxury from the people who tut-tut in disapproval at many white vans and plot to make working lives even harder with speed limiters and financial penalties , all for a dogma based on discredited statistics pedalled by a clique of bought and paid-for academics , funded and hyped by super-rich vested interests in the green industrial complex - Al Gore , Prince Charles , Shell and Goldman Sachs - all of whom stand to steal a fortune from the taxes harvested through wind factory subsidies and carbon trading .
While I appreciate the efforts of some MEPs to blunt the worst excesses of this CO2 hysteria , the plain truth is that anyone who even gives credence to the threadbare hoax of man-made global warming is a collaborator with the deadliest scam in history .
Yes , deadly , because it is not only robbing ordinary people and de-industrialising the West ; it is also right now starving to death hundreds of thousands of the world 's poorest children as food crops are replaced by taxpayer-subsidised biofuels .
But it is boosting profits for Monsanto and giving MEPs all expenses paid trips to palm oil plantations in Malaysia , so that is all right is it not ?
No , it is not , particularly as it is diverting attention from the real crisis - not that we are releasing carbon dioxide from fossil fuels , but that we are beginning to run low on the oil which powers our civilisation .
Every day wasted talking about limiting emissions of nature 's most important fertiliser is a day lost in the struggle to sustain more and more people on less and less energy .
If it was not such a tragedy , it would be a farce .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , Mr Griffin was wrong when he said that this has been a cold winter across the globe .
It was actually just some parts of northern Europe and some central parts of the USA .
Globally , 2010 was one of the two hottest years in recorded history .
The fact that it is colder here now is also quite predictable , because if the Gulf Stream is pressed down by meltwater from the Arctic , this is an explainable effect .
So no , 2010 was a very hot year , climate change is real and the measures we are taking are good for the economy .
Mr President , I do not know if the House noticed , but yesterday was also the record snowfall in Korea for 100 years , so it is not just a few places .
Just as it was two years ago in Copenhagen , when the climate change conference was there , it was the coldest at the climate change conference in Cancún that it had been for decades .
Secondly , there is no evidence whatsoever of meltwater from the Arctic impeding the Gulf Stream .
There has been no change in that whatsoever .
Thirdly , your arguments would be more effective if the climate change computer models had foreseen this a couple of years ago .
They did not .
A couple of years ago , we were told that our children would not know what snow was .
What an absolute nonsense this has been .
Finally , as for the statistics showing a global warming trend , the key factor everyone is ignoring here is that 65 % of the world 's weather stations are within 10 metres of an artificial heat source .
They are virtually all in cities .
The collapse of the Soviet Union meant that most of the weather stations in naturally cold areas were closed down .
That is what has skewed the statistics , which are fundamentally bogus because people , boosted by the United Nations , set about finding man-made global warming in order to impose the solutions they wanted .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on securing this agreement .
It was a difficult agreement to reach , as our debates have clearly shown .
I think everyone will agree with what has been said .
Yes , of course , climate change exists , but commercial vehicles are not vehicles that people buy for the sheer pleasure of driving or because they are passionate about them .
They are vehicles that people use as a tool for their work , which means that the target of 147 grams of CO2 by 2020 strikes the right balance .
I would have even preferred slightly more , but at least this is a proposal that seems to me to be more balanced than the one initially put forward by the Commission .
That proposal would have resulted in technological targets being imposed on manufacturers , with the associated innovation costs having a major financial impact on end consumers , who we do not want to penalise , given that they are going through an exceptional period of crisis .
Nevertheless , I embrace the introduction of incentives for manufacturing high-efficiency vehicles and of penalties for car manufacturers that do not meet the targets .
Therefore , all this is really a step in the right direction .
I am also glad to see that there are penalties .
I am pleased that we have been able to find common ground regarding penalties which are the same as those applied to passenger vehicles .
For these reasons , I will be delighted to vote in favour of this report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the transition towards a low carbon economy and the achievement of the objectives set out in the climate change package mean that we need to establish rules to regulate CO2 emissions in various sectors , including the automotive sector .
I am very pleased with the negotiations , which led to an agreement with the Council to limit emissions to 147g CO2 / km by 2020 .
This is a realistic limit that also represents an excellent balance between environmental , social and industrial rules .
I hope I also played my part in this as shadow rapporteur for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
The agreement reached takes account of the economic crisis that the sector is experiencing and also makes reasonable allowances for the difference between the passenger car sector and the light commercial vehicles sector .
Just as we saw with the regulation on passenger cars , the European automotive sector will also manage to develop green , competitive and environmentally beneficial technology for light commercial vehicles .
I hope it will also manage to take advantage of the environmental challenge to invest even more in innovation and research .
Mr President , maybe we should question whether or not we might have achieved more if this measure had been introduced to improve the fuel efficiency of commercial vehicles rather than to reduce CO2 .
In practice , of course , it is the same , but one is seen as a cost to business , and the other as a saving .
Mr Nuttall says that this measure will increase the price of vehicles by EUR 5 000 .
I suspect it will not increase it by a single euro .
Let us have this debate in three years ' time and see who is right .
The fact is that oil prices are now at USD 100 a barrel .
That is more than the Commission estimated when it undertook its assessments .
The potential savings to business are greater , and I wish the EPP would recognise this .
The EPP has been talking on behalf of big business , of the manufacturers , instead of on behalf of all the businesses which use light commercial vehicles and which need more fuel-efficient technology to drive down costs .
The manufacturers have made great technological progress over recent years .
We should be driving forward that ambition .
I hope that the Commission will come back in its review in a couple of years ' time and ensure that this ambition has a chance to be properly realised .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , does the right honourable gentleman really think that it is correct to vote for legislation that will , in effect , push up the cost of vehicles ?
He knows it will , and I know it will .
In effect , what it will be doing is putting small firms in Liverpool and Manchester - in his own constituency - out of business .
Does he think that is fair ?
Does he think it is morally correct ?
Is he prepared to stand on that platform in the elections in three years ' time ?
Mr President , the UK Government , in the form of the Department for Transport , actually undertook an assessment of the effects of this measure .
It found they were likely to be more beneficial to businesses than even the Commission had estimated .
The net savings on running a vehicle , when fuel prices are at record highs , are greater than any potential increase in the cost of the vehicles - net savings for businesses and lower prices for consumers .
This is what the UK Independence Party is so determined to fight against .
In doing so , it wants businesses to pay more than they need .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal initially set a long-term emissions limit of 135g CO2 / km for light commercial vehicles , to be achieved by 2020 .
However , in the unanimous opinion of manufacturers , it was technically impossible to respect this limit .
If the report had been approved as it was , the level of CO2 would have been reduced by 0.00014 % at a global level , compared to an extremely high economic impact of more than EUR 45 billion for Europe alone , which would inevitably lead to an average price hike of around EUR 3 800 per vehicle .
Despite these problematic issues , an agreement was reached with the Council at first reading that sets the emissions limit to be achieved by 2020 at 147g CO2 / km , subject to feasibility , which must be assessed by the Commission before January 2013 .
In any case , this decision is purely political and has absolutely nothing to do with real industrial or market conditions , or consumer interests .
We will be voting against the report , because we believe that the economic impact is excessive in relation to the insignificant reduction of CO2 at a global level .

( ES ) Mr President , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Callanan , who has worked very hard and , most importantly , achieved an optimum result .
It was not at all easy to reach an agreement at first reading on a regulation as complex as this one .
The motor industry is of vital importance in the European Union .
It is , moreover , an industry that is committed to the European Union 's objective of reducing emissions and to technological innovation .
This agreement is a stable framework that gives legal certainty to our vehicle manufacturers .
I believe that the targets for reducing emissions are both ambitious and realistic .
Manufacturers will have to achieve 147 grams of CO2 per kilometre by 2020 .
I am sure that they are going to succeed , and they will therefore have contributed to the European Union 's objective of reducing emissions by 20 % by that year .
However , there are also other elements of interest in this new regulation , such as super-credits and promoting alternative fuels .
Biofuels are clearly promoted , in line with the EU 's objectives regarding renewable fuels for 2020 .
I am highlighting this obvious fact because if the Commission continues with its hesitant proposals on biofuels , we will not achieve our objective for 2020 .
Finally , I would like to end my speech by congratulating the shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , who has just become a mother and has worked very hard and also helped to make this agreement a success .

( SV ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Callanan , the shadow rapporteurs and everyone else involved in the work on this directive .
We will now finally also have a regulatory instrument for emissions from light commercial vehicles , and that is important .
The directive now needs to be introduced as quickly as possible .
At the same time , we did not go as far as many of us would have liked , and I think we should talk openly and honestly about that .
What we are seeing is an environmental and industrial policy decision that has clearly been influenced by the economic crisis and by the fact that so many European governments , conservative , right-leaning governments , have chosen to respond to this economic crisis by simply making cuts and not making any investments .
The result of this is high unemployment and low demand , and it is affecting both the passenger car industry and the light commercial vehicle industry .
Of course , this could be called realism , but what it amounts to is enforced adaptation to the economic crisis and a policy of cuts .
The Commission was therefore more ambitious even than Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and that is unusual .
I am grateful for the fact that this decision nevertheless contains a review of the emissions targets for 2014 .
I therefore hope that we will get another chance to show that we mean business when it comes to not allowing competitiveness and lofty ambitions on climate policy to conflict with each other , but instead enabling these two factors to drive each other forward .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is with reluctance that I will vote for the final compromise .
The negotiations were dreadful , and to my mind , this vote is a decision imposed as a result of the power play within Parliament and the Council .
The major producing countries , supported by a majority of MEPs who are sensitive to the industry 's arguments , have succeeded in preventing us from setting an ambitious emissions reduction target .
I would point out that the Commission had suggested a target of 135 grams per kilometre by 2020 .
Parliament is therefore being less ambitious than the Commission , and that is regrettable .
The automotive industry , which fought against this text - and we have just had some more examples of this - has evidently not realised that it has everything to gain from pioneering a reduction in emissions , especially since the study by the European Federation for Transport and Environment carried out last November showed that technological solutions do exist .
The study notes that car manufacturers in Europe reduced CO2 emissions for non-commercial vehicles by 2-10 % in 2009 , and that one Japanese manufacturer has all but reached its target six years early .
I will vote for this compromise because we run the risk of destroying this achievement , as small as it may be , with a second reading .
However , I would stress that we are not doing manufacturers any favours by defending the status quo and that , as far as the public authorities are concerned , by failing to encourage innovation , they are not fulfilling their role .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the outcome we have arrived at is extremely ambitious .
I should like to note that CO2 emissions from these vehicles are currently around 200 g per square kilometre .
Reducing this to 147 g therefore cuts this threshold by more than 25 % .
Furthermore , I would emphasise that marginal reductions are the most costly , so we should be careful .
I also think that this particular category of vehicles cannot be compared to passenger cars , as has often been the case in this House .
The cycles of production are much longer and it would have a mere 1.5 % effect on CO2 emissions across the whole transport sector .
If we do not establish our central aim , we will end up penalising a sector that has already suffered an abrupt contraction of more than 30 % , above all , hurting small and medium-sized enterprises , which , just 12 hours ago , all of us in this House confirmed we wanted to support due to the huge economic and social role they play as the only true engine of employment in Europe .
We must therefore be very careful .
I applaud the work that has been done , but we do need to exercise careful supervision .
( NL ) Mr President , the text before us is , indeed , a compromise and we would have liked to have been a little more ambitious here and there , particularly when it comes to the timing and the level of the penalties .
On the other hand , it is important that emission standards are established for this category of vehicles - something which seems to have slipped through the net a bit , seeing as a number of rules already exist for both passenger cars and goods vehicles .
The trend is heading in the right direction , but - as you have said yourself - the number of LCVs has increased enormously in recent years and it looks as if that number will continue to rise in years to come .
As a member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I would like to return briefly to speed limits .
We in the Committee have proposed that the speed limit be set at 120 kilometres per hour from 2018 , which is really not unreasonable .
As you know , there is already a limit for goods vehicles , and I think that , for both environmental and road safety reasons , it would be advisable to lay this down in law .
It seems to me that you have to do that at European level , because there is little sense in leaving this to Member States .
Consequently , Commissioner , I would like to invite you to revisit this issue , together with your colleague , Mr Kallas - he is here in the Chamber with us - study it and put forward a proposal .
I think that this would be a positive thing for your respective areas of responsibility : the environment and road safety .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Hedegaard , ladies and gentlemen , we are not here today to hold a discussion on the climate .
Instead , we simply need to do what is possible .
I welcome the compromise that has been reached .
By restricting emissions to 147 grams per kilometre from 2020 , we are setting very clear standards .
This will create incentives for the development of new technologies to increase energy efficiency and combat climate change .
The users of the vehicles will also benefit from these innovations , which will save them fuel and therefore money .
Small vans are primarily used by tradespeople , small and medium-sized companies , farmers and winegrowers .
They generally only travel short distances and are often driven for many years until the company is passed on to the next owner .
Therefore , the costs of these vehicles must remain manageable .
Higher investment costs must be funded on the basis of energy efficiency and energy savings .
The long-term goal of 2020 leaves enough time for transition periods so that research organisations and the industry can develop and manufacture new engines .
The target which we have set for ourselves is realistic , achievable and still efficient .
I hope that it will receive broad support .
( PL ) Mr President , everyone involved in road transport , both manufacturers of passenger vehicles and manufacturers of light commercial vehicles , should contribute to limiting overall CO2 emissions .
I therefore welcome the compromise worked out by the European Parliament , the Council and the European Commission , which sets limits on emissions and penalties for non-compliance with these limits .
Setting mandatory and ambitious limits which are also realistic will pose a challenge to the innovative potential of the European automotive industry .
It will act as an incentive to step up research and development efforts aimed at finding new design solutions which can be used to manufacture vehicles which are more environmentally friendly .
We must have our own green technologies so that we can avoid importing vehicles , as has been the case with hybrid technology .
I believe that the legislative decisions we have taken will act as an appropriate stimulus to mobilise European manufacturers , who will realise that green technologies represent an opportunity for development .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his position , and I note that Parliament finds itself in a tight corner between a Commission that is very ambitious and a Council that is , as usual , cautious , between climate sceptics and climate critics , and between industry supporters and environmentalists .
This is therefore a balanced position that remains ambitious , since the target of 147 grams in 2020 will give industry the time to make the technological leap while simultaneously encouraging it to be highly efficient .
The extension of the amendment period until 2018 is positive and will make research into , and the production of , non-polluting vehicles more attractive .
I would like to make two comments by way of conclusion .
Naturally , I welcome the fact that the proposal has been passed at first reading , and I did not fully understand the comments by our fellow Member just now , when he said that he preferred second readings .
Secondly , like Mr El Khadraoui , I deplore the absence of speed limitation devices , as it means that we will continue to be overtaken on motorways by the only vehicles that no longer keep to the speed limit , namely , light commercial vehicles .
( RO ) Mr President , this regulation marks a step forward in terms of gradually achieving the CO2 emission reduction targets for light commercial vehicles in Europe .
This will be possible to achieve by creating incentive schemes for making vehicles more efficient and by imposing penalties on manufacturers who do not meet these targets .
However , I do not think that the new legislation on CO2 reduction should jeopardise the position of either car manufacturers or the customer .
The new regulations must pay heed to the concerns of SMEs and European car manufacturers , which are asking for the gradual introduction of the pollution limits to start after 2015 , as the vehicles which will be sold in 2014 are already at the development and production stage .
The figure of 147 grams is an acceptable compromise compared to the figures which have been mentioned .
However , the Commission must monitor closely relations between the car industry and users to assess this measure 's impact on prices and , by extension , on the activity of small enterprises .
( PL ) Mr President , the manufacture of light commercial vehicles and related technological issues require much greater investment and a longer-term strategic plan and manufacturing cycle than is the case for passenger vehicles .
Approval of such a long-term goal was essential in this respect in order to provide industry with guaranteed security of manufacturing .
On the other hand , we should not neglect the target limit of 147 g to be achieved by 2020 .
The initial short-term goal which has been set of a limit of 175 g , with a view to achieving the goal of 147 g by 2020 , will significantly increase the cost of manufacturing light commercial vehicles , making them more expensive for many small companies which use them as tools for their daily work .
I hope that this will not result in a marked drop in sales of new vehicles , which , in turn , would mean that technologically older vehicles which are responsible for much higher levels of emissions would stay on the roads longer .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the compromise reached with the Council certainly seems more balanced and realistic compared with the initial proposal of the Commission , which was so ambitious that it appeared utopian in parts , as it did not take industrial conditions and the impact on the market into due consideration .
Overly ideological environmentalism always runs the risk of making tangible results less likely , resulting in harm being done to the environment .
In my opinion , despite the fact that the long-term objective of 147g CO2 / km by 2020 is not yet optimal , it could turn out to be more reasonable and realistic than what was originally proposed .
I also welcome the planned incentives for eco-innovations but , in my opinion , a critical issue remains : the decision on emissions from so-called completed vehicles , meaning those built in a number of stages .
I hope the Commission respects its commitment to submit a specific legislative proposal on this before the end of this year .

( RO ) Mr President , I welcome the fine job which the rapporteur , Mr Callanan , and my colleague , Mr Groote , have done in completing this report .
This regulation will force car manufacturers to develop new green technologies and , although this seemingly imposes a new burden on them , it may boost the car industry 's competitiveness on the global market .
At the same time , it will help meet CO2 emission reduction commitments , in line with the European Union 's strategy .
The compromise amendments which have been agreed provide sufficient time for manufacturers to prepare the implementation of new technologies , as well as for the Commission to develop an effective mechanism for monitoring breaches of the provisions in this area .
( PT ) Mr President , the management of innovation , in other words , the research and development of new technologies and production processes , their implementation on a large scale and the choice of the appropriate time to implement them , should have the protection of the public interest , improvement of quality of life for the public and environmental protection , first and foremost , as its guiding criteria .
These principles , rather than the narrow commercial interests of industry and business , should primarily guide the efforts towards innovation and the management of their implementation .
This also applies to the case of vehicle emissions .
Given that the transport sector accounts for a substantial proportion of CO2 emissions , an appropriate part of the efforts at reduction should be focused on this area .
It is therefore important to pursue an increase in vehicle energy efficiency , a reduction in fuel consumption and , in general , the development of low carbon technologies .
This is now made possible by scientific and technical developments , which take into account the progressive and inexorable scarcity of fossil fuels at the very outset , something that it is already vital to heed .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I will be brief .
I am going to vote for this text because I believe that this compromise is a step in the right direction .
At the same time , however , I regret that it has not gone as far as the proposal made by Mrs Hedegaard .
Therefore , I would now like you to tell us , following the debate and before the vote in a few hours ' time , what the procedure you are going to adopt for the next two years consists of , since a review is due to take place in 2013 , thus allowing us without delay , as our group rapporteur Mr Groote wanted , to take this fight further in order to reduce pollution by these light commercial vehicles .
That is my question to you , Commissioner , and I know that you will be tenacious so that we can make progress in spite of this industrial lobbying , which I , like a number of my fellow Members who have spoken on this matter , consider inappropriate .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Hedegaard , I cannot conceal the fact that I am one of those people who would much rather have adopted a target of 135 grams today .
However , I believe that this compromise reflects reality and shows that we are prepared to make a serious joint effort to limit and reduce CO2 emissions .
The European Union has recently succeeded in reducing overall CO2 emissions by 9 % .
However , emissions in the transport sector have increased by almost 30 % .
Purely from this perspective , I believe that the move we are making today is another step in the right direction .
However , we should not allow ourselves to be distracted from the fact that the real problems in the transport sector lie elsewhere , given the overall increase of 29 % .
In other words , we need to focus heavily on developing public transport .
We must not increase the burdens on small and medium-sized companies .
Instead , we must make things easier for commuters and speed up the construction of railways .
We will achieve much more by moving from individual transport to public transport .
I think we are taking the first step in the right direction because , after all , we are talking about a reduction of 25 % .
( NL ) Mr President , I wish to congratulate everyone , but I would have liked to have seen a more ambitious result .
Much more ambitious .
And why ?
I will give you five reasons : more innovation , greater competitiveness for Europe , the environment , obviously , because this could have saved us raw materials , and it would have been cheaper for the consumer , too .
We in Europe are very dependent on imports of raw materials for energy .
With cleaner technology , we would have made many more savings and we would also have given an enormous impetus to our strong automotive industry to come up with clean , intelligent technology which could be sold anywhere in the rest of the world and which could have given us a headstart .
This would have been cheaper and more efficient , precisely because we are so dependent on imports .
It would also have translated into savings for the consumer .
The purchase price might have been higher , but it would ultimately have worked out cheaper per kilometre .
That would have been very much of interest to small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular .
For the Dutch , the saying ' Look after the cents and the euros will look after themselves ' is still very interesting !

( ES ) Mr President , I would also like to thank the rapporteurs , and especially our shadow rapporteur , Mr Groote , for a proposal that will encourage our industry to become greener .
However , I find it deeply regrettable that we have lost a golden opportunity to introduce speed limiters , which are essential tools for helping improve air quality .
I must point out that the directive has already been compulsory for more than a month and a half , as demonstrated in cities such as Barcelona , where the socialist council has set the speed limit at 80 km per hour , and the difference has been felt compared with other cities such as Madrid or Valencia that have conservative councils , where the population is at high risk of suffering from allergies and respiratory diseases .
Speed limiters would have helped us to reduce these problems , and also to improve road safety and cut the number of human lives lost .
It is therefore regrettable , and we trust that we will be able to achieve this in future legislation .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first , a brief remark to Mr Pargneaux who asked what the plan was for the next few years .
First , of course , as we have agreed , the Commission must assess the progress made and ascertain whether things are feasible .
That is what we have all agreed , but , of course , we have reason to believe that it is feasible because our impact assessment has already demonstrated this .
We are aware of the cost and consequences of whatever we do , and the level we choose to impose .
So we believe that it will be feasible but we are , of course , looking into this .
I would just like to say that reopening the debate as to the 2020 target could lead to uncertainty in planning , so , of course , we should now stress that a long-term target has been set .
Many manufacturers appreciate that because that gives them the long-term planning that they really need , the predictability that they need .
In the end , they appreciate that .
That was also an answer to Mr Vlasák and his concerns .

Just a brief remark to Mr Nuttall - I do not know if he is still here - or rather to Mr Nuttall 's father , because he has absolutely nothing to worry about , except that his son is using figures from a source I am not familiar with .
The fact is that the cost of doing this is much less than Mr Nuttall claimed and the money saved in fuel consumption is greater than the cost .
So , in the end , Mr Nuttall 's father will not only save money , but will have a net gain .
He can also explain that his children and his grandchildren will have cleaner air .
At the same time , what we are trying to do here is to boost innovation in a very important industrial sector for Europe .
This is what we are trying to do .
Wrapping up this debate , I would just say that we have the benefit of the wide-ranging experience we have gained in the field of car legislation .
In every case , it turned out that the manufacturers could comply with legislation faster and with less expenditure than they had claimed .
I would not be surprised if the same thing happens with vans .
So regulation for cars is in place .
Now it is the turn of vans .
I appreciate the very broad support for this piece of legislation .
The next thing we have to look into in this field will be heavy-duty vehicles and there , of course , I greatly look forward to working in cooperation with the European Parliament .
rapporteur . - Mr President , let me respond briefly to many of the points that have been made .
Mr Schlyter said he thought it was bad for European industry and it would result in more light commercial vehicles being built in Asia .
I have to say that I simply do not understand that remark .
We are setting the most challenging targets in the world by far , much tighter than the rules in the States or anything that exists in China or the Far East .
Mrs Wils compared this regulation with the passenger car regulation .
In my view , that is a false comparison .
The opportunities to reduce emissions in passenger cars are much greater in terms of lightweighting and changing the fuel mix .
There is already a much higher diesel penetration in the vans market .
Of course , by their nature , vans are already much more utilitarian and are bought by business customers .
Mr Nuttall , I am afraid , has not stayed for the end of this debate , but he is wrong in the figures that he has given .
This will result in overall cost savings for many businesses .
I have to say that I would have a little more respect for the remarks that he made if indeed the EFD Group had bothered to send a single representative to any of our trialogue meetings or to any of our shadow meetings to make the point that they are fond of quoting on behalf of small businesses .
( Applause )
In conclusion , I think this is a good result .
It produces the best balance , first of all , in favour of costs for businesses , but also in terms of environmental improvement .
Whatever view you take of climate change , fuel efficiency - using precious resources more efficiently - has to be a good thing .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday today ( 15 February 2011 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - The agreement which has been reached with Council is the result of tough negotiations in the face of intense lobbying from industry .
Throughout the whole process , we have resisted heavy pressure from manufacturers to weaken the regulation and , in particular , to reduce the ambition of the long-term CO2 reduction targets .
It was a difficult dilemma , as many of us have car industries which are already struggling because of the economic context .
But we knew from our experience with the passenger cars regulation that the car industry has made enormous progress in terms of innovation and developing cleaner technology because the legislative framework encouraged them in the right direction .
We wanted to repeat this success with legislation for vans - not just for environmental reasons , but because greater fuel efficiency will ultimately bring costs down for many businesses .
We have a compromise text which , although not as ambitious as we would have liked , will lead to a significant reduction in CO2 emissions from vans and contribute to the EU 's emission reduction ambitions for 2020 and beyond .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and shadows on their successful negotiations with the Council .
The road transport sector is the second highest source of greenhouse gas emissions in the EU , and its emissions have not stopped increasing .
All types of vehicles , including light commercial vehicles , should therefore be covered by regulations aimed at reducing these emissions .
The objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions will be better achieved if there is legislation covering the whole EU , rather than national legislation with different objectives .
That said , we need to combine ambition with realism and good sense .
Therefore , and given that small and medium-sized enterprises are most likely to use light commercial vehicles , and that these make up 99.8 % of companies and 67.4 % of jobs within the EU , we should not pursue goals that might jeopardise them .
I therefore agree with the target of 147 g of CO2 emissions per kilometre for new light commercial vehicles in the EU , if it is confirmed that this option is viable .
I also welcome the fact that a single speed limit for this type of vehicle has not been introduced at EU level .
I welcome this measure , as it is very important that a balance be maintained between protecting the environment and protecting jobs and the competitiveness of SMEs in the EU .
Rights of passengers in bus and coach transport ( debate )
The next item is the report by Antonio Cancian , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport and amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2006 / 2004 ( 00063 / 2010 - - .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the negotiation that I led by myself for the first year and then , during conciliation - the first conciliation procedure after the Treaty of Lisbon , I would note - with the guidance of Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou and the support of the Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Mr Simpson , has been more arduous and difficult than expected .

Through this regulation , Europe 's 70 million bus and coach passengers will also enjoy a range of rights that until now were much reduced or almost non-existent in comparison with other means of transport .
During negotiations on this important issue with three rotating presidencies , the goals we wanted to fulfil were as follows :
a regulation that would protect non-discriminatory access to transport by bus and coach ;
a regulation that would bear in mind the particular characteristics of the sector , which involves small and medium-sized enterprises which could not have additional and excessive economic burdens imposed upon them ;
a regulation that would fill a regulatory vacuum that left the bus and coach transport sector in an anomalous position compared with other means of transport and would therefore ensure minimal guarantees for all passengers ;
a regulation that would protect the rights of persons with reduced mobility as much as possible , given the intransigent attitudes within the Council ;
a regulation that would bear in mind the needs of an ageing population for whom public transport will be an essential resource in the coming decades .
The text voted on today is the fruit of a very hard-fought compromise , but one which pleases us given the direction taken in the debate and in the negotiation itself .
The main problems were primarily encountered in defining the scope of application .
In fact , the regulation applies to all regular services , whether regional , national or international , over a distance greater than 250 km .
In any case , we have prepared a list of fundamental rights that cannot be ignored , irrespective of such a distance .
These rights focus principally on the right to transport , as well as training , information and responsibility .
At distances of over 250 km , the regulation essentially provides for compensation and assistance in the event of an accident , the rights of passengers in the event of cancellation or delay , and the rights of persons with disabilities or persons with reduced mobility .
Furthermore , with regard to complaints , the carriers must set up and activate a system for dealing with complaints relating to the rights and obligations referred to in this regulation .
The time needed to provide a definitive response cannot be more than three months from receipt of the complaint .
Lastly , each Member State must designate a new body or , better still , an existing body , responsible for enforcing this regulation .
The Member States will be able to avoid implementing the regulation for a period of four years , which can be renewed once upon prior notification to the Commission of the reasons for this .
Member States are also asked and urged to develop a future single ticket for each transport type and a single national body responsible for passengers ' rights in all means of transport .
The final text can be deemed a pleasing and balanced compromise .
The outcome of the conciliation procedure must be seen as a victory for Parliament .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , it is a pleasure for me to take part in this debate on the proposal for a regulation on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
This is a very important moment , as our discussions on this legislative act are coming to a close after two years .
First of all , on behalf of the Council , I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to the European Parliament for its cooperation and for the sprit of compromise that allowed us to reach an agreement in the Conciliation Committee to the benefit of EU bus and coach passengers , in particular , as regards disabled persons and passengers with reduced mobility .
The discussions among the three institutions have not been easy , but they were always constructive and guided by a spirit of compromise .
The joint text on which an agreement was reached at the Conciliation Committee meeting , and which will hopefully be adopted today , represents a compromise across political groups .
Therefore , I would like to pay tribute to all involved in the work on this legislative proposal and , in particular , to Vice-President Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , Brian Simpson - Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Mr Cancian - the rapporteur , and the shadow rapporteurs , for their work .
Together , they have had to bring the legislative process to a successful outcome .
My thanks also go to Commissioner Kallas and his team and to their counterparts from the secretariats in Parliament and the Council .
Together , they worked tirelessly in helping to move things forward .
Last but not least , I would like to express my appreciation for the excellent work of the Belgian Presidency in securing the necessary support within the Council for the compromise reached in the Conciliation Committee .
I am convinced that the joint text resulting from the Conciliation Committee meeting represents a fair balance between the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport and the interests of carriers , most of which are small- and medium-sized enterprises .
In the Council 's view , the main objective of the regulation is to grant rights to passengers travelling on regular services where the scheduled distance is equal to , or more than , 250 kilometres .
Furthermore , a guaranteed number of rights will apply independently of the distance travelled .
The new rules focus , in particular , on helping disabled persons and passengers with reduced mobility .
In the discussions between the three institutions , we were able to find mutually acceptable solutions on a number of difficult issues , namely the scope , the rights of passengers in the event of cancellations or delays , compensation and assistance in the event of accidents , provisions easing the transition to the new rules , and finally , the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
As you already know , the Council approved the joint text at its meeting on 31 January 2011 .
This legislative act will therefore be signed tomorrow .
Its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union can be expected in March .
( IT ) Mr President , lastly I should like to congratulate Mr Cancian on his excellent work .
Let me congratulate you on a job well done .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the legislative proposal on the rights of passengers travelling by bus and by coach that we are discussing today is the result of a very difficult process , including conciliation .
Long negotiations on the night of 30 November 2010 at the Conciliation Committee led to a breakthrough and a compromise after more than two years of negotiations .
Let me convey my heartfelt thanks to you for making this happen .
First , to Vice-Chair Madam Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for her skilful leadership , to Mr Simpson , Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Mr Cancian , the rapporteur , and , of course , we should also mention the Belgian Presidency .
I am grateful to Parliament for always having pushed for a high level of passenger protection .
After the endorsement by the Council on 31 January , I invite you to also adopt this regulation and formally conclude the procedure .
The proposal on the rights of passengers travelling by bus and coach now completes the arrangements for the protection of travellers and will ensure that passengers benefit from the same basic standards of service quality wherever they travel in the Union .
The compromise text contains important achievements : it provides a set of basic rights for all passengers travelling by bus and coach .
As Mr Cancian has already mentioned , there were difficult points unresolved until the last moment of negotiations .
Some may say that the scope of the regulation on bus and coach services of 250 km and more is too limited and they would have wished to see passengers in local transport protected too .
Others may claim that the text contains provisions whose implementation would be costly , in particular , for smaller operators .
I am of the opinion that the text represents a very well-balanced compromise .
We should not forget that a number of basic rights apply to services of all kinds and provide special protection to the most vulnerable passengers .
On the other hand , potential cost implications for the industry have been kept to a minimum .
All in all , the compromise text constitutes a real advance for travelling citizens and for the image of the industry .


Mr President , Mrs Győri , Mr Kallas , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Cancian in particular for his hard work , because this was not a straightforward dossier , but we have reached a good conclusion .
Compromises obviously always have their advantages and disadvantages .
Some people will think that we have gone too far and others that we have not gone far enough .
The process in the Council was not easy and , therefore , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Council for enabling us to reach a compromise at the last minute .
I think the scope of the report is correct .
We have said that three countries are not directly affected .
However , because Luxembourg is involved in a cross-border context , there are actually only two countries which the regulations do not affect directly .
In the case of local public transport , it will be easy to include provisions in the requirement specifications for tenders which state that passengers ' rights must be respected and reinforced .
Therefore , it is not realistic to criticise us for excluding local transport .
This can be dealt with at a regional level .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will give its overall support to this compromise .
We see passengers ' rights as a complete package and we hope that it will be possible in the near future to produce a consolidated version covering the whole area , so that we can soon put in place rights which will benefit the citizens rather than the lawyers .
In my view , there are still a number of problems , particularly with regard to the implementation , where the regulations are not useful to citizens and where they are not clear enough to establish passengers ' rights .
Against this background , I would like to thank everyone involved for their hard work .
I hope that we can achieve a large majority in plenary in support of this healthy compromise .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , firstly , I would like to express my thanks , and the thanks of the S & D Group , to Mr Cancian , for his hard work on what was indeed a very difficult and very complicated dossier .
Two questions spring to mind when you look at this particular agreement .
The first is , ' Is it ideal ? ' , and the second is , ' Does it move us forward ? ' .
In response to the first question , from a parliamentary point of view , I think we have to say that it is not ideal .
By the very nature of it being a compromise , there are things there that Parliament has had to give up , particularly on the scope , where we would have liked to have seen a smaller distance before the regulation kicks in .
But does it move us forward ?
Well , yes it does , because we will now have in place a similar set of rights for buses and coaches to those that we currently have for other modes of transport .
It also moves us forward in our commitment to improving access to bus and coach travel for those people with reduced mobility , and indeed disabled people , throughout the European Union .
I would just pick up on one issue , which concerns asking for staff to be trained to help people with reduced mobility and disabilities so that they can have the same access to public transport as those of us who are able-bodied have .
I know there is a derogation for Member States to push this back for five years in this area , and I hope they will not use that .
Finally , I think it is important for us to support this final agreement so that the rights for all the modes of transport are now in place .
I know we will go forward in future to look at them again and revise them again , but I think we have made a step forward in this area and that Parliament should support the agreement that Mr Cancian reached with the Council in conciliation .
Mr President , a long procedure has now come to an end , which is good news .
There are some positive aspects to all of this .
One is that the basic rights for people with disabilities include the right to information and the right to access .
Another positive feature is that the damages paid by small and medium-sized businesses have been kept to a reasonable level , which was not originally the case .
It is also good that we have reached an agreement , because otherwise , we would have been stuck in the conciliation procedure and there would have been no regulations at all covering one specific area of transport .
However , I would also like to pick up on some negative points , as we have not been able to produce a genuine European solution .
Although we say that the free movement of people , goods and services is a European principle , we have not reached a European solution in this area , if three countries are not included and other countries do not have bus routes of this length .
The right of people with disabilities to be accompanied , which is something they often need in order to be able to travel , is only guaranteed over long distances .
In addition , the clause on major natural disasters , which does not apply to air travel , because damages had to be paid in the case of the ash cloud , has been applied to buses and coaches .
This means that poorer passengers in particular who are making short journeys will not be compensated and have no rights .
That , of course , is not a good thing .
Therefore , because of this mix of positive and negative features , we abstained from voting during the midnight session in the conciliation procedure and we will do the same today .
Mr President , despite the EU being a signatory to the relevant convention , the rights of people with reduced mobility are not taken into consideration in this dossier .
I have mentioned this at the beginning of my comments on this report , because I think its most serious failing is the fact that we have always included the restriction ' if possible ' .
Unfortunately , I am sufficiently familiar with these situations to be able to say that this ' if possible ' generally results in it not being possible to provide an efficient solution for people with reduced mobility .
I was particularly disappointed when a restriction was placed on the formats used to make information available about bus and coach travel .
This has also been toned down , so that people with reduced mobility cannot even find out about where they can get assistance and so on .
There are other problems resulting from the last round of negotiations , which Mr Cancian has really put his heart into , and I would like to thank him for that .
He has made every effort to produce a good result , but his attempts have been blocked by the Council 's hard-hearted approach .
Another aspect is the distance of 250 kilometres which has already been mentioned .
I am afraid that longer routes will be divided up and that routes of 500 kilometres will be broken down into two parts , so that there is no risk of having to grant passengers their rights .
This must be taken into consideration during the implementation process .
One good feature was the introduction of an arbitration body , which will be helpful for consumers .
Other positive aspects include the fact that the principle of constant improvement applies and that training will be provided for staff .
However , in other respects , ladies and gentlemen , this is by no means a masterpiece of European legislation .

Mr President , I , too , should like to add my thanks to all parties involved in reaching this compromise , but I should especially like to thank Mr Cancian , who , I believe , found absolutely the correct possibilities for compromise on behalf of Parliament .
With the inclusion of the rights of passengers travelling by bus and coach , we have , in principle , now introduced passenger rights in all modes of transport .
Of course , it could be said that as between different modes of transport , these rights vary greatly , when it comes to levels of compensation , depending on the length of delay or the removal of a route served by that mode of transport .
Yet , even if our passengers in the European Union may get confused in the initial years , this still represents a step forward in ensuring passenger rights , and the fact that these rights for passengers travelling by bus and coach are the very last to be introduced shows that this was perhaps the most difficult step of all .
I am particularly pleased about basic rights for the disabled and persons with special needs , and also that these rights apply to them on bus journeys of below 250 km , with the one exception referred to by Mr Simpson , namely , that operators offering these services may defer staff training .
I very much hope that this will not be done maliciously , just as the Member States may not defer implementation of this directive for four years twice over , until the latest possible date .
Thank you .
Mr President , the rights of passengers in all forms of transport have become an increasingly important topic of debate in the European Parliament in recent years .
I must say that in many cases , I see problems which may arise from the application of passenger rights , and insuring against these problems will surely be a very lucrative area for many financial institutions .
On the other hand , fares will logically rise as a result of these new costs .
It is nothing new that the Council has attempted to change the basic elements of the draft regulation fundamentally with regard to passenger rights in bus and coach transport .
We are familiar with this position of the Council from previous conciliation proceedings .
In this context , I would like to thank the Vice President of the delegation , Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , the Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Brian Simpson , and the rapporteur , Antonio Cancian , for a fine piece of work .
They have achieved what is a genuinely very reasonable compromise .
I regard the following elements as being particularly positive :
1. the definition of long-distance transport as transport where the length of the entire route is in excess of 250 km , with the proviso that the regulation will also apply to people using the long-distance route only as part of their journey ;
2. improving the position - even if it is not ideal - of people with disabilities and reduced mobility in connection with this mode of transport ;
3. compensation and assistance in case of an accident .
I would like to note here that , in the case of damage to equipment such as wheelchairs , compensation of the full amount is envisaged , which entails a level of uncertainty , and it will surely be necessary to clarify the formulation for insurance purposes , for example , through an upper limit ;
4. the rights of passengers where journeys are disrupted or delayed are relatively clearly set out .
I also consider the improved information for passengers to be positive ;
5. like most of my fellow Members , I welcome the fact that the transitional period for implementing this regulation should be reduced to a maximum of four years .
On the other hand , I am not at all pleased at the possibility of extending this period by a further four years .
I believe there will be no fundamental problem even in setting out the application of passenger rights on routes parallel with sections of long-distance transport in the near future .
A question remains as to the setting of financial limits , of course , with the absence of an inflation supplement to adjust the financial limits in accordance with the euro exchange rate , so that the limits remain the same in real terms .
I believe the agreement is a good compromise .
The ultimate aim is the further expansion of passenger rights on all forms of transport , and this additional step in bus and coach transport is definitely a successful outcome for the conciliation process .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left supports this outcome .
Mr President , it is good that following the debate and coordination of positions , the final text can be regarded as a very satisfactory and well balanced compromise .
It manages to secure the rights of passengers without , at the same time , imposing a heavy burden on carriers , most of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
In particular , the outcome of the conciliation procedure can be regarded as successful for the European Parliament , and I congratulate it on this .
Taking account of the steady growth of this transport sector , the aim of this proposal is to establish EU-wide rights for the protection of passengers comparable to those in other modes of transport and to secure a level playing field between carriers from different Member States as well as the various modes of transport .
The regulation strengthens passengers ' entitlement to compensation for death , including reasonable funeral expenses , or personal injury , as well as for the loss of or damage to luggage due to accidents .
Moreover , in the event of an accident , passengers are entitled to assistance to cover their immediate practical needs , including , where necessary , provision of food and clothes , transport , facilitation of first assistance , and accommodation .
Where travel is cancelled or delayed for more than 120 minutes , passengers shall have the right to compensation amounting to 50 % of the ticket price , in addition to the reimbursement of the ticket price .
The regulation also strengthens the provision of assistance for disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility , which is very important .
Passengers must receive updated information in real time by electronic means .
This is a good decision , congratulations !
( DE ) Madam President , improving the rights of passengers on regular bus and coach services is a desirable goal .
However , some points in the proposal go too far .
For example , passengers are entitled to up to two nights in a hotel if the departure of a regular bus service is delayed by more than 90 minutes .
However , road transport is often subject to factors which are outside the control of the individual bus operators , such as traffic jams caused by accidents , poor weather conditions and inadequate snow clearance .
The consequences of this will be costly liability cases where it will not be possible to apply the principle that the party responsible is liable for the damages .
The most recent EU regulation on rail passengers ' rights is in a similar position .
Companies now have to pay for delays which they have not caused .
For example , the Austrian federal railway company is liable for the number of hours that trains are delayed , which amounted to a total of 2 800 last year , when they arrive very late from Germany .
We must avoid inappropriate measures like this in future .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Kallas , ladies and gentlemen , I very much welcome the result of the conciliation procedure .
When the regulation is implemented , bus and coach passengers , including those with reduced mobility , will have the same high level of protection that applies on other forms of transport .
In addition , the regulation guarantees a high overall level of consumer protection and takes into consideration the fact that this transport sector consists mainly of small and medium-sized companies .
The extreme requirements which would have made bus transport almost impossible have been removed , together with those that would have excluded the majority of the Member States from the scope of the regulation .
Bus and coach services which benefit the majority of citizens must also provide a high quality service for disabled people and people with reduced mobility .
They should have the right to receive help and this must be provided free of charge in the interests of social integration .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to thank Mr Cancian for his efforts in obtaining this difficult compromise .
Thanks to this regulation , bus and coach passengers can enjoy rights similar to those of passengers on other modes of transport , such as trains and boats .
The regulation , which applies to all national and international services wherever the distance to be covered is equal to or greater than 250 km , also protects passengers using regular services over shorter distances .
I am referring , in particular , to disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility , who have been guaranteed non-discriminatory access to transport , the right to compensation in the event of loss of or damage to wheelchairs , as well as training on disabilities for bus and coach employees .
I am also delighted that an agreement has been reached on compensation for death , including reasonable funeral expenses , or personal injury , and loss of or damage to luggage due to accidents .
I also consider it a positive step that passengers can choose between continuing the journey at no additional cost or reimbursement of the ticket price in case of cancellation , a delay of more than two hours , or overbooking .
In terms of information for passengers , I think it would have been useful to provide them with information on connections with other means of transport , thereby also ensuring dialogue between bus and rail passenger transport services .
Lastly , I am very pleased that during negotiations , we managed to research and guarantee the maximum level of assistance for disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility , giving them the option of being accompanied at no extra cost .

( ES ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Cancian , who has worked very hard to reach this agreement , and following complex negotiations , this document has been agreed upon .
Progress has been made on passenger rights in terms of compensation and assistance in the event of an accident , cancellation or delay , and in terms of the recognition of basic passenger rights , irrespective of distance ; the agreement also includes the rights of disabled people and those with reduced mobility .
However , the definition of the scope of application , which is journeys longer than 250 km , means that three countries remain outside this European legislation .
In our view , this is not sufficient , although we acknowledge the progress that has been made compared with what there was initially .
Our group will therefore abstain .
( PL ) Madam President , today , the European Parliament is sending out a very positive message to passengers , taxpayers and European voters who use buses and coaches , including disabled persons .
The people who vote for us and pay our wages expect us to take concrete decisions of precisely this kind .
There have , of course , been comments in this Chamber to the effect that this is not the most important of matters in the wider scheme of things , and no doubt it is not .
However , I believe that it is a very significant step forward which will make Europe and the European Union more humane and more open to the needs not of politicians , but of consumers , or , in other words , those who use the various means of transport .
I would like to thank my neighbour , Mr Cancian , very much for his diligent work as rapporteur .
( DA ) Madam President , bus passengers on long journeys have more or less the same rights as air , train and boat passengers in respect of delays , cancellations , lost luggage and in a large number of other areas .
This is fine in principle .
However , I would nevertheless like to raise a couple of points of criticism .
People with reduced mobility have been granted more rights in this regard here .
However , not all buses can accept both disabled and able-bodied passengers at the same time , and not all buses can be converted to enable them to carry disabled people .
Thus , there is still a long way to go in this area if we want to achieve the highest possible level of equality .
Ticket prices for long journeys are most often kept as low as they can go in order to be able to compete with air traffic .
I therefore consider it impossible for small bus companies to be able to pay all of the claims for compensation and rights that are being called for here .
Their ability to be competitive will be severely reduced and they will rapidly come under threat of closure .
This can hardly be in the interests of the Union , because the EU very much wants to support small and medium-sized enterprises .

( DE ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate everyone involved , but in particular , Mr Cancian , for all his efforts during the tough and long-winded process of reaching a compromise on this difficult dossier .
Some of the successes have already been mentioned , but there were also disappointments , in particular , with regard to the scope and other small points which have been referred to .
By coming to this compromise on bus and coach transport , we have established passengers ' rights on all types of transport .
The next step which we need to take is to create a common , coherent and efficient framework programme for all passengers ' rights .
It is particularly important for the credibility of the EU among the citizens of Europe that we put in place fair and clearly defined rights .
In order to be credible , we must ensure that the rights across all the different means of transport are coherent .
The criteria relating to air passengers ' rights must not be fundamentally different from those of rail passengers , for example .
Therefore , it is particularly important that we do not base our framework programme on the lowest , weakest standards .
Instead , we must set ourselves ambitious goals on behalf of the citizens of Europe .

( NL ) Madam President , I would , of course , like to start by thanking the rapporteur for his efforts , as well as the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Simpson and everybody who has contributed to the result ; the Belgian Presidency should not go unmentioned , either .
However , let me start with a point of criticism , addressed to the Council , in particular .
I regret the fact that the scope applies only to journeys of 250 km .
From a European perspective , it would make sense if all cross-border links fell under the provisions of this directive .
Even when confined to those 250 kilometre journeys , the directive barely received enough support from the Member States to pass .
Judging not just from this dossier , but also from many other dossiers , it appears that it is becoming increasingly hard to get a majority of Member States to reason in the interests of the consumer or from a European perspective , and I find that very worrying .
Having said that , this regulation completes the list .
We now have European rules on passenger rights for all transport modes .
The next step - and the Commissioner has announced that he will take action on this - must be to learn from the experience gained in the various sectors and to achieve a more integrated approach to passenger rights .
This should be enforced on the ground , in particular .
This regulation will mean a step forward , in particular , for people with reduced mobility .
They will no longer be refused access and will be able to count on assistance , if needed .
That is important , in my opinion .
As with other transport modes , compensation has been provided for in a number of cases and there are accommodation arrangements for stranded passengers in the event of lengthy delays .
For these reasons , we want to support this compromise .
We are not doing so with a great deal of enthusiasm , because the regulation will not come into force until two years from now .
However , it is a step in the right direction and it represents a compromise between the Council 's extreme position , on the one hand , and our more ambitious targets , on the other .
( ET ) Madam President , Estonians have a proverb : ' Practice makes perfect ' .
Unfortunately , this cannot be said for the directive on coach passengers ' rights , which , following a long conciliation procedure , ultimately distanced itself from the principles that had been requested by the European Parliament .
It is indeed good that we now have minimal fundamental rights , but it is unacceptable that the agreed 250 km route denies these rights in three states .
In addition , these rights are minimal in three to four other states because there are perhaps only one or two coach routes that long .
Furthermore , it is not acceptable that cross-border coach services were excluded , irrespective of the distance , and also we cannot support the eight-year period given to Member States where implementation of the said directive is not compulsory .
Unfortunately , the Estonian Government supported these very conditions , and furthermore demanded a longer route .
Now we need to ask ourselves whether we are indeed supporting passengers ' rights , or those of coach companies and their profits .
In any case , while I support the citizens of the European Union , I do not understand why part of Europe is excluded from this directive .
I therefore feel unable to vote in favour of this directive or the report .
Madam President , I strongly support the principle of passenger rights , and it is only right that customers should expect a high standard of service .
However , we must have a sense of proportionality and look at what effect this will actually have .
We have to compare the real benefits for users with the true costs to businesses in this sector .
This House and the Commission often take a ' one size fits all ' approach , but we must accept that passenger rights differ across different modes of transport .
Air travel is not the same as bus travel .
Most importantly here , the difference lies with the number of small- and medium-sized businesses in this sector .
I believe everyone in this Chamber knows the importance of reliable and profitable bus and coach services to our local economies , and it is for this reason that I strongly support the introduction of the 250 km rule .
It is simply not right that small local companies providing very local or regional services should have these burdens put upon them .
Given the introduction of that protection , and the value of the underlying principle of this legislation , I strongly support the compromise .
Madam President , this initiative has been in gestation for almost three years and , for once , I found myself on the side of the Council rather than of Parliament .
Of course , we need to protect the rights of passengers , and particularly those with disabilities , but the initial proposal - as Philip Bradbourn has said - if adopted , would have serious consequences for small transport providers .
Indeed , it would put many of them out of business .
For that reason , the conciliation process was vital and the compromise reached strikes a fair balance between passengers ' rights , on the one hand , and those of service providers , on the other .
I fully agree with Mr Bradbourn that you cannot equate sea passenger rights , air passenger rights , rail passenger rights and bus passenger rights all in the same package .
For that reason , talking about a consolidated package simply is not something that is feasible and realisable .
I would like to pay a compliment to the Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Brian Simpson , who did an excellent job , to the rapporteur , Mr Cancian , and to our own coordinator , Mathieu Grosch .
At the end of the day , we have a fair and balanced package which is to the mutual benefit of all concerned .
( CS ) Madam President , in recent years , the European Parliament , together with the Council , has adopted laws relating to passenger rights in air and rail transport .
It is therefore logical for us now to adopt an analogous measure for bus transport as well , despite the fact that travellers in Europe still prefer individual transport and that standards on bus and coach transport itself are rapidly improving .
However , our effort and enthusiasm for regulation should have clear boundaries .
It is logical to define basic standards in the European Union for cross-border travel , protecting vulnerable groups of passengers and securing their rights .
On the other hand , an effort to extend rights to local transport , and attempts to secure the maximum possible compensation or to regulate down to the last detail , constitute an inappropriate interference in the internal market .
It is clear that all superfluous obligations mean greater costs for transport operators , which will ultimately be reflected in ticket prices .
As a former mayor , I therefore followed with concern the proposal to include urban and suburban transport within the scope of the directive .
I am pleased that common sense has prevailed in this case , and that urban and suburban transport will be protected from excessive regulation .
( FI ) Madam President , I want to thank everyone who has been involved in formulating the compromise and , in particular , the rapporteur and Mr Simpson , Chair of the Committee .
Although this is a compromise , it is also an important step forward from the perspective of the public .
If we consider the question of delays and loss of baggage , it is extremely important for the public to know that we have introduced legislation to protect their rights .
This limited distance of 250 kilometres is not the best possible solution , nor has it succeeded in the way many here have said it has .
I believe that this is perhaps the weakest point in the act and we will surely have to return to this in the future , but , on the other hand , it is a big step in significantly improving the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
From the point of view of the public , this represents just the sort of legislation that we should be introducing .
Madam President , this provision is a little like the curate 's egg .
It is good in patches .
I particularly welcome the dispositions for those with a disability or reduced mobility , but have the same concerns already voiced by other speakers about the 250 kilometre threshold .
One size does not fit all .
In the European Union of 27 countries of different sizes , there should have been some flexibility within countries so that all could be included in the provisions .
I live myself over 300 kilometres from our capital .
There is a buoyant small business enterprise in coach travel between rural areas in my constituency and the capital , Dublin .
This now will be put under severe pressure because of the provisions of this proposal and also , particularly , increased insurance costs which may drive them out of business .
If they go out of business , jobs are lost and the facility for passengers is also lost .
We will have to monitor this as we go forward .
( HU ) Madam President , I welcome the report on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
It will be easier for EU citizens , including persons with disabilities , to use this form of service .
The compromise was preceded by long consultations .
During these , the European Parliament and Mr Cancian stood by people with disabilities until the very end .
Unfortunately , the European Council proved to be more short-sighted and inflexible on this matter .
I deeply regret that the European Council is unable to recognise that we are living in a rapidly ageing society .
The number of people with disabilities will skyrocket overnight .
We should realise that all EU citizens will suffer from this problem , and sooner or later , everyone will require assistance .
Lastly , I would like to stress that our work is not yet done .
A compromise has already been reached with regard to four modes of transport , and now it is time to create a single passenger rights charter , which can later facilitate the assertion of passengers ' rights .
( CS ) Madam President , the European Parliament is about to vote on an important compromise which will greatly enhance the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
I consider it significant that , besides passenger compensation for loss of or damage to baggage or refunds for late buses and other measures , the compromise also includes enhancing the rights of passengers with disabilities and people with reduced mobility .
I particularly support the right of disabled people to information and assistance services , at least in line with what was finally agreed in the conciliation process .
Public transport is a fundamental and important part of the everyday lives of people with reduced mobility .
It was not easy to reach the compromise , and therefore I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur and all members of the negotiating team for the work carried out .
The approval of this regulation will bring into existence a joint protection framework for all types of transport at the European level , and while it is certainly not ideal in the area of passenger rights , it is a very important step forward .
( FR ) Madam President , with the Liberals , I will abstain during today 's vote on the regulation concerning the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
This is the last link in the package on the protection of travellers , after air , rail and sea travel , but unfortunately - as has been said - it is much less ambitious .
This has been said by , among others , Mr Simpson and Mr El Khadraoui , for the Socialist Group ; this is exactly what they said .
As a result , people will have to travel more than 250 km to be protected by this regulation .
If you travel from Brussels to Amsterdam by air , you are covered ; if you travel by coach , you are not .
And this is all the more unjust , I might add , since those who use this type of transport are often the least well off .
Neither does the entry into force make any sense , since several derogations could well postpone it until 2011 .
There will be new rights , then , as well as compensation in the event of accidents , delays or cancellations .
This assistance is vital for disabled people , but the reality is that it will not be introduced straightaway and , more importantly , not everyone will be entitled to it .
( DE ) Madam President , it is a good thing that we now have passengers ' rights across all means of transport , but these rights cannot conceal the fact that rail transport , which is environmentally friendly , has once again been put at a severe disadvantage .
The railway companies pay track access charges for every kilometre travelled , but the same system does not apply to buses and coaches , which benefits bus companies .
Railways are included in the Emissions Trading System , but buses are not , which again puts buses at an advantage and trains at a disadvantage .
If a train is delayed , 25 % of the fare is repaid in compensation after an hour .
In the case of buses , it is two hours .
All these advantages are unacceptable .
This is why we need an integrated approach .
We need passengers ' rights across all the different means of transport , but we also need fair basic conditions .
It must not be the case that one passenger only receives compensation after three or five hours , but for another passenger , the period is one hour .
A great deal remains to be done here and this is not a good compromise in this respect .
I do not understand why environmentally friendly rail travel is constantly being put at a disadvantage .
( SK ) Madam President , following complex negotiations in the conciliation process , a complex agreement has been reached on the wording of the regulation on passenger rights in bus and coach transport .
Even though the draft regulation relates only to regular services on routes longer than 250 km , it brings new rules and better protection for bus passengers as well .
The most important benefit for passengers will perhaps be the definition of their rights in cases of cancelled or delayed services , since it penalises transport operators for organisational failures in transport with an obligation to reimburse up to the entire fare , as well as reimbursing other losses up to the amount of 50 % of the fare .
The only issue which , in my opinion , might have been better handled , is that of the time schedule exemptions , which allow Member States to postpone implementation of the directive by four years , with a subsequent extension of this time period by a further four years .
A total period of eight years for implementing this directive seems to me overly long .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I should like to thank the honourable Members for their mostly positive comments .
We now face the challenge of implementation .
We face this challenge with all passenger rights legislation .
Fine-tuning the legislation will , of course , be a long process for us , but I still think that the compromise we have achieved will probably be adopted in a future document and is a great opening .
It is also a matter of principle that we have introduced certain principles of passenger rights into bus and coach transport , which is such a large area .
Modest compromises will probably be needed ; everything must be fine-tuned and must be implemented , but it is a very important opening and I hope that you will vote in favour of this regulation .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Cancian , ladies and gentlemen , I would only like to add two remarks , and comment on the very valuable debate that took place here .
This debate illustrated very well the difficulties Mr Cancian , as well as we in the Council , the Commissioner and the experts had to overcome .
I do not believe that this is the best of all possible worlds for travellers using bus and coach transport , but I believe that perhaps the main question we must ask ourselves is whether the situation will improve once the new legislation comes into effect .
I believe that we can answer this question with a definite yes ; that bus and coach passengers will indeed enjoy more rights in the future , even if this is not a perfect compromise .
A compromise is about having to come to an understanding with each other on difficult issues .
This was noticeable in almost all speeches , the question of where the boundary is , beyond which we would guarantee rights to such an extent as to cripple important economic actors and small and medium-sized enterprises , whose situation we are trying to keep an eye on .
At the same time , however , we very much intended to provide additional rights to passengers .
I can very well understand those who are looking at the issue from the perspective of those with disabilities .
I believe that we took a significant step forward in this respect as well .
I feel that this is a well worked-out part of the draft and I trust that the legislation will bring about progress for these people , indeed , especially for these people .
I would only like to remind the honourable Members that the Hungarian Presidency is thinking in terms of a strong European Union , a European Union which provides additional rights to its citizens and always puts citizens at the centre of these strong policies .
Furthermore , I am convinced that the current debate on this draft legislation serves to provide citizens in the European Union with additional rights .
I would once again like to thank everyone for their work , and I trust that today , we will get through the votes without any problems .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as I thank all the fellow Members who have spoken , I , too , should like to express my belief that it is not the best possible regulation but it is the only one that could be obtained given the position of the Council .
It is a truly important issue since I think it is really crucial for both the transport sector and the tourism sector - two subjects for which the Committee on Tourism and Transport is responsible - to have found a balance for this mode of transport as well .
It is a balancing act between the need , on the one hand , to protect small and medium-sized enterprises - a topic we have discussed at length over the last few hours - involved in the bus and coach transport sector and , on the other , the need to protect the rights of persons with reduced mobility , disabilities , old-age pensioners , persons with temporary reduced mobility , and vulnerable users overall , in order that there may also be fewer disputes .
This is the balance we were looking for and , with everyone 's contribution , we hope we have achieved it .
The recast then announced by Mr Kallas is , I believe , founded on the idea of creating a single regulation for all means of transport .
Indeed , the creation of a single transport market has not yet been accompanied by suitable measures designed to protect passengers ' rights .
Commissioner , aside from the single regulation , I really hope we can bring about the creation of a single reference body , a single ticket office and a single ticket for the various modes of transport .
I should once again like to thank all the Members who have spoken , those who followed this dossier -particularly the shadow rapporteurs - and those who played an enthusiastic part in the final negotiations .
My thanks to the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the staff of the Secretariat , the Council , particularly the staff of the Belgian Presidency , and , last but not least , Mrs Győri , who is here with us .
If I may , I should lastly like to thank the European Commission , Mr Kallas and his assistants for the constructive input that they never failed to contribute , the staff of the Secretariat of the European Parliament 's Conciliation Committee , which showed great skill and professionalism - indispensable traits when taking important decisions on behalf of our citizens .
Overall , it has been a good test , which has brought excellent results for Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The report on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport aims to establish passenger protection rights , applicable across the entire Union , for all passengers and for various forms of transport .
The Council did not agree with the European Parliament 's amendments , and it was therefore necessary to launch the so-called conciliation procedure .
The chief points of the agreement that was reached are mainly compatible with Parliament 's original proposals .
It is particularly important that the regulation will apply to all regular domestic and cross-border transport , and Member States will be able to apply exemptions for regular services and some specific services for up to eight years .
In the event of an accident , passengers will have the right to compensation of up to EUR 220 000 per person and EUR 1 200 for baggage .
Transport providers must , moreover , provide basic assistance in case of an accident ( food , clothing and medical assistance ) , and lodging for up to two nights .
In the event of a delay in excess of 120 minutes or the cancellation of a connection , transport providers must offer passengers the option of continuing the journey , rerouting the journey at no additional cost to the passenger or refunding the ticket price .
If this is not within their power , they must reimburse the ticket price and pay an additional 50 % of the ticket price .
The agreement also protects the rights of people with disabilities and people with limited mobility .
For the above reasons , I fully support the adoption of the report .
in writing . - I support this compromise on the rights of bus passengers , guaranteeing a right to transport , a right to accessible travel information , the obligation for bus operators to organise mandatory disability awareness training for drivers , a right to compensation for damaged wheelchairs , a complaint-handling mechanism for all passengers , with independent national bodies to enforce the regulation and issue penalties .
For all bus and coach journeys of 250 km or more , there will be specific assistance , free of charge , for disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility , both at terminals and on board and , where necessary , transport free of charge for accompanying persons .
For blind and partially sighted people in particular , the provisions on accessible travel information and training of drivers in disability awareness would make a huge difference .
Equal access to transport is essential for independence .
Without equal access to transport , people with disabilities cannot go to work , go shopping or take part in cultural and other leisure activities .
While the text does not encompass all that I would want , by supporting it and strengthening the rights of all disabled passengers , I believe that an important step will be taken towards enabling Europe 's guide dog users to move across the European Union on an equal footing to other citizens .
I support the legislative resolution on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport and amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2006 / 2004 .
Given the stable growth of this transport sector , I believe that it is essential to establish rights for the protection of passengers which apply throughout the EU , similar to the rights enjoyed by passengers travelling by other means of transport , and also to ensure equal conditions for carriers , no matter which Member State they come from or which means of transport they operate .
In view of the fact that these rights focus , in particular , on the needs of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility , this initiative deserves our support .
It is of key significance that the resolution establishes compensation rights for passengers who have been injured in coach accidents .
The provisions mean that passengers will be entitled to compensation in the event of death or injury or loss of , or damage to , luggage caused by an accident .
I would like to congratulate Mr Cancian on his work .
I am pleased that we were ultimately able to reach agreement in the Conciliation Committee .
Our principal achievement is , of course , the matter of passengers ' rights to compensation and assistance in the event of an accident , guarantees for passengers in the event of cancellations and delays , and guaranteed rights for disabled persons and passengers with reduced mobility ( PRM ) .
I am particularly pleased by the fact that passengers with reduced mobility have been included in the document , as I mentioned previously , but , at the same time , I have well-founded concerns in this respect : in the case of air passengers , neither the airlines nor the airports know exactly which passengers are to be regarded as passengers with reduced mobility .
It is common for help to be refused to mothers and father travelling alone with small children as a result of this lack of knowledge among carriers and airports .
I would therefore like to make the following appeal : our work will not be complete after voting through the document during the plenary session .
We also have a duty to monitor whether the regulation is properly applied .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur for his hard work , which has been exceptionally effective .
Up until now , there has been no guarantee of appropriate protection for passengers travelling by bus and coach , since it was the only form of transport which was not subject to any EU regulations in this respect .
One of the consequences of the changes which have been made will be that passengers will be able to claim compensation in the event of an accident .
The fact that assistance for disabled persons will be guaranteed by carriers , and that an accompanying person can travel at the carrier 's expense as part of this guarantee , are further extremely significant points .
I will not hide the fact that it was an exceptional challenge for me personally to be able to play an active role in the conciliation procedure for the first time in history under the Treaty of Lisbon .
During the negotiations , which lasted until late into the night , together with Mr Cancian , we succeeded in voting through a compromise making the provisions mandatory for distances of over 250 km .
It should be noted , and this is quite a significant point , that 12 fundamental rights are guaranteed in the regulation , particularly for disabled persons .
We should currently be placing a great deal of emphasis on an appropriate information campaign to ensure that the citizens of the European Union are aware of the rights to which they are henceforth entitled .
The legislation on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport , which we will be voting on today , might be considered unambitious .
The compromise reached after much wrangling is , however , better than nothing at all .
It is regrettable that the proposal for a regulation only applies to national and crossborder bus and coach journeys that are at least 250 km long .
This being the case , Luxembourg , Malta and Cyprus , for example , will not be affected at all .
It is also unfortunate that the legislation will only enter into force years from now .
Four , or possibly even eight years , is a long time to wait at bus stops for new legislation .
There is , of course , something good to be found in the compromise achieved .
In the original Council position , there were only three basic rights for passengers regardless of distance .
I am pleased that there are 12 in the final compromise , and that special attention is being paid to the needs of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
The entry into force of the regulation will make it easier for the disabled to travel on buses and coaches .
At the same time , it puts them on a more equal footing with other passengers .
When the new legislation enters into force , the Member States must ensure that the regulations are implemented effectively and appropriately . This is in the interests not only of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility but also of our other citizens that travel by bus or coach .
The regulation voted on today marks a highly significant success as it is the first time that the rights of passengers travelling by bus and coach will be protected by law .
After two years of difficult negotiations , the European Parliament and Member States have reached agreement on the key points which will consolidate the rights of passengers using this means of transport .
These include compensation in the event of the journey being delayed or cancelled , compensation for loss of , or damage to , luggage , as well as the assumption of liability by companies and the provision of assistance in the event of accidents .
Non-discrimination against and the provision of assistance to persons with disabilities and reduced mobility , as well as the right of passengers to be informed before and after their journey , have been incorporated into the regulation as fundamental rights which will be applied regardless of journey length .
The regulation does not impose any new technical requirements , but requests that carriers assume liability for their passengers .
We also took into account the current economic climate and its impact on companies targeted by this regulation , by offering an exemption period of four years , which can be renewed once .
I think that once this regulation comes into force in 2013 , it will help achieve the objective of harmonising and consolidating passengers ' rights at EU level , no matter which means of transport they choose .
Rule of law in Russia ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the rule of law in Russia .
I would like to ask Mrs Győri to take the floor on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , at the request of Baroness Ashton , the Hungarian Presidency of the Council is representing the High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission during this debate .
Baroness Ashton , as you may know , is travelling in northern Africa and in the Middle East this week .
I wish to thank you for raising the issue of the situation of human rights and the rule of law in Russia .
Despite some very positive signals from President Medvedev last year , the actual human rights situation in Russia and , in particular , in the Northern Caucasus region , remains deeply preoccupying . Violence , harassment and intimidation against activists , lawyers and independent journalists are of great concern to us .
The number of cases to support this statement is unacceptably high .
The brutal attacks on Russian journalists , Oleg Kashin and Anatoly Adamchuk , and environmental activist , Konstantin Fetisov , are among the latest reminders of the climate of insecurity and intimidation that journalists , activists and human rights defenders in Russia face in their day-to-day work .
Despite assurances at the highest levels , the perpetrators are rarely brought to justice and sentenced .
Accountability for violence and intimidation against human rights defenders - let me mention the cases of Mrs Estemirova , Mrs Politkovskaya , Mrs Barburova and Mr Markelov among a great number of others - remains an important test for the independence and efficiency of Russia 's judiciary .
As long as the crimes remain unsolved , a climate of impunity will continue to prevail .
There are , however , also positive developments .
I should mention here the Moscow City Council 's decision to authorise peaceful and regular demonstrations - which were forbidden until last year - such as those in support of Article 31 or the day of press rallies .
We have welcomed this decision .
At the same time , we continue to receive reports about arbitrary arrests of peaceful demonstrators , including opposition leaders , at these very same authorised demonstrations , as well as others across the country .
This is a matter of serious concern to us .
Freedom of speech and freedom of assembly and association are preconditions for the development of modern societies .
All of these freedoms are enshrined in the Constitution of the Russian Federation .
They also form part of the commitments that Russia has entered into as a member of the United Nations , the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
The EU urges Russia to uphold its commitments and guarantee this right to citizens .
President Medvedev has asked his Presidential Human Rights Council to examine the Khodorkovsky , Lebedev and Magnitsky cases .
We very much welcome this decision .
The EU has made no secret of its serious concerns with the way these cases have been handled .
President Medvedev has often spoken out against what he has termed the legal nihilism prevailing in Russia .
The EU stands ready to support Russia 's efforts to overcome this , starting with the reform of its judicial system .
Convinced that real modernisation needs established respect for the rule of law and its equal and fair application , we have put the rule of law at the core of our partnership for modernisation .
In this context , concrete activities have already been prepared - for example , the setting up of an appeal system for civil and criminal court cases in Russia - in close cooperation with the President 's administration and the Council of Europe .
We are ready to work with Russia on this , as well as on new projects on corruption and the Hague Conventions .
The situation in the Northern Caucasus is particularly worrying and needs urgent action .
We welcome the new strategy for economic and social development and the efforts by Deputy Prime Minister Khloponin , but much more needs to be done to provide a lasting response to the barbaric acts of terrorism against civilians .
The continuing immunity and impunity of security forces operating in Chechnya is fuelling grievances and terror in the region and is a source of deep preoccupation for us .
We pay tribute to all those who have lost their lives and to those who have fallen victim to aggression because of their professions or beliefs , as well as the courageous ones who cannot be deterred from their civil engagement in such a precarious environment .
Overall , the current report has not been a very positive one .
However , there are positive signs in the situation of human rights in Russia .
These are often offset by backward developments and , overall , have not been enough to achieve real improvements , but we must not be discouraged .
The significant body of European Court of Human Rights case-law provides an important incentive for the development of Russian law with regard to respect for human rights .
We are engaged in a serious dialogue with Russia on human rights .
Russia accepts this and , of course , also uses it to criticise what it sees as imperfections in the EU .
We will continue with that dialogue .
There is no alternative .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , those who know Russia will know that what passes for a legal system there does not measure up to the normal criteria of the Rule of Law .
This affects Russia 's relations with the rest of the world and equally with its own citizens .
It follows that , when the European Union deals with Russia , it must take into account a variety of non-legal factors , notably , political interference , corruption and occasionally violence .
The relationship between Russia and the West , then , is subject to uncertainty , not to mention the complete absence of transparency and accountability .
Where Russia 's own citizens are concerned , they lead lives more affected by arbitrariness and violence than can be reconciled with the European Union 's commitment to universal human rights .
Attempts to transform Russia have failed , so the European Union has no alternative but to live with the awkward interface between its own legality and Russia 's non-legality .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the model of power sharing between the state and the members of society determines the content of political decisions , while the predictability of the decision-making process and the correct enforcement of decisions are guaranteed by the honesty , professionalism and independence of the judiciary .
The European Union and Russia can do business together only if there is compatibility between their power-sharing models , their decision-making mechanisms and their judiciary systems .
The achievement of such compatibility is an exercise in partnership and cooperation , in consensus , confidence and interoperability-building , not in advocacy , lecturing and finger-pointing .
Russia is a full member of the Council of Europe and a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights .
Consequently , it is the Council of Europe that has competence to look into the functioning of democracy and the Rule of Law in Russia .
The European Union should therefore rely on the Council of Europe in order to achieve , together with Russia , a common area of freedom , democratic security and justice .
Moreover , since the European Union is itself on the way towards accession to the European Convention on Human Rights , it should use its future status as a party to that convention to accelerate convergence and interoperability with Russia in the field of democracy and the rule of law .
Years ago , when the European Parliament had little more power than a militant NGO , its only tools were the rhetoric of naming and shaming .
Today , after Lisbon , we are a powerful political institution .
This imposes on us more responsibility , pragmatism and self-restraint .
We should not let ourselves be led by emotions .
We should not be casual with our values either .
We are not allowed to be simultaneously prosecutor and judge .
We should not act on the basis of mere allegations , rumours or various interest lobby groups .
Our credibility , generated by the fairness and maturity of our approach , as well as our firmness and openness , is the best weapon we have in our dialogue with Russia at a time when our citizens have instructed us to develop a strategic partnership with Russia , not to restart the Cold War .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , we consider Russia to be an important partner of the European Union .
Therefore , we expect Russia to respect her international obligations and implement the constitutional rights of her own citizens .
It is a fact that violations of human rights , civil liberties and the rule of law have become commonplace in Russia .
Unlawfulness and widespread corruption led to the emigration of 300 000 citizens from Russia last year alone .
It is hard to envisage both foreign and domestic business investments in such a climate .
The Russian authorities are evidently implementing unconstitutional law and order .
The situation in the North Caucasus is one of the vilest examples of that .
The Russian constitution provides a basis for a multi-party system , but de facto it has become a one-party system with a marginalised parliament .
I would like to ask the representative of the Council which punitive measures and sanctions will be applied against the Russian officials who are directly responsible for human rights abuses and perversion of the rule of law .
The European Union must be consistent in its policy towards third countries .
It would discredit the European Union if we turned a blind eye to some severe offences in some countries , while imposing sanctions on other countries for identical offences .
We cannot continue normal relations unless concrete improvements are made in Russia .
We have to face the truth .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite its excellent constitution , the Russian Federation is still not a state under the rule of law , because there is a huge gap between constitutional law and constitutional reality .
The fundamental requirements of a functioning state under the rule of law - an independent judiciary and a free press - are unfortunately lacking .
As one sarcastic commentator said : ' The best Russian court is in Strasbourg ' .
The fact is that around one third of the cases brought before the European Court of Human Rights come from Russia .
Russian citizens do not have any confidence in their own courts , which only rarely dispense justice .
This is also clear from the fall in the number of appeals .
The country is headed by two lawyers , President Medvedev and Prime Minister Putin , who have repeatedly expressed their intention of combating legal nihilism .
However , their words , which are usually followed by completely contrary actions , have been shown to consist merely of legal cynicism .
None of the courts in Russia dare to pass judgment without consulting higher authorities .
This system of telephone justice has created judges who are no longer independent and who are more concerned about their own safety and progress than about justice .
The Khodorkovsky case clearly demonstrates this .
An employee of the justice system has recently said that Judge Danilkin 's judgment was dictated to him from above .
The reconviction of Khodorkovsky and Lebedev is a sign that the rule of law in Russia remains in the era of the gulags .
As in Soviet times , the judgment was made in advance by the political leadership .
Controlled democracy goes hand in hand with controlled justice .
Although the Russian justice system is the embodiment of the punitive state , it fails completely when it comes to solving , prosecuting and passing judgment on politically motivated crimes .
The attacks and murders of journalists have created a climate of fear and oppression .
Conditions in Russian prisons are also appalling .
One example of this is the case of Sergei Magnitsky , a lawyer who uncovered a case of corruption and , as a result , was imprisoned arbitrarily and without charge .
He died a horrible death in prison because of a lack of medical treatment .
A modernisation agreement between the EU and Russia will only be successful if it is based on a modernisation agreement between the Russian leadership and its own population .
This involves ensuring that the rights of the citizens , which are guaranteed under the constitution , are finally respected and fulfilling the obligations which have been entered into with the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) and the Council of Europe .
Russia needs to make the transition from a controlled democracy to a developing democracy .
Essential prerequisites for this include free and just elections to the Duma and the Presidency , an easier process for registering political parties , which meets European standards , and a fair election campaign which gives all the candidates the same opportunities and access to the public media .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , Russia is an important partner for the EU on many fronts , but we cannot pretend that Russia is a genuine democracy with a rule of law .
Unsolved murders of journalists and human rights defenders to politically-motivated show trials with acquiescent judges say it all in my view .
Why , then , is Russia tolerated as a member of the Council of Europe ?
That is a very good question .
Undoubtedly , the Kremlin treasures this international legitimisation of a government described in the US diplomatic cables recently leaked by WikiLeaks as a virtual Mafia state .
Conversely , the Council of Europe is discredited by its continued acquiescence towards Russia 's authoritarian government .
The European Court of Human Rights has a backlog of 27 000 cases from Russia alone , yet a Russian judge on the court is able to order the British Government to give British prisoners the right to vote .
This not only exposes the absurdity of Russia 's membership of the Council of Europe , but also encapsulates why the Council of Europe is , in my view , increasingly ignored internationally .
Sadly now , and as a result of this , many Britons , including politicians , think it is time for the UK to review its membership of this organisation and its very intrusive court .
( FR ) Mr President , this House thinks it can lecture Russia on human rights .
It would do better to put its own house , that of the European Union , in order .
For example , Mr Tannock mentioned Mr Julian Assange , a dissident publicist and founder of the WikiLeaks site , whose actions I do not , for all that , endorse .
He has been detained for weeks in the UK because of a totally outrageous and ridiculous extradition request from Sweden , and it is plain to see that this could be a step towards his being handed over to the US .
Indeed , Mr Assange has been accused of rape by two young women , one of whom actually pressed charges on the grounds that the condom tore during consensual intercourse .
The other accused him of surprising her in her sleep following earlier consensual intercourse .
Who are they trying to kid ?
It is obvious that if these two young women did not want to be ' raped ' by Mr Assange , they should not have slipped into his bed naked !
They have not been outraged ; they have been honoured .
This example illustrates the degree to which extreme freedom ...
( The President cut off the speaker but the speaker continued off-microphone )
Dear colleague , this is a discussion on Russia .
The item on the agenda is the situation in Russia .
I am sorry , but we cannot change the topic in the middle of the discussion .
( NL ) Mr President , we are having this debate today because the Russian leaders and , in particular , President Medvedev , have themselves so often emphasised the importance of the rule of law to the modernisation of Russia .
At the same time , though , we are finding many specific examples of things which are impeding that very modernisation ; for example , if I look at corruption , which is reportedly continually on the increase , despite a good , new corruption law being in place , or if I look at the Yukos case ; or the repeated arrests of opposition members and the human rights activists who were awarded our Sakharov Prize .
The modernisation that is being declared in Russia has not yet actually become a reality .
Given that we are supposed to be working together with Russia on the Partnership for Modernisation , and supposed to be negotiating an EU-Russia agreement , I find it unbelievable then that only five sentences in the progress report on the Partnership for Modernisation have been devoted to the modernisation of the rule of law .
I also think that we need to develop more expertise at home .
What I want to do , and we will also be doing that together in the report that Parliament is to prepare on Russia , is call for the promotion of the rule of law .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I regret the fact that this debate was put on the agenda at such short notice that the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy was not able to be here .
In recent months , Baroness Ashton has worked with the Council to improve internal EU coordination on cooperation with our strategic partners , including Russia .
With regard to her efforts to achieve a coordinated position , I think it would have been sensible to involve her in this debate .
None of the other strategic partners of the EU is as close to us as Russia , either geographically or in relation to our historic experiences .
This is why we take great interest in the internal political developments in Russia .
At this point , I would like to make specific mention of the work programme drawn up jointly by the coordinators of the Partnership for Modernisation , both in Russia and in the EU .
This joint work programme for modernisation contains important measures which will provide active support for the development of the rule of law in Russia .
This is the right way of ensuring that our partnership brings real benefits , in particular , for the citizens .
The initiative to modernise Russia launched by the Russian President gives the country 's international partners the opportunity to begin a fruitful cooperation with Russia .
We must make use of this opportunity .
As my fellow Members have already said , if the modernisation process is to be sustainable , it must not only be based on technological developments .
A modern Russian economy must be founded on the reliable principles of the rule of law .
Only when citizens and business people can rely on the rule of law will they have the courage to introduce innovations and make investments .
Let us take the hand that Russia has reached out to us and help the country to modernise .
( PL ) Mr President , in common with many of my fellow Members who have already spoken , I agree with the obvious statement that Russia is a strategic partner for the European Union in terms of geopolitics , international security and economic matters .
It is also no wonder that we are so interested in the situation in the most important of our neighbours .
It is now turning out that there are some very alarming trends emerging in the country .
I would like to quote from some social research recently carried out , according to which only 3 % of Russians believe that they have any influence over political life in their country , 61 % believe that they cannot defend their rights effectively and 82 % believe that state representatives do not observe the laws enacted and in force in Russia .
This is a sorry state of affairs in a country whose development is so important to us , but relations between Europe and Russia should not , under any circumstances , stop at development in a strictly economic sense and economic modernisation .
Human rights and the rule of law are also important aspects upon which we should concentrate , as is the case for our other neighbours , including Belarus , for example .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe it is important , alongside our wide-ranging cooperation in the field of business and in the face of global challenges , as has already been said , that we keep the subject of the rule of law on the agenda in all our discussions with Russia .
In recent weeks , we have discussed the stability of the Mediterranean region on many occasions and we have defined what the concept of stability does not consist of , namely , authoritarian structures .
At the same time , this means that for Russia , stability cannot be based on political influence over the courts or the persecution of journalists and of people who stand up in support of human rights .
Therefore , from my point of view , it is always the right time to discuss this issue .
I hope that we can make it clear to Russia during the course of the practical relationships which we will be entering into in the near future that it is putting its own future at risk if it does not establish the rule of law .

Madam President , there has been a sequence of tens of independent journalists and civil activists being murdered in Russia - for example , Politkovskaya , Estemirova and Magnitsky - but not one crime has been cleared up and not one murderer has been brought to justice .
The Kremlin regime , by its unwillingness to bring about justice and transparency , can be seen as complicit in these crimes .
Yesterday , the young assistant judge , Natalya Vasilyeva , dashed the network of falsehood around the Khodorkovsky trial by declaring that the verdict was not reached by the judges , but was dictated to them from above .
Issuing a visa ban for the officials responsible for Magnitsky and other cases is one concrete measure to show that the EU is serious about the improvement of the rule of law and transparency in Russia .
The fact that the Russian authorities have become so nervous about the very idea of a visa ban shows what a huge positive potential the EU really has to bring about changes in the situation .
Madam President , many of us in this House see Russia as part of the great family of European nations and had hoped that after the fall of the Berlin Wall , we would see Russia moving closer to the European Union .
Sadly , that has not been the case .
The current Russian leadership has chosen its own path , and it is one which causes great distress to those of us who wish to see freedom and democracy and the rule of law for the Russian people .
The Commissioner here today has more experience than most of us in dealing with Russia , and no doubt will have his own experience there , but I hope that the Commission will put pressure on the High Representative to adopt a new policy towards any country whose leaders constantly flout the values we hold dear .
Let us talk to them and engage with them on trade , as we need to .
Let us endeavour to discuss with them human rights , as we should , but let us not allow their leaders to launder their money through Europe 's banking systems , to educate their children in our schools or universities , or to take holidays in our holiday resorts .
If we applied that equally to all authoritarian leaders across the world , we would start moving towards what one could call an ethical foreign policy .
Madam President , I join with colleagues who are saying that we need smart measures to deal with authoritarian regimes which violate human rights .
I would like to ask the Council and Commission Representatives here whether they are prepared to take measures against those who violate human rights , in the manner indicated in Parliament 's resolution of 16 December 2010 , which called for an asset freeze and visa bans on those 60 officials implicated in the case of Mr Magnitsky , who unfortunately died in prison in Russia .
Would there be one or two courageous foreign ministers - or indeed Ms Ashton 's representatives - who would take up this initiative , and if it proved to be true that Judge Viktor Danilkin did write the verdict on Khodorkovsky and Lebedev taking direct orders from the Moscow city court , would such a judge be on their list ?
( SK ) Madam President , Russia is one of the most important and most stable partners of the European Union .
It is a country where democracy does not have a very long tradition , and it might be said that Russia is still getting used to democratic rule .
We must also remember that it is a country which is still struggling with relentless Islamic terrorism , and the social standing of the security services is therefore higher than it is over here .
From this standpoint , it is necessary to judge the frequent departures from our usual standards for the democratic functioning of a state in a principled and sensitive way .
It is good to have proper discussions with our Russian friends on all of the issues that concern us regarding the running of the country by the Russian authorities .
However , this dialogue must be businesslike , in a spirit of partnership , and motivated by an effort to improve the functioning of the democratic system in Russia , rather than by the lecturing of a self-styled custodian of global democracy .
Let us negotiate with Russia as with a friend , in a correct manner , openly and decently .
After all , we have a common interest in the peace , harmony and prosperity of Europe .
Madam President , in my opinion , Mr Werner Schulz has drafted a resolution which is very well founded with arguments and draws correct conclusions .
However , I am not sure that I understood the point made by Mr Fleckenstein .
If the Rules of Procedure do not allow me to ask a question any more , I would still like to put this to him .
Was he suggesting that we should refrain from supporting this resolution , or was he expressing the opposite , namely , wholehearted Socialist support for adopting it right now ?
Madam President , I am sorry , I was not listening .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Madam President , I was not sure whether Mr Fleckenstein was suggesting we support this resolution by Werner Schulz and others , or calling for us to refrain from adopting it at this part-session ?
Madam President , I will vote for the resolution , yes .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , first of all , I wish to thank all the Members for the pertinent questions they raised during the debate .
I very much share the concerns expressed here by many of you .
I believe that the European Union as a whole will have to continue raising these concerns at all levels with our Russian interlocutors .
We should not shy away from speaking directly when we have real and concrete issues to raise .
If we are to act as strategic partners - and I believe that we are strategic partners of Russia - we must also be prepared to tackle difficult issues .
Two things in particular delighted me during this discussion .
The first is that nobody questioned the fact that Russia is an important strategic partner for the European Union .
Second , there was a general consensus in this room that modernisation and the establishment of a fully-fledged democracy and the rule of law has not yet finished in Russia , and there are many problems with the workings of democracy there .
I will certainly bring all the points raised to the attention of the High Representative in order for us to follow through the various means at our disposal .
I am sure the coming visit of the Russian Government to Brussels on 24 February will provide us with a good opportunity to reiterate our concerns .
Russia is a permanent issue on the agenda of the Foreign Affairs Council .
You may know that since last year , a regular European Council meeting has been dedicated to discussing issues with our strategic partners .
This happened first - and most recently - in September 2010 , and I think Mr Van Rompuy will do the same in the course of this year .
I shall now answer some of the specific questions Members have put to me .
First , on Ms Hautala 's question on human rights , I would point out that the High Representative takes Parliament 's resolution of December 2010 very seriously .
The circumstances surrounding the deaths in pre-trial detention of Sergei Magnitsky and Vera Trifonova must be duly investigated and the Foreign Affairs Council will , of course , pay special attention to that .
We continue to raise these and other concerns at all levels , not only in the twice-yearly human rights consultations , but up to summit level , insisting on Russia upholding international commitments .
Any decision on restrictive measures would be for the Council to take .
Such instruments should be wielded wisely on the basis of clear evidence .
First of all , we keep calling on Russia to ensure a proper investigation .
I would say to Ms Oomen-Ruijten that human rights are at the core of the negotiations on the new agreement and will be addressed on a number of fronts .
We can assure you that the commitments of the EU and of Russia to uphold human rights , including those of persons belonging to minorities , will figure very prominently in this agreement and indeed constitute an essential element of the future agreement .
In conclusion , I will briefly sum up some of my previous points .
The rule of law and independence of the judiciary must remain an integral part of the modernisation effort currently under way in the Russian Federation .
The European Union must stand ready to support Russia in these efforts .
Freedom of speech , assembly and association are the building blocks on which all Western democracies rest .
Russia should uphold the legal commitments which it has entered into as a member of the Council of Europe , the United Nations and the OSCE .
The North Caucasus region remains a source of deep concern for us .
We must encourage Russia to seek a sustainable solution to this endemic problem in the region .
The important thing to bear in mind is that , in spite of the many concerns we have and the number of challenges Russia is currently facing , there have also been a number of positive developments .
We must take President Medvedev at his word and continue to engage in a serious dialogue with Russia on human rights .
So if there are cases , we have to be alerted and we have to follow what is happening in Russia very closely .
Thank you very much for your valuable comments .
The High Representative will be duly informed of your opinion .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday on Thursday , 17 February 2011 .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 : 45 and resumed at 12 : 00 )

Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The international press has discussed at length the case of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and there actually seems to be every indication that this case has been exploited for political purposes .
The recent statements made by Judge Danilkin 's press officer clearly show the Russian justice system 's lack of independence .
On the other hand , it is important to stress that this is not an isolated case .
On the contrary , the NGOs operating in Russia regularly report that the standards for a fair trial are not met in this country .
Furthermore , in September 2010 , the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly asked the authorities in Moscow to adopt reforms to guarantee the independence of the justice system and to end the harassment of lawyers .
Lastly , it is important for us to stress the critical situation in the North Caucasus , a region where a climate of impunity reigns and where , even worse than this , victims are afraid to defend themselves so as not to put themselves even more in danger .
If they want to show their credibility through announcing their intention to respect the rule of law , the Russian authorities clearly need to make greater efforts than they have done so far .
in writing . - The rule of President Medvedev and Prime Minister Putin is not compatible with the rule of law .
For more than 10 years , Putin and Medvedev tolerated , and possibly protected , an appalling catalogue of abuses and crimes , including stage-managed trials , press control and political murder .
The horrendous record of lawlessness in Russia is not a question of private delinquency .
The real problem is state-sponsored lawlessness .
The Russian justice system , and indeed the Russian state , never dealt with crimes aimed at journalists , human rights campaigners and whistle-blowers in the army or in the judiciary .
The lawlessness in Russia was regarded for too long as an accident or as a problem beyond state control .
EU policy should hold the Russian authorities responsible for their collusion with criminal elements .
Recent developments seem to indicate that the second Khodorkhovsky trial was conducted at the behest of high political figures .
The extrajudicial record of the Russian state is already a tradition .
The EU 's policy should take stock of this deplorable practice .
The usual soft EU rhetoric is not appropriate .
It should be replaced by a resolute policy , including credible warnings that future cooperation with Russia requires an immediate improvement in Russian law enforcement .
At the start of his term of office , Mr Medvedev promised Russians a ' dictatorship of law ' and full democracy .
The Russian President is , I think , aware of the fact that his country is struggling to build a democratic state under the rule of law and to create a modern economy which can respond to global challenges .
Recent events in Russia , in particular , the numerous attacks on journalists and representatives of independent non-governmental organisations , and the judgment handed down in the Khodorkovsky case , mean that there are grounds for wondering whether there is any real understanding of human rights and fundamental freedoms behind the noble-sounding demands .
Russia 's observance of its international obligations can also be considered controversial in a number of respects .
The unresolved conflicts in regions such as Nagorno-Karabakh , Transnistria and Abkhazia and South Ossetia should be ended as soon as possible , in accordance with international law and the obligations undertaken by Russia .
Russia should fulfil unconditionally all the provisions of the 2008 agreement between Russia , the European Union and Georgia .
In particular , the representatives of the EU Monitoring Mission in Georgia ( EUMM Georgia ) must have guaranteed and unlimited access to the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia , in order to guarantee peace and stability in these regions .
in writing . - The problem of independent courts and the imitation of democracy , free speech and rule of law seems to be understood by a wide audience .
After all , the EU should know how to recognise such a problem .
Nonetheless , it seems bizarre that at the same time , some Member States wish to override common understandings and even agreements , such as the EU Common Position 2008 / 944 / CFSP .
Ceterum censeo - France has decided to sell a Mistral class warship to Russia ; we believe that it will sincerely regret its action .
Corrigendum to a text adopted : see Minutes
Madam President , I hope I can make myself heard above the din .
I wonder if you could advise me when action is going to be taken in this House to prevent Members constantly having to run the gauntlet between the lifts from their offices and this Chamber and being accosted by people - whether they are lobbyists , assistants or whatever - trying to thrust myriad pieces of paper into our hands as we approach this Chamber to vote .
This place is getting to look more like a university students ' union than a Parliament , Madam President , and I hope you will take action to stop it .
Thank you for the suggestion , Mr Bradbourn .
We will pass your observations to the Quaestors so that they may take the necessary measures .
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure : see Minutes
1 .
Agreement between the EC and South Africa on trade , development and cooperation (
2 .
Agreements between the EU , Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway ( Financial Mechanisms 2009-2014 and imports into the EU of certain fish and fisheries products 2009-2014 ) (
3 .
Agreement between the European Community and Brazil on certain aspects of air services (
4 .
Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Iceland , the Kingdom of Norway , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on supplementary rules in relation to the External Borders Fund for the period 2007 to 2013 (
5 .
Accession of Liechtenstein to the Agreement between the EU , the EC and Switzerland on Switzerland 's association with the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis (
6 .
Accession of Liechtenstein to the Agreement between the EC and Switzerland concerning the establishment of the State responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland (
7 .
Agreement between the EU and Brazil on short-stay visa waiver for holders of ordinary passports (
8 .
Agreement between the EU and Brazil on short-stay visa waiver for holders of diplomatic , service or official passports (
9 .
Implementation of the Services Directive (
10 .
Rights of passengers in bus and coach transport (
11 .
Emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles (
12 .
Enhanced cooperation in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection (
13 .
Radioactive contamination of foodstuffs (
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to state for the record that the vote took place immediately after the previous one , and I would therefore like to state for the record that my vote is against .
Although I was not able to vote , my vote is against .
In addition , I wanted to bring it to Parliament 's attention that this proposal for a decision on the European patent is pending a decision of the Court of Justice , which is expected on 8 March .
I therefore intended to propose that Parliament postponed the vote on the European patent until the Court of Justice had ruled on the issue of jurisdiction in terms of the language rules .
I would like this to be recorded in the Minutes .
Madam President , it is an oral amendment on compensation for farmers , with thanks to Mrs Rivasi for the initiative .
It reads as follows : ' The Commission shall submit , by March 2012 , a report to the European Parliament and the Council on the appropriateness of a mechanism for compensating farmers whose foodstuffs have been contaminated above the maximum permitted levels and that cannot be placed on the market .
That mechanism should be based on the polluter-pays principle .
The report shall , if appropriate , be accompanied by a legislative proposal setting up such mechanism ' .
This is a joint proposal by five political groups .
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Madam President , the aim of the Services Directive , which entered into force in December 2006 , is to open up the market for service providers in the European Union and get rid of all protectionist barriers , arbitrary hindrances and any discriminatory rules .
In any case , the European Parliament has always insisted that this directive must not form a pretext for dangerous deregulation and liberalisation of the sector , thereby harming workers ' rights .
The country of origin principle , which was criticised as paving the way for social dumping , was discarded and replaced by the destination country principle .
I voted in favour of this report because , with regard to the implementation of the directive in question by the Member States , it puts particular emphasis on unjustified delays and failures , as well as a number of issues relating to its interpretation and application .
I will finish here , Madam President , because speaking in these circumstances is rather difficult .
( PL ) Madam President , development of the European services market plays an absolutely essential role in stimulating economic growth in the European Union .
It is therefore very much to be welcomed that the European Parliament is closely examining the way in which the Services Directive is being implemented .
Further measures to support the proper development of the European services market are also essential .
Our overriding aim was to facilitate the provision of services throughout Europe .
We are therefore alarmed to note that some of the Member States are showing a tendency to enact and apply laws which are in no way justified by the directive 's provisions .
Artificial barriers are thus placed in the way of the activities of service providers .
At present , as many as 90 % of new jobs are created in the services sector .
I therefore believe that an efficiently functioning directive is an essential condition for the development of the single market , and a key project for the European economy .
I am thus pleased that we are starting to see examples of the directive achieving measurable results , such as the huge number of notifications of amendments to legislation that we are receiving from the Member States .
( IT ) Madam President , I voted with great conviction against the adoption and application of the Services Directive , also known as the Bolkestein Directive .
The aim of the directive should have been to create greater competition in Europe , assisting in the development of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Unfortunately , however , the real aim appears to have been to beat down and attack our small and medium-sized enterprises .
In Italy , there are sectors that represent real strengths , such as beach concessions , in which the owners have invested all their possessions and made enormous sacrifices .
Now , thanks to this directive , they have lost everything .
This is not the system we should be bringing in , with a bureaucratic Europe and major corporations and multinationals that want to invade Italy and overpower our enterprises .
We cannot allow it and I will stand shoulder to shoulder with these small and medium-sized enterprises and defend them , so that we look after our traditions and Italy 's strengths .
( SK ) Madam President , the Services Directive currently in force requires that all EU countries eliminate bureaucratic obstacles and make life easier for entrepreneurs .
However , the implementation of the directive is stalling .
The main problem areas are the failure to comply with the scope of the directive , delays in creating points of single contact , shortcomings in administrative cooperation and differences in mutual assessment .
The report I have supported considers it very important to set up the points of single contact rapidly .
They will be able to handle everything necessary for cross-border service provision , including information that is easy to understand on the formalities and administrative procedures of a given country .
Services represent up to 40 % of the gross domestic product of the Union .
The elimination of unnecessary obstacles and delays could make a significant contribution to increased competitiveness and the creation of new jobs .
( LT ) Madam President , I believe that the evaluation of the Services Directive has given us a good opportunity to check whether this directive really facilitates improved development in the services sector and whether the provisions of the directive are being properly implemented in the Member States .
It is essential for there to be agreement throughout all stages of the implementation of this directive that public services should not be covered by the directive , but that it should ensure social rights and comply with the requirements of employment law .
It is clear that the Commission and the Member States must increase their efforts to set up high quality points of single contact in the Member States .
Adequate funding must be earmarked for this , in order to ensure that these centres provide high quality information which is accessible .
Madam President , there has been a misunderstanding from the earliest days of the European Union as to what we mean by a free market in goods and services .
When my constituents voted in favour of EEC membership in 1975 , they understood the common market to mean mutual product recognition .
If you can sell a bottle of mineral water in the UK , you should be allowed to sell the same water in France , Germany or Italy and vice versa .
What they found in practice is that it means standardisation - that ' the mineral water has to contain the following minerals but not any of these ' , that ' the volume must be not greater than x and not less than y ' and so on .
You can then find that a product that was never intended for export can be criminalised in its own nation of origin .
That is what we have seen again and again , both with goods and with services .
Instead of having an increase of consumer choice , we have a restriction of consumer choice , often driven by one particular producer somewhere in the European Union which happens to meet a load of specifications anyway and which sees EU legislation as the way to export its costs to its competitors .
This is why our share of world GDP continues to shrink and how my country has shackled itself to a cramped and confined regional bloc .
Madam President , I remember when the Services Directive first went through this Parliament in the last mandate , how controversial many of the elements were .
I also remember personally , as the rapporteur for the trade and services report , the great controversy when I spoke about the need to liberalise many services - financial services , health services , education services , water services - to provide consumers with more choice and better services , rather than relying on clapped-out old state monopolies , which quite often taxpayers were underfunding .
Here , we have this definition of services of general economic interest , as if somehow the disciplines that allow us to have a wonderful choice when it comes to supermarkets or other types of services do not apply to water , education and health .
It is time that we moved on from the politics of 30 years ago when certain things could only be state-provided .
The implication has been that they have been underfunded and not provided well .
Let us move towards more service liberalisation throughout the EU and throughout the globe .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to explain why the majority of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has abstained from voting on this directive .
It is good that we have made a decision and that the rights of people with disabilities are being respected .
However , that is only the case over longer distances .
Many of the other points are not worthy of a European directive .
For example , because the directive only covers journeys over 250 kilometres , there are many countries where it does not apply .
Cyprus , Malta and Luxembourg have no rights , in just the same way as some other Member States which do not have bus routes that are longer than 250 kilometres .
The free movement of people , goods and services is one of Europe 's central principles .
Now it is the poorer passengers who are not protected , because some Member States have no system of passengers ' rights .
This is why we have abstained .
There are some positive aspects , but also many negative aspects , and this is the reason for our abstention .
( IT ) Madam President , the proposal for a regulation tabled by the Commission in 2008 aims to introduce new , Europe-wide rights to protect bus and coach passengers which are similar to those applied to other means of transport , thereby assuring equal conditions of competition between carriers and the various modes of transport within the different Member States .
A long and difficult negotiation with the Council , including recourse to a conciliation procedure , was required in order to reach the text voted on today .
The final text can be considered a very satisfying and well-balanced compromise , since it succeeds in guaranteeing passenger rights without simultaneously imposing heavy burdens on carriers , which - lest we forget - are mostly small and medium-sized enterprises .
The result of the conciliation procedure can quite reasonably be considered a success for the European Parliament , since some of our main requests were incorporated , namely in terms of its scope , fundamental rights for passengers irrespective of distance , derogations and , lastly , providing for accidents , cancellations and delays with suitable forms of reimbursement , assistance and compensation for passengers .
( IT ) Madam President , a new season of rights is upon us , but these rights could have been more widespread .
We must be aware that at distances of less than 250 km , the rights of the most vulnerable , of disabled people , old-age pensioners , and persons with reduced mobility , are not addressed at all in this measure .
If it is true that homogenised quality standards are being established , it is just as true that excluding local transport seriously limits the number of passengers affected .
Implementation over the course of the next four years will allow the sector to prepare itself as well as possible , but we will also need to monitor the establishment of the enforcement bodies .
The result of this process represents a victory for Parliament and is a positive sign of our attention to citizens ' needs .
However , compromise always implies mediation - and in this case concessions - of this House 's aims .
Basically , we have shown that we are good interpreters of needs , in contrast to the Council which has shown that it only represents interests .

( IT ) Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Cancian on his excellent work in bringing this measure to its conclusion .
Mr Mastella will allow me to disagree with him on the idea that this measure represents a great victory for our citizens .
One cannot but note that citizens are only protected if they travel further than 250 km by coach or bus .
Where is the protection for the rights of citizens of Europe if - as Mrs Meissner has already stressed - entire States such as Cyprus , Luxembourg and Malta are excluded from this protection ?
These are the reasons why our group abstained in the vote .
We did not vote against the report because some rights are protected , such as those of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
That is why we abstained .
As for the rest of it , we would ask to return to the issue as soon as possible in order to really protect our citizens .
( FI ) Madam President , first of all , I wish to say that it is excellent and important that we concern ourselves with the rights of our citizens .
Whenever rights are spoken of , we must remember that obligations come with them and so there are no rights without obligations .
There is a lot that is good and positive about the report on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
We also need to remember that panEuropean bus and coach companies differ greatly from one another .
For example , in Finland , there are many small family firms , and we might ask whether we should be continually burdening these small companies with new costs and obligations , since they are struggling to make their enterprises profitable .
I can say that we have shown flexibility on this issue in a variety of ways , and that the rights of different passengers have been taken into consideration .
Acknowledging the needs of the disabled always brings with it clear added value .
It is very important that we ensure that disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility are better able to travel and get about generally , and that greater account is taken of their needs .
This is a good thing , but as I said earlier , the matter is slightly inconsistent , as when we talk about rights and obligations , it is also important to make sure that costs do not rise too high for those small companies in the bus and coach transport industry .
Madam President , I voted in favour of this regulation , even though I feel that it certainly does not go far enough .
However , it is a start , and sometimes in this Parliament and in the EU , we take only baby steps .
That is what we have done today .
It is unfortunate that some Member States are outside this regulation and , indeed , that it applies only to journeys of distances greater than 250 kilometres .
I certainly would have preferred the ALDE line , where passenger rights would have applied to journeys of a much shorter duration .
I am , however , pleased to see that some of the basic rights in the regulation apply to passengers travelling over shorter distances .
Those rights , in particular , apply to persons with a disability , or indeed , persons with reduced mobility .
Some of these rights include non-discriminatory access to transport and disability-related training for staff on coaches and buses .
Unfortunately , Member States have a derogation period of up to ten years and , while small businesses do need adequate time to comply , I would ask and encourage Member States to try to ensure compliance with this regulation as soon as possible .
Madam President , I strongly support passenger rights and , in particular , increased rights for disabled people .
I am not particularly happy with the compromise reached .
I would have preferred , in contrast to my colleague , a threshold of 200 kilometres , as this would have enabled Ireland to exempt rural areas of my constituency .
I am thinking of parts of North and West Donegal , Mayo , and indeed Galway .
Most rural areas are outside the 250 kilometre limit .
The level of rights being sought in terms of compensation is disproportionate to the type of service operating in rural areas .
I also want to refer to the cost , and that is principally an insurance cost , that could cause some operators to leave the market .
In many cases , there is no alternative public transport service available .
Of course , we have to accept the decision that has been taken today and , hopefully , the derogation period could give the opportunity to those who are outside the 250 kilometre limit to adapt .
So , while I agree in principle , I had to abstain for the foregoing reasons .
( SK ) Madam President , every year , more than 70 million passengers in Europe travel by bus or coach .
It is high time that a regulation came into effect protecting passenger rights in the same way as in air , water or rail transport .
Passengers will have 12 basic rights applying to any length of journey .
In addition to this , in the case of journeys in excess of 250 km , they will have the right to compensation for delays , assistance in case of accident or death , compensation for lost or damaged baggage , and better information .
For small countries in particular , however , the 250 km minimum is rather extreme .
I applaud the fact that passengers with reduced mobility will have the right to special assistance , as is already the case with air transport .
In the future , I will certainly support the introduction of a common regulation to unify the already existing regulations on passenger rights in various transport systems , which will substantially clarify the entire system of passenger rights .
( SK ) Madam President , passenger rights in bus and coach transport , which is frequently used in the European Union , require a clear legal set-up , as is the case in air , rail and water transport .
I consider the final text of the submitted regulation to be a satisfactory compromise .
I am particularly pleased about the adoption of the 12 basic rights of passengers , applying to all passengers on this form of transport , regardless of the distance .
I particularly welcome the recognition and consideration of the special needs of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
Guaranteeing the right to compensation for loss or damage to a wheelchair or other device providing mobility , and the training of staff on buses or coaches in the area of transport for disabled persons , are becoming important tools in the fight against discrimination and against the social exclusion of these people .
( DE ) Madam President , I have voted in favour of the report , because it represents a significant improvement in the current situation .
We have been able to achieve a balanced solution which protects the rights of bus passengers and guarantees the continuing existence of small and medium-sized operators .
The regulation covers journeys of more than 250 kilometres and gives bus and coach passengers the right to claim compensation if journeys are cancelled , overbooked or delayed by more than two hours .
Bus operators are often small or medium-sized companies which would be brought to the brink of ruin by excessive claims for damages .
This is one successful feature of the regulation which will ensure that compensation payments cannot get out of hand .
As far as the distance of 250 kilometres is concerned , there is no reason why we should not allow the new legislation to come into effect and then see how it can be improved .

( LT ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Cancian , because the document we adopted today really is a very satisfactory and well balanced compromise .
It manages to secure the rights of passengers without , at the same time , imposing a heavy burden on carriers , most of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
European Union citizens will be able to feel better protected .
This agreement also improves travel conditions for disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
It also lays down clear rules on compensation for damages and the facilitation of assistance .
I believe that it will make a significant contribution towards improving conditions for our citizens when travelling , and will give them more legal clarity in the case of an accident or other unforeseen events .

( IT ) Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Cancian for his excellent work and , in particular , for the good result achieved in the conciliation procedure with the Council .
Both from the point of view of the directive 's scope as well as the incorporation of some 12 basic rights within the proposal , the compromise obtained represents an important step in protecting the rights of passengers .
The proposal takes the rights and needs of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility into due account , particularly with regard to non-discriminatory access to transport , the rights to compensation in the event of loss of , or damage to , mobility equipment , submission and handling of complaints , disability-related training for staff on buses or coaches , and information to be provided during the journey .
The final text has also managed to guarantee the rights of passengers without , at the same time , putting pressure on carriers , most of which are small and medium-sized enterprises and could not have borne heavy burdens .
Madam President , while I acknowledge that there are many positive aspects to this report - and I strongly support the right of those with disabilities to have access to transport and to compensation - I believe that these kinds of schemes should be put in place by national governments .
I also believe that the financial burden associated with this proposal would be prohibitive for many transport providers .
This Parliament must remember that many coach firms are privately owned , are relatively small and are under an increasing financial pressure as a result of the huge rise in fuel prices experienced over the last 12 to 18 months .
For many private firms , and indeed government transport schemes , additional cost will only result in two things : higher ticket prices for customers and reduced routes .
Indeed , it will put many in the voluntary sector - which runs many of the schemes for those with disabilities - out of business altogether .
( IT ) Madam President , it has been a long road to today 's vote on this report so I should like to echo the compliments of my fellow Members directed to Mr Cancian , who fought so doggedly to get us here .
All modes of transport have now finally got their own regulation on the rights of passengers .
I think that the next step is to come up with a proper consolidating act that brings together all these different regulations .
The scope is reasonable , even though we negotiated it on other premises , but the fact that we managed to include all Member States but two is certainly positive , as is the fact that many clauses were made obligatory , even at distances of less than 250 km , while giving up some other forms of compensation .
During this morning 's debate , some Members stated that there was no provision for suitable protection for passengers with reduced mobility , but fortunately , this has been proved false by the latest speeches .
On the contrary , this protection is a great step forward for the civility of this compromise and we ought to be proud of that .
( ET ) Madam President , I am voting against this document , because the current act does not guarantee equal treatment of passengers .
It does not compare with other modes of transportation , nor with passengers of different states .
As a result , several small European Union states are left out of the regulation zone .
The act functions only partially in several other Member States .
The problem in connection with cross-border coach travel is also unresolved .
Coaches are used by those on a low income and the young , including students and schoolchildren .
It is therefore not acceptable for implementation to be deferred to a later date .
( PL ) Madam President , a compromise between proposals by the Commission and Parliament 's Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and its Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has been reached with regard to commercial vehicles and emissions standards , whereby the latter will be reduced for such vehicles from 203 g to 147 g per kilometre over a period of 10 years .
The new emissions standard which has been introduced is acceptable to manufacturers and users and is important in terms of the costs incurred by users as a result of increased prices for such vehicles .
This group of users is made up , primarily , of small and medium-sized enterprises , tradespeople and family businesses , and we have just been discussing EU instruments aimed at providing financial support to small and medium-sized enterprises during this part-session .
One of the goals in this area is to reduce barriers to the growth of small and medium-sized enterprises .
We hope that increased costs for fleets of light commercial vehicles resulting from limits on emissions and higher manufacturing costs will not become a significant barrier .
In 2014 , we will be able to check whether the principles behind the regulation have been implemented successfully .
( DE ) Madam President , the European Parliament has succeeded in putting in place an ambitious , long-term target in the face of opposition from the Council and the Commission , which will restrict the CO2 emissions of small vans to a maximum of 147 grams per kilometre by 2020 .
This ambitious and yet realistic limit can be achieved by means of innovative environmental technology .
The vehicles will be considerably cleaner , but they will remain affordable for small and medium-sized companies .
This was particularly important for us , because it will not help climate change if the price of new vehicles is so prohibitive that the old vans remain on our roads and , in particular , remain a burden on the environment .
I am pleased that we have voted on this motion today and that it has been adopted with an overwhelming majority .
Madam President , we have just voted on a report called ' emissions performance standards for light commercial vehicles ' .
Like much EU legislation , it is a long-winded title for a real issue .
Let me translate : light commercial vehicles are , of course , vans , and performance standards mean fuel emissions which depend on fuel burnt .
Now , we have all seen the rising fuel prices at the pumps , but for sole traders like builders , plumbers and carpenters , running their van is a business-critical cost .
They want fuel-efficient vehicles and fuel efficiency has always been a key part of their buying decision .
On the production line in the General Motors factory in Luton , in my constituency , I have also seen that the innovation needed for improvements comes from the factory floor .
There are some who think that just because targets are set in this House in Europe , they will be achieved .
But the truth is that achieving those targets will mean the innovation comes , whether from vans or otherwise , and it will come from consumer demands and manufacturers ' improvements and not just from European legislation .
( GA ) Madam President , I was sorry that I could not attend this debate but I had other meetings at the time .
So , thank you for giving me the chance to say a few words now .
In the 2020 strategy , we have put much emphasis particularly on renewable energies , and that is only right .
But equally important in meeting our targets will be energy efficiency , particularly in relation to motor vehicles - private and commercial .
Commercial vehicles are on the road every day and they travel huge distances .
Through a directive like this , we can help to comply with the 2020 strategy in relation to fuel efficiency because it will compel designers to produce more fuel-efficient engines , and while the cost may be big in the short term , the savings in terms of miles per gallon travelled , and also in terms of the environment , are huge .
( IT ) Madam President , the Council has sent us a proposal for a decision that authorises an enhanced cooperation procedure in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection .
The reason for this is that some Member States - including Italy and Spain - objected on a number of occasions to the adoption of the planned trilingual system of translation , which would end up becoming truly discriminatory , since it blatantly violates the principle of equal status for all official languages of the Union .
Despite the numerous negotiations carried out so far and this morning 's vote , it seems that the unanimous adoption of this regulation will be impossible .
However , reasons of legal and institutional expediency would suggest , or seem to have suggested , that we should wait for the opinion of the Court of Justice , expected in the coming days , which might not only clarify numerous technical aspects of the unitary patent system , but also highlight all the jurisdictional consequences deriving from it .
We did not choose this path and that is why I voted against .
( DA ) Madam President , listening to the debate here in this Chamber on enhanced European cooperation with regard to a unitary European patent , it is difficult not to sit here with a smile - an indulgent smile - on my face .
Politicians from certain countries , whose own language is , in their opinion , the most important one in the world , have claimed that we will destroy the internal market in this area if we enter into enhanced cooperation .
This is , of course , an absurd claim inasmuch as we do not have an internal market when it comes to the unitary patent .
It costs around ten times more to obtain a patent in the EU than it does in the United States , corresponding to an annual turnover of EUR 250 million for our enterprises .
It is therefore a good thing that we have finally voted the enhanced cooperation through today , so that certain countries can no longer be obstructive .
Enough is enough !
We have not reached the goal , but today we have already made more progress in one day than we have done in the last ten years .
( PL ) Madam President , we have been holding debates on the creation of a unitary patent protection system for over 20 years at European level .
The very complex system currently in force for registering patents , which is time-consuming and expensive in comparison to the American system , is no help whatsoever to European entrepreneurs .
Patents play a significant role in the development and growth of a modern economy and in supporting scientific research .
Given that global markets are becoming ever more competitive , we cannot afford to put off decisions on this matter any longer .
We therefore need to step up work on the creation of a unitary patent market .
Yet although we should support the idea , we must not ignore the controversial nature of many issues , for example , the question of language .
Our aim should therefore definitely be to combat discrimination against the smaller , less-populated and often poorer Member States .
( IT ) Madam President , we live in a market in which our enterprises operate according to global competition .
The basic premise of the reform of the language regime for patents , as announced by the Commission , is to reduce translation-related costs in order to be competitive on the markets where we compete with the United States , particularly the Asian market .
I therefore wonder if it would not have been more efficient to produce a patent in just one language ?
That would really help our enterprises to compete on the global market .
Moreover , it is well known that there are currently two legal systems in Europe , with different characteristics and rules .
I think it would have been a better idea to start harmonising them .
Lastly , starting enhanced cooperation is not only against the spirit of the European Union , but it also harms the internal market , which is thereby subject to geographic segmentation and distortion of competition between Member States , meaning that some States will certainly find themselves worse off than others .

( IT ) Madam President , whilst , on the one hand , I applaud the objective achieved by Europe of equipping itself - after many years - with an important instrument such as the patent , which will finally allow the European Union to compete on level terms with other territorial organisations , I must also express my great regret that this result has been achieved to the detriment of other areas , like Italy , which has been a perennial advocate of strengthening the role of the Union .
The decision to issue the patent in just one of the three working languages of the Patent Office will actually create inequality between Italian enterprises and those countries that form part of the proposed linguistic regime .
I would recall that some months ago , I submitted a question to the Commission to defend the use of the Italian language .
In the meantime , 25 countries out of 27 fell into line , which has led me to abstain .
( PL ) Madam President , no one is satisfied with the present answers to the problem of patent protection in the EU and the Member States .
The introduction of a unitary patent protection system is therefore essential , both for the economies of our Member States and for the economy of the EU as a whole .
In particular , the new system should help stimulate scientific research and innovation .
The introduction of a relatively simple system based on a standardised form - although this is the subject of controversy - using three languages , although there has been talk of using one language or many languages , with translation into the mother tongue of the applicant , represents an important step .
This will be particularly important for small and medium-sized enterprises , many of which do not have sufficient financial resources to apply for patents .
I hope that it will prove to be a key step in spurring into action the group of small and medium-sized enterprises which we frequently refer to as ' sleeping innovators ' . We often discuss how to encourage this very group of businesses to introduce innovations and patent their own inventions , particularly in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
We want this new regulation to both mobilise these small and medium-sized enterprises and also to provide better protection for patented inventions in the European Union .

( FR ) Madam President , I voted in favour of Mr Lehne 's report , which gives the European Parliament 's consent to enhanced cooperation in order to create a unitary patent within the European Union .
It is about time too !
Twenty years of effort to achieve a result , to arrive at the point where we start to take concrete action for European businesses , both our SMEs and our large companies , which have been waiting a long time for this major instrument for their competitiveness and growth .
By giving its consent to enhanced cooperation , the European Parliament is showing just how interested it is in this particular enhanced cooperation procedure - and I would point out that this is the second time it has been applied - but it is also sending a very positive and very specific message to promote the innovation and competitiveness of our businesses .
As has already been said , 25 of the 27 Member States have chosen to go ahead with this enhanced cooperation procedure so as to create a European Union unitary patent .
I do not underestimate the difficulties that some of our Member States may still be experiencing , but let us move forward and set an example .
That is what businesses are expecting .
( ES ) Madam President , I abstained because I think that the decision to create a unitary patent through enhanced cooperation is another failure by the Council .
There is only agreement between nine Member States and the document itself acknowledges that the objectives cannot be achieved within a reasonable timescale .
Competitiveness ?
Efficiency ?
In addition , the judgment of the Court of Justice on jurisdiction in terms of the language rules is pending .
The Council should have made the effort to reach a common position , and perhaps it should have done more work on using a single language , taking into account the number of registrations and the language used in the majority of them , in order to make us more competitive in our global context .
Once again , the national perspective of the Member States has resulted in a fragmented decision with no clear criteria regarding the use of three languages .
If we implement measures such as this , we shall never make progress in consolidating the European project .
( SK ) Madam President , if the European Union is to boost competitiveness and become a world leader in innovation , its creative potential must be adequately secured .
The EU patent system , however , suffers from many deficiencies , preventing the establishment of unitary patent protection , but also the development of the internal market , thereby reducing legal certainty for inventors and innovative firms .
The provision of unitary protection of inventions in all Member States through the existence of a single European process for granting patents on the basis of a unitary system of patent law would expressly clarify a complicated system while , at the same time , reducing costs , particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are having to pay up to three times higher costs than in the US , for example .
Since the attempts to create unitary patent protection throughout the EU have failed to fulfil expectations , and in view of the fact that all of the legal preconditions stipulated for enhanced cooperation in the area of creating individual patent protection are fulfilled , I agree with the European Parliament giving its consent .
( IT ) Madam President , when , a century ago , Antonio Meucci 's patent was not recognised by the American telephony industry , it was not because of a lack of English or his use of Italian , but instead the failure to meet a condition : he did not have the money to register his patent for another year .
In a similar vein , we are now in a paradoxical situation and , quite apart from the vote , I think that the fact that a trilingual patent system is to be adopted , which excludes Italian , is basically a sign of the weakness of our government , its inability to make its voice heard in European politics , and the weakness of our political system , which reflects , above all , on research and innovation .
On this issue , we need only recall the competitiveness study published last December , which shows that in recent years , Italy has willingly handed over EUR 4 billion to other countries that have welcomed our researchers .
These researchers certainly no longer have any need for Italian , since they have learnt English , French and German and have all the tools required to submit these patents , to the detriment of Italian products .
( IT ) Madam President , once again , we have witnessed the inability of the Italian Government to protect the pro-European reputation of Italy and the interests of its businesses on a crucial point such as the adoption of the European patent .
Twenty-five countries out of 27 and the overwhelming majority of Parliament support a proposal that regulates the field of patents and that has a real effect on the most innovative enterprises and those that are most orientated to international markets .
By ruling ourselves out of this decision , we in Italy will expose our enterprises to the risk of not being suitably protected in Europe and across the world .
It is quite incredible that a government that does nothing to spread Italian culture throughout the world , that cuts funds to cultural institutes and fails to value the language of the country that is host to the largest number of World Heritage Sites , can ride roughshod over the language issue while our enterprises have actually always asked for patents to be drafted only in English , which is now the lingua franca of the global economy .
However , we have reached a result that allows anyone submitting patents to do so in their own language .
Madam President , there was nothing that made it compulsory for Mr Barnier to force this through with such a hasty vote before the opinion of the Court of Justice which , as we know , will be expressed during the first week of March and will deal mainly with two crucial points : the use of one 's national language to defend oneself before the European Union Patent Court and the very legitimacy of creating a patent court .
As we well know , these are important issues to resolve before taking any decision .
Hence , the Italian delegation of the Democratic Party ( PD ) decided to abstain .
Madam President , this proposal is certainly not perfect , and indeed may have to be revisited as a result of the ECJ judgment in a few weeks .
Nevertheless , I think it is a step in the right direction , and for that reason I supported it .
I have attended a number of seminars here at the European Parliament in relation to innovation .
General Electric have done some surveys right across the European Union which show that most people believe that progress out of recession can only be achieved through innovation .
Innovation means research , development and new products .
New products have to be patented , and the easier it is to do that , the better .
We have to try and aim for a system right across the European Union that is as easy and as cost-effective as it is in the USA .
We are a long way from that yet but , at the same time , we are at least trying to move in that direction .
Therefore , I supported today 's proposals .
( NL ) Madam President , I have abstained from voting on the Lehne report , not because I have any objections to the creation of a unitary patent protection scheme .
Quite the contrary .
Businesses in Flanders have been clamouring for such a scheme for a long time .
The idea itself can only be welcomed , especially if we consider how costly and cumbersome the current procedure is , having to apply for a separate patent in each Member State .
I abstained from voting because the language arrangements are still not entirely clear .
It remains to be seen to what extent the draft Commission regulation will allow for the use of the official languages other ​ ​ than English , French and German .
In any case , I am , and will continue to remain , of the opinion that it should also be possible to submit a dossier in Dutch .
( SK ) Madam President , the codification of the previously mentioned provisions of applicable texts , together with the previously mentioned changes , will undoubtedly bring the necessary clarification to legal arrangements on radioactivity in food .
In my opinion , however , in the context of adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , it would be desirable to reassess the legal basis of the proposed regulation , which must also take account of the new powers of the European Parliament in the area of public health protection .
In this case , I agree with the opinion that Article 168 ( 4b ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union provides a legal basis for the proposal , since the direct aim of the measures passed on this basis is to protect public health , which is the case when ( and I quote ) ' laying down maximum permitted levels of contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs ' .
( IT ) Madam President , I mostly support the amendments proposed through this text , which in any case essentially does nothing more than codify previous legislation regarding the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and animal feedingstuffs .
We are forgetting and letting it pass somewhat unnoticed that we are talking about waste from nuclear accidents .
This means that we have to continue to pay close attention to the risks of nuclear plants and to the fact that these are the consequences of the rotten and poisonous results of what , in certain States , we insist on developing .
It is therefore a measure that must inspire us all to be as vigilant as possible .
Getting to the heart of the matter , I do , however , think that more could be done to bring in compulsory immediate notification , which would allow all risk factors to be dealt with together .
Furthermore , there should be no way to avoid the requirement to notify government authorities in the event of an accident .
( PL ) Madam President , regulations ensuring that foodstuffs are not contaminated by radioactive substances came into being after the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant .
This is a very important issue , in particular , from the point of view of public health , but it is , at the same time , a difficult subject .
Implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon means that certain regulations need to be updated , including these ones , even though there is a dispute between the European Commission and Parliament 's proposals as far as the legal basis is concerned .
Parliament cites Article 168 ( 4 ) of the Treaty of Lisbon , whereas the Commission cites Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty .
It is important to reiterate the need to protect consumers , but also to emphasise the need to protect farmers , who should receive compensation for the losses they suffer following an accident .
The debate we have held has also shown the large differences in opinion when it comes to assessing possible threats , including levels of radiation caused by accidents or those from natural sources .
The fact that an increasing proportion of the European Union 's market is occupied by imported agricultural products and foodstuffs from various parts of the world should also be highlighted , since public health standards , including those ensuring that foodstuffs are not contaminated by radioactive substances , must be met .
( IT ) Madam President , the insertion of a new recital in the proposal for a codification of three regulations adopted between 1987 and 1990 laying down levels of radioactive contamination in case of radiological emergency brings the necessary ex post motivation to an existing article and justifies the right for the Council to exercise direct power in terms of adopting a regulation to promptly endorse the emergency measures proposed by the Commission .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Belet , that this cannot be disassociated from the article to which it refers .
In any case , in the light of the new rules introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , we need to clarify whether this justification provides sufficient motivation for the reservation of implementing powers to be exercised by the Council and whether those implementing powers delegated to the Council are properly defined and framed .
Citizens ' interests in the effective management of post-accident situations must be guaranteed .
The measures designed for this purpose include streamlining the procedure in the event of nuclear emergency and the clear assignment to the Commission of a supervisory role , which , at the same time , clarifies the regime of its acts .
Written explanations of vote
I agree with the rapporteur 's position regarding the consensus needed to conclude the agreement , now with new provisions in line with the EU 's development cooperation objectives , as set out in Article 208 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
On the other hand , I believe that this approach was overly focused on commercial and economic concerns , and on free trade , to the detriment of a more robust approach to development , and I welcome the new provisions , which should be included in the revised agreement , especially as regards combating poverty , aid efficiency , the Millennium Development Goals and the link between migration and development .
However , I am voting for this proposal because I believe that relations and trade with South Africa are essential for both parties .
I voted in favour of this document , because it includes important amendments .
It has to be welcomed that disarmament becomes an essential element of the agreement - to be more precise - on a par with democratic principles , human rights and the rule of law .
These are very important provisions , contributing to peacekeeping and security in the region , as well as respect for human rights and the development of democracy .
The principle of aid effectiveness ( as a development cooperation objective ) and priority for operations , which contribute , in particular , in the fight against poverty , towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) , have been added to the agreement .
It should be noted that obviously , from a South African development perspective , extending cooperation to many new areas is a point in the revised agreement 's favour ; and , moreover , extending cooperation in this way , which was provided for in the original 1999 agreement as simply a possibility , is what both sides wanted .
Moreover , it is also important that much attention is focused on commercial , economic and free-market concerns , which should contribute to the region 's economic development .
This revised agreement introduces a number of amendments , especially regarding the development of democratic principles and cooperation on the aspects relating to disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
I welcome the initiative for prioritising the operations which help achieve the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) , namely : the strategies aimed at reducing poverty , improving living and working conditions and creating new jobs .
I think that an in-depth political dialogue needs to be established on combating terrorism and money laundering , on the financing of terrorism and organised crime , and on combating the manufacture of , trade in and accumulation of weapons .
In addition , I advocate the need for us to focus as well on developing cooperation with the aim of improving the education and healthcare sectors .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
South Africa is a country that is developing rapidly in all areas and with which the European Union wishes to foster a special relationship .
Following the positive recommendation by the Committee on Development and the approval of the Committee on International Trade , I supported the signing of this agreement , which will strengthen our cooperation with that country .
I voted for the renewal of the EU-South Africa cooperation agreement , as amended in 2009 , because it introduces a new dimension to cooperation between the European Union and South Africa .
The initial 1999 agreement provided for trade cooperation , support to South Africa during its economic and social transition process , the economic integration of the country within southern Africa , and development cooperation .
Today , the agreement has been extended to the following areas : the fight against poverty , the effectiveness of development aid , the implementation of the MDGs , the fight for security , the fight against weapons of mass destruction and the fight against terrorism .
These are areas of strategic cooperation which I believe are important , considering the European Union 's active cooperation with South Africa and its influence in the southern African region .
I welcome this new agreement , which is aimed at stepping up bilateral cooperation in a number of areas .
I would stress the importance of children 's rights , gender equality , combating violence against women , environmental cooperation , particularly on climate change , cultural cooperation , cooperation on combating drugs and money laundering , health cooperation and , in particular , the fight against AIDS .
The link between cooperation and development should cover strategies aimed at reducing poverty , improving living and working conditions and creating employment , the participation of migrants in the development of their home countries , and cooperation to strengthen capacities , particularly in the health and education sectors , in order to offset the negative impact of the ' brain drain ' on sustainable development in South Africa .
I welcome our increased cooperation in these many new areas and am pleased with the new provisions on development that have been inserted into the revised agreement , in particular , as regards combating poverty , aid effectiveness , the Millennium Development Goals and the linkage between migration and development .
I voted in favour of this recommendation as I support the implementation of new development-related provisions in the agreement .
It is important to ensure effective monitoring by the EU authorities , as envisaged by the Treaty of Lisbon , so that it is possible to achieve the objectives of reducing and eradicating poverty in South Africa .
South Africa is a country that has been inspiring interest , aid and esteem internationally since the end of apartheid due to the way in which , despite difficulties and setbacks , it has managed to make a relatively peaceful transition from a supremacist regime to a democracy in which universal suffrage prevails .
It is impossible to recall this transition without evoking the inspirational figure of Nelson Mandela and his show of dignity , kindness and reconciliation , which is still having a positive effect on the country .
Today , we can say that South Africa is a key geopolitical and geostrategic player in Africa , and an example to other countries that have not yet been able to free themselves from the dictatorships that are oppressing them and holding back their development .
The EU has every interest in strengthening the ties that bind it to South Africa and in establishing partnerships that are mutually advantageous .
I therefore support the amendment to the Agreement on Trade , Development and Cooperation between the EU and South Africa .
The Agreement on Trade , Development and Cooperation between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of South Africa , of the other part , came into force on 1 May 2004 .
Although this agreement , which was concluded in Pretoria on 11 October 1999 , was set to be in force indefinitely , it provided for a review within five years of its entry into force .
I therefore welcome this recommendation , which will bring an end to a long negotiation process , as the revised agreement was concluded in Kleinmond on 11 September 2009 .
It will enable the entry into force of a regulation introducing significant amendments to the original agreement , in particular , at the level of disarmament and of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , as well as at the level of combating poverty by meeting the Millennium Development Goals , along with many other important amendments .
Although I agree with the rapporteur on the precedence given to trade concerns to the detriment of a development approach , I am voting in favour of this recommendation as it represents another step forward by the EU in terms of development cooperation , and this will help to meet the objective of eventually eradicating poverty .
This proposed amendment to the Trade , Development and Cooperation Agreement ( TDCA ) , with a view to including a ' comprehensive development assistance envelope ' , should be examined in the light of the efforts that the EU has been making for South Africa to conclude an Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) , seeking to overcome criticism and legitimate resistance to both the current TDCA and what the EU intends to become the EPAs .
The TDCA has exacerbated the economic asymmetries between the two parties to the EU 's advantage , as it has increased its exports to South Africa .
The EU 's policies on the ' liberalisation of trade in goods , services and capital ' have clearly failed .
The worsening of the economic and financial crisis of capitalism bear this out .
Competitiveness has been promoted instead of mutual assistance and reciprocity , imposing a division of labour that has meant the export of agricultural products from South Africa and the export of industrial products from the EU .
The beneficiaries are the same as ever : the major EU powers and their economic interest groups .
The consequences are plain to see , not only for developing countries , but also for EU countries such as Portugal : the weakening of productive sectors , an increase in external dependency , unemployment , poverty , etc .
I voted in favour of this document because the revised agreement makes a number of interesting changes to the original agreement , in particular - with regard to development - the following : disarmament becomes an essential element of the agreement - to be more precise - on a par with democratic principles , human rights and the rule of law ; the principle of aid effectiveness ( as a development cooperation objective ) and priority for operations contributing , in particular , in the fight against poverty , towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) , have been added .
I agree with the objective of strengthening support for the International Criminal Court and its work to put an end to impunity and to enforce international justice ; cooperation on migration is also to be the subject of regular political dialogue , as is , in this context , the linkage between cooperation and development , including , but not confined to : strategies aimed at reducing poverty , improving living and working conditions and creating employment ; participation of migrants in the development of their home countries ; cooperation to strengthen capacities , particularly in the health and education sectors , to offset the negative impact of the South African ' brain drain ' on sustainable development in South Africa ; legal , expeditious and cost-effective ways for expatriates to transfer remittances to the country .
The following are the most important aspects : peacekeeping and security in the region , as well as respect for human rights and the development of democracy .
I support the conclusion of the agreement between the EU and South Africa to extend bilateral cooperation .
In addition to consolidating the rule of law , important measures will be taken to combat terrorism and terrorist financing and to prevent the use of weapons of mass destruction .
The overwhelming support of the European Parliament for the agreement will lead to improvements in working conditions and in the healthcare system and to the reduction of poverty in South Africa .
The Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of South Africa signed in Pretoria in October 1999 entered into force in 2004 with a clause for its revision within five years of the date on which it became effective .
Today , seven years since the agreement was ratified , the European Parliament has managed to express its opinion on the negotiations led by the Commission on the basis of Council directives .
The text was submitted to us for approval and I decided to vote in favour , since it primarily concerns itself with development in South Africa .
Its fundamental purpose is to commit the two parties to the agreement to fight to try and definitively eradicate the issue of poverty , making a serious contribution to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
However , this can only be brought to pass if South Africa manages to take real action on its own behalf by setting out a proper disarmament policy , which is thought to be the real foundation on which to base the development project in the country .
in writing . - I welcome this agreement between the EU and South Africa which sets out new provisions on development , in particular , with regard to combating poverty , aid effectiveness and the MDGs .
South Africa is an important partner both for trade and development relations .
This agreement is situated within a specific context that the rapporteur seems to ignore .
The European Commission is exerting an unprecedented amount of pressure on the countries of southern Africa , especially South Africa , in order to conclude harmful economic partnership agreements .
The reference to the negotiations on the EPA and the suspension of all trade negotiations to make way for it are the very illustration of this blackmail .
I am voting against this report , which validates , rather than condemns , the draft agreement by the Barroso Commission .
An initial Trade , Development and Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of South Africa , of the other part , was concluded in Pretoria on 11 October 1999 and came into force on 1 May 2004 for an indefinite period .
This agreement has a five-year review clause following its entry into force .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has also necessitated the adoption of a new agreement , so that the EU can exercise all the rights and obligations that were previously exercised by the European Community .
The revised agreement concluded at Kleinmond in 2009 introduced a certain number of important amendments into the initial agreement , particularly the following changes in the area of development : disarmament , democratic principles , human rights and the rule of law , cooperation on disarmament issues and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
That is why I voted as I did .
in writing . - I abstained from voting on this issue because : ( 1 ) the Republic of South Africa possesses tremendous natural resources and is capable enough to resolve its own questions itself ; ( 2 ) the level of corruption in South Africa is so high that the shadow economy accounts for more than 60 % of its market ; ( 3 ) there are countries which cannot solve problems themselves and are more significantly in need of EU financial support , and whose situation is more hopeless ; ( 4 ) the EU may assist the Republic of South Africa in an advisory way .
I voted in favour of the text tabled by Mrs Joly on the agreement between the European Union and the Republic of South Africa because , in the light of the new international situation that has come about over recent years , we need to revise the agreements with South Africa on trade , development and cooperation .
In terms of economic relations , the agreements bring benefits for both parties ' industries .
For example , South Africa is an important commercial partner for Italy , both in terms of cofinancing projects and trade .
A further aim of the revision of these agreements is to establish coordination on the fight against terrorism , partly in the light of the entry into force of the International Criminal Court , and also to open a conversation on common values and interests in areas such as migration , energy , space , transport and security .
I voted in favour of the conclusion of the agreement between the European Union and its Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of South Africa , of the other part , which amends the Trade , Development and Cooperation Agreement ( TDCA ) .
Since the TDCA entered into force , the trade in EU goods with South Africa has increased steadily .
The EU is South Africa 's main trading partner ; in 2009 , the EU was the destination for about 34 % of total South African exports and the source of about 35 % of total imports to South Africa .
The balance between imports and exports is clear , but my sole concern is with the production methods in South Africa for products exported to the EU : these should meet the same standards as those required of European producers in the same industry .
These indicators suggest that the results of the first agreement concluded in 1999 can already be seen .
Like the rapporteur , I would like the EU 's development cooperation objectives to be respected , the foremost of these objectives being to reduce and ultimately to eradicate poverty .
I voted in favour of this recommendation on the review of the Trade , Development and Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and its Member States and South Africa .
By comparison with the original agreement , concluded in Pretoria on 11 October 1999 , this revised agreement , concluded in Kleinmond on 11 September 2009 , was aimed at extending the political dialogue between the parties in important areas such as the fight against weapons of mass destruction and against terrorism , along with stepping up development cooperation , with particular emphasis on operations that contribute to the fight against poverty , in the context of achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
I therefore believe that the amendments that have been introduced are to be welcomed .
in writing . - Parliament consents to the conclusion of the agreement , and calls for the new development-related provisions in the agreement and the new cooperation arrangements it provides for to be applied in full and , when the agreement is implemented , to be closely monitored in the light of Article 208 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , i.e. in line with the Union 's development cooperation objectives , of which the Union must take account in all the policies that it implements which are likely to affect developing countries , the primary objective being to reduce and , in the long term , eradicate poverty .
I voted in favour of this recommendation because I fully support its contents , particularly in terms of the desire to strengthen bilateral cooperation between the European Union and the Republic of South Africa .
Since this is , above all , an economic and commercial agreement , the amended text supports the economic and social transition process in the Republic of South Africa , promoting regional cooperation and providing fresh impetus to the country 's economic integration into the global economy .
Partly as a result of my institutional roles , I think it is a priority to strengthen political dialogue with this country , particularly with regard to issues of specific interest for African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) States .
In particular , I support the decision to direct a large portion of the EUR 980 million available to the EU for the period 2007-2013 to the creation of new jobs , as well as financing the construction in South Africa of the necessary infrastructure to provide basic services in terms of health and security .
Pursuing these objectives with the real involvement of civil society means proceeding doggedly along the path to achieving the Millennium Development Goals and placing the eradication of hunger and all forms of poverty above all other goals .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this agreement as it will improve Europe 's trade and development relations with South Africa , which are critical for the South African region and also for us .
1999 marked the conclusion of the first Trade , Development and Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and its Member States and the Republic of South Africa , which came into force on 1 May 2004 .
This first agreement had a distinctly economic character , being based on trade liberalisation , and it left little room for development cooperation .
The review of this agreement , which was provided for therein , was concluded in 2009 , and introduced important changes in development policy , in particular , cooperation on issues associated with disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , the inclusion of the principle of the rule of law and human rights , the principle of aid effectiveness , particularly in matters concerning the fight against poverty , and achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
New areas were added in order to enhance cooperation : the fight against terrorism and organised crime ; the prevention of mercenary activities ; the fight against the manufacturing of , trade in and accumulation of small arms and light weapons ; and cooperation on migration .
I welcome the adoption of this agreement with a strategic partner of the EU and the institutionalisation of non-state actors as cooperation partners , thus making them eligible for financial aid .
I supported the European Parliament 's recommendation to amend the provisions of the Trade , Development and Cooperation Agreement in the field of rights , freedoms and security .
I believe that it is important to introduce a results-based approach into development cooperation if we want to make progress towards achieving our Millennium Development Goals .
The main objective of creating jobs addresses the central problem of the economic development of South Africa .
For years , there have been calls for a concept for establishing small and medium-sized enterprises in the country .
The EU , which is South Africa 's most important trading partner , can provide valuable assistance in the process of economic and social transformation .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Joly on the revision of the agreement between the European Union and the Republic of South Africa , which has been in force since 2004 .
In fact , the aim of said revision is to work out new possibilities for liberalising trade in specific sectors and , at the same time , adapting the agreement to the changed international context .
In my opinion , it is essential to stress that this revision lays the foundations for improving and deepening dialogue between the European Union and South Africa on important issues such as migration , exploitation of energy sources and security .
Given that the four agreements included in the Commission 's proposal offer the possibility of enhancing the contribution made by the European Free Trade Association / European Economic Area ( EEA ) to reducing the economic and social disparities within the EEA , I am voting for this report .
It is worth highlighting the agreement between the EU , Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway and the agreement between the EU and Norway , two financial mechanisms for 2009-2014 which provide for a total package of EUR 1.8 billion , representing a 31 % increase in the EEA financial mechanism and a 22 % increase in the Norwegian financial mechanism against the previous period .
These resources are available to Iceland , the 12 most recent Member States , and Portugal , Spain and Greece , helping to revive some of the European economies that have been most weakened by the crisis .
in writing . - I voted against this report as I question the propriety of granting Iceland any concessions regarding the importation of fisheries produce into the EU when they continue to persist with their approach on the management of mackerel , with the negative impact this is likely to have on EU pelagic fishermen .
Established in 1994 , the agreement permits Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway to participate in the EU 's single market without conventional EU membership .
In exchange , they are obliged to adopt all EU legislation related to the single market except those pieces of legislation that relate to agriculture and fisheries .
Iceland can export fisheries produce to the EU tariff-free .
It is a difficult pill to swallow that having blatantly disregarded international management of the mackerel stock and , in 2010 , declared a catch of 100 000 tonnes , Iceland has the freedom to export its entire mackerel catch into the EU .
While the fisheries concessions granted to Iceland may not have changed in the new agreement , Iceland 's behaviour with regard to fisheries management has certainly changed and in this light , I would question if this agreement should be ratified .
The purpose of this resolution is to give backing to four agreements between the European Union and Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway , which are intended to establish the contributions of these countries to reducing economic and social disparities within the European Economic Area and reinforce them in the light of the previous period .
This proposal steps up the contribution of the states concerned and does not substantially alter fisheries concessions .
In this regard , the period from 2009 to 2014 is essentially a renewal of what was agreed for the previous period , from 2004 to 2009 .
The unanimous vote by the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Fisheries is indicative of the non-controversial nature of this issue .
The Commission has tabled a proposal for four agreements to Parliament .
Two of these agreements , on financial mechanisms for the 2009-2014 period , provide for an overall package of EUR 1.8 billion .
They relate to one agreement between the EU , Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway which represents a 31 % increase in the European Economic Area ( EEA ) financial mechanism , and another relating to an agreement between the EU and Norway which represents a 22 % increase in the Norwegian financial mechanism .
The other two agreements are related to fisheries concessions for Iceland and Norway between 2009 and 2014 , and provide for their renewal .
The concessions are the same for Iceland .
For Norway , they have increased slightly , so there will be a provision for the renewal of the transit agreement which expired on 30 April 2009 .
I am voting in favour of the proposal because EEA funds will be made available to the 12 most recent Member States , along with Portugal , as well as Greece and Spain , and the areas to be funded include the environment , especially climate change and renewable energy , civil society and the protection of cultural heritage .
The conclusion of this agreement , adopted here today , follows the Agreement on the European Economic Area ( EEA ) which has been in force since 1994 , covering the states of the EEA / European Free Trade Association .
At that time , five-year contributions were agreed upon by those states in order to reduce economic and social disparities within the EEA ; naturally , we support this aim .
The funding for this five-year period ( 2009-2014 ) has more than doubled the funds available for the previous period .
These EEA funds will be made available to the 12 most recent Member States , as well as Greece , Portugal and Spain , and may be used in a number of important areas , including environmental protection , human and social development and the protection of cultural heritage .
In view of the enlargements of the EU and the worsening of the social and economic situation in many of its countries , as is the case with Portugal , we believe that it is important to increase these funds .
As Chair of the European Parliament delegation for relations with Switzerland , Iceland and Norway and to the Joint Parliamentary Committee of the European Economic Area , I welcome this report .
It was I who prepared the Opinion of the Committee on Fisheries on the report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Koppa report on the Financial Mechanism relating to fisheries .
Nevertheless , this does not indicate that all is well with EU-EEA fisheries matters .
The refusal of Iceland to come to an agreement with the EU and Norway in relation to mackerel is highly regrettable and I strongly urge all parties to go back to the negotiating table
I agreed with this document , because since the entry into force of the Agreement on the European Economic Area ( EEA ) in 1994 , the EEA EFTA States ( Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway ) have contributed to alleviating economic and social disparities in the EEA .
The most recent five-year period of financial contributions expired in 2009 ( EUR 1.467 billion ) .
The Commission 's current proposal includes four agreements .
These agreements provide for a package of EUR 1.8 billion , comprising a 31 % increase in the EEA financial mechanism and a 22 % increase in the Norwegian financial mechanism , compared to the period 2004-2009 .
This outcome reflects the negotiating directives agreed by the Council , which requested a ' substantial increase ' in the funds .
The EEA funds will be made available to the 12 most recent Member States , as well as Greece , Portugal and Spain .
Priority sectors include the environment , climate change and renewable energy , civil society , human and social development and the protection of cultural heritage .
The funds earmarked for Norway will be made available to the 12 most recent Member States .
Priority sectors include carbon capture and storage , green industry innovation , research and scholarship , human and social development , justice and home affairs , promotion of decent work and tripartite dialogue .
Two protocols concerning certain fisheries concessions for Iceland and for Norway for the period 2009-2014 provide for a renewal of the previous 2004-2009 protocols with unchanged concessions for Iceland and a relatively modest increase in concessions for Norway , on the basis of which Norway will renew the fish transit arrangement .
I support the agreement between the EU , Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway concerning the continuation of the European Economic Area ( EEA ) financial mechanism , as we should all be working towards reducing the social and economic disparities within the EEA .
The total package of EUR 1.8 billion represents an increase of 31 % or 22 % over the last five-year period .
The extension of the protocols on fishery concessions and market access are important , long-term regulations in the field of aquaculture .
Today , Parliament has voted in favour of the agreement proposed by the Commission regarding , on the one hand , financial mechanisms for the period 2009-2014 between the European Union and Iceland , the Principality of Liechtenstein and Norway , and on the other hand , an agreement between the European Union and Norway .
The agreements make provision for an increase in the European Economic Area Financial Mechanism for climate change and renewable energies , civil society , humanitarian and social development , and the protection of cultural heritage .
In practical terms , it provides an overall package of EUR 1.8 billion .
The last 12 States to join the Union , plus Spain , Greece and Portugal , are the countries that will be able to take advantage of these funds .
I therefore voted in favour of the report , since I think that we should support economic cooperation and because we must never forget that the wellbeing of a Member State contributes to improving the economy of the whole of Europe , and thus the quality of life of its 500 million citizens .
in writing . - I voted for this proposal which gives an opportunity to strengthen the contribution of EEA and EFTA states to the reduction of economic and social disparities in the European Economic Area .
In the meantime , fisheries concessions remain unchanged for Iceland and are modestly increased for Norway .
These agreements provide for an overall package of EUR 1.8 billion , comprising a 31 % increase in the European Economic Area ( EEA ) financial mechanism and a 22 % increase in the Norwegian financial mechanism .
It is worth pointing out that EEA funds should be channelled towards funding conservation , climate change and renewable energy , civil society , human and social development , and the protection of cultural heritage as priorities .
Norway 's financial resources will be channelled to priority sectors that involve carbon capture and storage , green-industry innovation , research and scholarship , human and social development , justice and home affairs , the promotion of decent work and tripartite dialogue .
The two protocols concerning certain fisheries concessions for Iceland and Norway for the period 2009-2014 provide for the renewal of the previous 2004-2009 protocols with unchanged concessions for Iceland and a relatively modest increase in concessions for Norway , on the basis of which Norway will renew the fish transit agreement .
This report gives a green light to the renewal of agreements relating to the European Economic Area ( EEA ) .
Since the Agreement on the EEA entered into force in 1994 , the EEA / European Free Trade Association states - currently Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway - have contributed towards reducing economic and social disparities in the EEA .
These contributions were always agreed for five-year periods , and the aim is now to renew the agreements for the 2009-2014 period .
In parallel to those negotiations , but independently of them , negotiations were also launched on the basis of the two bilateral fish protocols with Iceland and Norway , and concluded on 18 December 2009 .
With regard to the outcome of the aforementioned negotiations , it is worth highlighting , in particular , the significant increase in the financial mechanism , although the position of Iceland is unchanged due to the severe crisis that it is experiencing .
As regards the agreements concerning certain fisheries concessions for Iceland and Norway for the period 2009-2014 , I share the favourable opinion of the Committee on Fisheries , which highlights the modest increase in concessions for Norway , on the basis of which Norway will renew the fish transit agreement , which expired on 30 April 2009 .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
Since the Agreement on the European Economic Area ( EEA ) entered into force in 1994 , the EEA / European Free Trade Association states - currently Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway - have contributed towards reducing economic and social disparities in the EEA .
These contributions were always agreed for five-year periods , and now the agreements reached on the financial mechanisms for the 2009-2014 period are under discussion , along with the renewal of the two bilateral protocols on fisheries concessions with Iceland and Norway .
No significant changes were made to these protocols against the previous period , with the concessions for Iceland remaining unchanged and those for Norway only increasing slightly .
The agreements on the financial mechanisms resulted in a significant stepping up of the contribution from the EEA / EFTA states for the 2004-2009 period , envisaging an overall package of EUR 1.8 billion , which will be made available to the 12 newest Member States , as well as Greece , Portugal and Spain , in order to fund priority sectors including conservation , climate change , renewable energy , human and social development and protection of cultural heritage .
I therefore voted in favour .
in writing . - This proposal gives an opportunity to : strengthen the contribution of EEA and EFTA States to the reduction of economic and social disparities in the European Economic Area ; significantly increase the financial mechanism against unchanged concessions for Iceland and modestly increase the concessions for Norway .
I therefore suggested that the Committee on Fisheries give a favourable opinion on the Commission 's proposal COM ( 2010 ) 234 .
I supported this recommendation because it represents an opportunity to strengthen the contribution of the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) States in reducing economic and social disparities in the European Economic Area ( EEA ) .
Fishing concessions for Iceland remain unchanged , while those for Norway have been increased slightly .
The two agreements regarding the financial mechanisms for the period 2009-2014 between the EU , Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway , and the EU and Norway , provide an overall package of EUR 1.8 billion , with substantial increases compared with the period 2004-2009 .
Now we need to work to resolve the differences that still exist between the EU , Iceland and Norway over issues relating to the management of marine life , especially whale hunting .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this agreement which will strengthen the contribution of EEA-EFTA States in tackling social and economic disparities within the European Economic Area .
I have voted in favour of the agreement because this is another logical step towards harmonising cooperation between the members of the European Free Trade Association .
As vice-president of the delegation , I am very pleased that we are continuing in the direction of a privileged partnership .
I am voting for this recommendation , as this horizontal agreement allows the removal of national restrictions on the current bilateral agreements between the Member States and Brazil , benefiting the entire European aviation industry .
In addition , such an agreement enables the restoration of a sound legal basis for relations between the EU and Brazil in the aviation sector , which will be an important step in strengthening EU-Brazil relations in this sector .
I foresee that this agreement will generate benefits for consumers in terms of lower fares by up to EUR 460 million , promote employment and offer new business opportunities for EU airlines .
Since the European Union has exclusive competence for certain aspects of external aviation policy , it was necessary from a legal point of view to replace a dozen bilateral agreements concluded by Member States with the Federative Republic of Brazil by agreements negotiated and concluded by the European Union .
Following approval by the Council of the European Union in 2003 , the European Commission negotiated the agreement that I have decided to lend my support to today .
The agreement will pave the way for ' a comprehensive air services agreement with Brazil based on a combination of gradual market opening and regulatory cooperation and convergence ' .
This future agreement will result in better services for travellers and a stronger position for European airlines .
I think that the agreement on aviation relations between the European Union and Brazil provides a sound legal basis and marks an important first step in strengthening EU-Brazil aviation relations .
I believe that this agreement will enable them to further enhance aviation cooperation and initiate negotiations on a global bilateral air services agreement .
I voted in favour of this recommendation as it is an important step in strengthening relations between the EU and Brazil in the aviation sector , and it will allow them to proceed towards negotiating a comprehensive air services agreement .
The agreement that we adopted today is an important step in strengthening relations between the EU and Brazil in the aviation sector .
It is expected that this agreement could lead to benefits for consumers in terms of lower fares by up to EUR 460 million , as well as promoting employment , and offering new business opportunities for EU airlines and benefits to those who travel between the EU and Brazil .
Given the special ties that bind Portugal and Brazil , I welcome the conclusion of this agreement , which will engender a new closeness between Europe and Brazil , with all the economic , social and cultural benefits that this may bring .
The Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , substantially changed the powers of various EU institutions , particularly Parliament , which , in the new set-up , is called upon to rule on matters which were not previously under its jurisdiction , as in this case of an international agreement between the EU and the Federative Republic of Brazil on air services .
This agreement , which was concluded on 14 July 2010 , is aimed at replacing the provisions contained in the bilateral agreements on air services between 12 Member States and the Federative Republic of Brazil with a bilateral agreement between the EU and the same .
I support this agreement because it represents an important step in strengthening relations between the EU and Brazil in the aviation sector .
As with previous agreements covering the same area that have been recently adopted by Parliament , and given the specific context in which civil aviation operates , this proposal raises serious concerns about its scope and possible consequences .
It concerns an issue with a clear impact on air transport companies , in a sector which is , for various reasons , strategic for safeguarding national interests .
In the case of Brazil , this concern is even more pressing .
The purpose behind it is clear , and the rapporteur does not make any effort to hide it : the aim is to open the market so as to create ' new business opportunities for EU airlines ' .
We know that the supposed creation of a level playing field for the various European companies contributes to the process of facilitating the monopolistic concentration of the sector , which is already under way , as well as the consequent reduction of the Member States ' capacity to defend their flag-carrying airlines , and thus their legitimate interests , at a number of levels .
' Free competition ' , which is constantly mentioned and seen as sacrosanct , is defended at all costs , and is once again the pillar by which this initiative is supported .
The result for this sector is not substantially different from the result for others : the monopolistic concentration that always ends up being imposed in these cases .
Together with my Italian colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I decided to abstain in today 's vote regarding relations between the European Union and Brazil on certain aspects of air services .
This is because , in the light of the content of the resolution on the Cesare Battisti case . I would have preferred it if the vote had been postponed ahead of the new decision of the Federal Court in Brazil on the extradition of Cesare Battisti , a criminal .
Given the non-urgent nature of the dossier , postponing it to the next part-session or the one in April certainly would not have been a problem , especially if we think about the pain of the families of the victims of this mass-murderer .
These same families have been waiting 31 years for justice to be done and for Cesare Battisti to serve the sentence handed down by Italy 's justice system in our own prisons .
I agreed with this report , because the EU has exclusive competence with respect to various aspects of external aviation which were traditionally governed by bilateral air services agreements between Member States and third countries .
Consequently , on 5 June 2003 , the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with third countries in order to replace certain provisions in existing bilateral agreements with EU agreements .
The agreement was signed on 14 July 2010 .
It covers such aspects as safety , taxation of aviation fuel , competition rules , etc .
Concluding this agreement has been an important first step in strengthening EU-Brazil aviation relations and has allowed Brazil and the EU to further enhance aviation cooperation and move towards negotiating a comprehensive air services agreement .
This agreement is based on a combination of gradual market opening and regulatory cooperation and convergence .
Such an agreement is expected to be capable of generating a consumer surplus ( benefits in terms of lower fares ) of up to EUR 460 million .
It will have a positive employment effect and is expected to offer significant new business opportunities for EU airlines as well as benefits to the travelling public .
in writing . - I voted for this Horizontal Agreement , which is not important in itself , but is an important step in strengthening EU-Brazil aviation relations , allowing Brazil and the EU to further enhance aviation cooperation and to move towards negotiating a comprehensive air services agreement between them .
The comprehensive air agreement should be based on a combination of gradual market opening and on regulatory cooperation and convergence .
The benefits to the EU will be more routes and lower fares for consumers .
My abstention in the vote on the report regarding the agreement between the European Union and the Federative Republic of Brazil on air services expresses a position that goes beyond the scope of the matter .
I do not approve of the conduct of the Brazilian Government in the Cesare Battisti case .
Extradition -procedures for which are defined in a bilateral agreement - should have been granted .
The interpretation provided by the judicial authorities violates the commitments undertaken .
The sentence -which Mr Battisti should serve in Italy - was handed down by an ordinary judge , applying ordinary laws to a common crime : mass murder .
It is difficult to support international relations , such as those defined in the reports voted on by Parliament , with a country that does not respect agreements and which , above all , takes a stand on the fundamental right to the protection of life .
The EU has always advocated free competition .
The mandate granted to the Commission on 15 October 2010 to negotiate a comprehensive air services agreement with Brazil based on a combination of gradual market opening and regulatory cooperation and convergence therefore makes perfect sense .
This agreement gives all EU air carriers non-discriminatory access to links with Brazil and replaces or complements the provisions of the current 14 bilateral air service agreements between the Member States and Brazil .
This is an important first step in strengthening relations between the EU and Brazil in the aviation sector , which has allowed them to continue to strengthen their cooperation at this level and proceed towards negotiating a comprehensive air services agreement between Brazil and the EU .
All consumers benefit from this new agreement , which offers the possibility of lower fares on air transport to Brazil .
I abstained on the recommendation tabled by Mrs Macovei , together with the two other reports , in the light of the conduct of the Brazilian authorities over the Cesare Battisti case .
The failure to extradite a terrorist - who is not recognised as such by Brazil - has to be taken into consideration .
For this reason , together with the rest of the Italian delegation of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I decided to abstain on the draft decision on the conclusion of the agreement between the European Union and Brazil on short-stay visas for the purposes of business and tourism , as well as the report on the improvement of the agreements regarding air services between the EU and Brazil .
Clearly , our actions are not an expression of our disagreement with the content of the reports , but a political signal through which , once again , we wanted to reiterate our disappointment regarding the conduct of the Brazilian authorities over the Cesare Battisti case .
By voting for this report , we are giving the necessary favourable opinion of the European Parliament on the international agreement concluded between the EU and Brazil .
It is a horizontal agreement with Brazil which will establish a solid legal basis for relations between the EU and Brazil in the aviation sector .
This is an important first step in strengthening relations between the EU and Brazil in the aviation sector and will allow both parties to continue to strengthen their cooperation at this level and proceed towards negotiating a comprehensive air services agreement .
It is thought that this agreement may generate benefits for consumers in terms of lower fares by up to EUR 460 million .
There will be a positive impact on employment , and it is hoped that new business opportunities will open up for EU airlines , with benefits for those who travel between the EU and Brazil .
In view of this , I agree with the rapporteur on the proposal for Parliament to adopt this report and the request for the Council to finalise this procedure without undue delay .
Given the important ties that bind Portugal and Brazil , I naturally welcome the adoption of this report .
It will replace certain provisions contained in the 12 bilateral agreements on air services between the Member States and the Federative Republic of Brazil This agreement provides the foundation for strengthening relations between the EU and Brazil in the aviation sector , and is expected to bring significant benefits for consumers in terms of lower fares by up to EUR 460 million , as well as new business opportunities for EU airlines .
in writing . - The horizontal agreement with Brazil will restore a sound legal basis for the EU 's aviation relations with Brazil .
This has been an important first step in strengthening EU-Brazil aviation relations which has allowed Brazil and the EU to further enhance aviation cooperation and move towards negotiating a comprehensive air services agreement between Brazil and the EU .
Upon a request from the European Commission , on 15 October 2010 , the EU Transport Council granted a mandate to the European Commission to negotiate a comprehensive air services agreement with Brazil based on a combination of gradual market opening and regulatory cooperation and convergence .
Such an agreement is expected to be able to generate a consumer surplus ( benefits in terms of lower fares ) of up to EUR 460 million .
It will have a positive employment effect and is expected to offer significant new business opportunities for EU airlines as well as benefits to the travelling public .
in writing . - I have supported this agreement which will encourage further cooperation between the EU and Brazil in the field of civil aviation .
The EU aviation industry will benefit from the removal of nationality restrictions between Member States and Brazil .
Relations between the European Union and Brazil are greatly important in the current context of European external relations .
This agreement , which I believe to be the first step of many towards a new EU civil aviation policy with Brazil , is to establish the general framework for developing relations in this field .
It is called a horizontal agreement because it creates a solid legal basis for a number of aspects of civil aviation between the two parties , by replacing the traditional bilateral agreements with provisions for general and uniform implementation across the entire EU territory provided for in this agreement .
The draft recommendation , for which I was the shadow rapporteur , welcomes the terms of the agreement , which addresses such important issues as security and imposing taxes on fuel for general implementation throughout European territory , and the requirement to comply with EU competition laws .
I believe that the agreement will pave the way for new economic benefits , be they for consumers or airlines , and strengthen cooperation relations between both transatlantic parties , thus constituting an asset for the EU .
For the above reasons , I voted in favour of the document .
With regard to the draft Council decision ( 07853 / 2010 ) , the draft agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Iceland , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on supplementary rules in relation to the External Border Fund for the period 2007-2013 , and to the request for consent submitted by the Council in line with the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , within the legal framework and according to a recommendation made by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I support the conclusion of this agreement .
I support the agreement between the European Community and Iceland , Norway , Switzerland and Liechtenstein on supplementary rules in relation to the External Borders Fund for the period 2007-2013 .
The countries involved in the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis should participate in the External Borders Fund , in line the decision establishing this fund .
This agreement should therefore provide for the implementation of standards in the territories of the countries involved , so as to allow the Commission to take ultimate responsibility for implementing the budget of the fund in these states .
It takes into account aspects at the level of financial management and control of the fund and also establishes the provisions concerning financial contributions from these countries to the fund 's budget .
I would also stress the choice that Liechtenstein has made , through a joint declaration , not to participate in the fund , although this does not affect its obligation to contribute financially to it , since it was established to share the burden and provide financial support for the implementation of the Schengen acquis in the field of external border and visa policy .
The proposal relates to the conclusion , on behalf of the EU , of an agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Iceland , the Kingdom of Norway , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein .
Broadly speaking , this agreement concerns the participation of these countries in the External Borders Fund , arising from their participation in the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis .
It is envisaged that further agreements will be concluded , setting out the necessary provisions for the implementation of this participation , in particular , those ensuring the protection of the EU 's financial interests and those that allow the Court of Auditors to supervise the whole process .
The final adoption of the agreement by the Council will follow Parliament 's vote in favour .
This recommendation relates to a draft Council decision on the establishment of an agreement between the EU and the Republic of Iceland , the Kingdom of Norway , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on supplementary rules in relation to the External Borders Fund for the period 2007-2013 .
Given that this agreement falls within the objectives that led to the signing of the Schengen Treaty on the free movement of people and goods , given the agreements that have previously been established between the EU and the aforementioned countries in relation to the objectives set out in the Schengen Treaty , and given that the EU has created an External Borders Fund for the period 2007-2013 under the general programme entitled ' Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows ' , I welcome the conclusion of this agreement , which will help to strengthen cohesion within Europe .
This report follows the agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Iceland , the Kingdom of Norway , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on supplementary rules in relation to the External Borders Fund for the period 2007-2013 .
It is connected to existing agreements or those which are still being implemented on the movement and freedom of people between these states and EU countries .
Thus , with the aim of supporting the monitoring of external borders , particularly in the field of immigration , the EU wants to assign , under certain conditions , Union support from the External Borders Fund for the period 2007-2013 .
The objectives of the actions taken in this respect by the EU and the Commission deserve our criticism , since we cannot ignore the unacceptable Return Directive .
As Chair of the European Parliament delegation for relations with Switzerland , Iceland and Norway and the Joint Parliamentary Committee of the European Economic Area , I welcome this report .
in writing . - I voted for this agreement which allows states associated with the implementation , application and development of the Schengen Agreement to participate in the External Borders Fund for the 2007 to 2013 period .
Looking from the point of view of a true European Union - in political , economic and , above all , geographic terms - I think it is necessary and fundamentally important to vote in favour of this proposal , since countries like Iceland , Norway and Liechtenstein , as well as Switzerland , are geographically located in Europe .
I therefore think that a single border management policy should be implemented in order to facilitate integration and movement from one country to another .
Establishing a European border management fund would be a just and significant measure in order to bring about centralised coordination , both in terms of resources and of implementing policies .
This would also facilitate and stimulate tourism and the free movement of transport and people .
Under the new powers granted to Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon , it has become necessary to adopt the draft Council decision on the conclusion , on behalf of the European Union , of the agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Iceland , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on supplementary rules in relation to the External Border Fund for the period 2007-2013 .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has recommended the adoption of this agreement .
The agreement envisages the participation in the External Borders Fund of third countries involved in the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis .
This participation can come about through further agreements which should be reached in order to clarify the necessary provisions for this participation , including provisions on the protection of the EU 's financial interests and the authorisation of the Court of Auditors to carry out the audit .
The agreement was reached between the parties , and given that there were no critical comments in any of the opinions expressed , I voted in favour of this resolution .
In line with Decision ( EC ) No 574 / 2007 of the Parliament and of the Council of 23 May 2007 establishing the External Borders Fund for the period 2007-2013 , third countries involved in the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis should participate in this fund .
To this end , it is envisaged that agreements will be concluded specifying supplementary rules that are necessary for this participation , including provisions ensuring the protection of the EU 's financial interests and the exercise of the power to audit by the Court of Auditors .
This proposal relates to the conclusion of an agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Iceland , the Kingdom of Norway , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein , the precise aim of which is the definition of supplementary rules on the participation of these countries in the aforementioned fund .
I believe that this merits my support , in line with the recommendation of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
in writing . - In line with our position during the vote in the LIBE Committee ( the lead committee ) , we in the Verts / ALE Group decided to vote against this proposal .
I have voted in favour of the agreement , because these states are not a problem in terms of quality or reliability and , therefore , do not represent a security risk for the EU .
The recommendation concerns the conclusion of an agreement with Schengen-associated third countries , in this case , Iceland , Norway , Switzerland and Liechtenstein .
They are to be involved in implementing , applying and developing the Schengen acquis .
Supplementary regulations are needed in this respect to protect the financial interests of the EU and to give auditing powers to the Court of Auditors .
These additions are sensible , which is why I have voted in favour of concluding the agreement .
I am voting for this report , given that the Schengen area already allows free movement within a territory of 42 673 km of external sea borders and 7 721 km of land borders , covering 25 countries and 400 million people .
The gradual expansion of this area has allowed third countries that have special relationships with the EU to take part in Schengen cooperation , and for the Swiss Confederation to belong to the Schengen acquis from 1 March 2008 .
Given the open borders policy between Switzerland and the Principality of Liechtenstein , a microstate that has been steadily integrating into the European trade area since its accession to the European Economic Area in 1995 , given that it has already implemented 98.4 % of EU directives into domestic law , and given that it is part of the Single Market , there is no reason for me to oppose its accession to the Schengen area .
A microstate located between Switzerland and Austria , Liechtenstein has an area of 160 km ² and a population of 35 000 .
Although the country is not a member of the European Union , it is associated to it within the European Economic Area ( EEA ) .
It applies almost all European legislation and has asked to join the Schengen area for the free movement of persons .
Given the tradition of cooperation between the European Union and Liechtenstein and the absence of any threat linked to the country 's accession to the Schengen area , I voted in favour of it joining .
I voted in favour of this recommendation , according to which the signature of the protocol between the European Union , the European Community , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on the accession of the Principality of Liechtenstein to the Agreement between the European Union , the European Community and the Swiss Confederation on the Swiss Confederation 's association with the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis took place on 28 February 2008 .
Switzerland joined the Schengen area alone , on 12 December 2008 , with the abolition of border control at land borders , followed by the abolition of border checks on intra-Schengen flights at airports on 29 March 2009 .
For the first time , it was necessary to put up controls at a place where there has been no real border for 100 years .
The 41 kilometres that separate the two countries became an external Schengen border .
In 2007 , the European Parliament was asked for the first time to give its opinion regarding the conclusion of this protocol .
Following a request by the designated rapporteur at that time - Mrs Ewa Klamt - on 11 June 2007 , the Legal Affairs Committee gave its unanimous opinion , recommending that the legal basis should be changed so far as to refer to the second paragraph of Article 300 ( 3 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which requires the assent and not merely consultation of the European Parliament .
I welcome the new rules introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon allowing the European Parliament to be more closely informed about international agreements .
Twenty five years ago , five Member States decided to abolish the domestic borders between them and create a single external border .
At present , all the Member States are full members of Schengen , with the exception of the United Kingdom , Ireland , Cyprus , Bulgaria and Romania .
There are also three associated states integrated : Norway , Iceland and Switzerland ; Liechtenstein should become the fourth .
It was hoped that Liechtenstein would become associated with Schengen at the same time as Switzerland , in 2008 .
However , the process did not occur as expected , in particular , due to the reservations expressed by two Member States , Germany and Sweden , concerning issues related to tax evasion .
The accession of Switzerland alone made it necessary to introduce controls in areas where , for more than a hundred years , there had been no real border , and the 41 km separating Switzerland and Liechtenstein became an external border .
In view of the new rules of the Treaty of Lisbon , which allow Parliament to be associated with the conclusion of international agreements in a much closer way , as well as the fact that the reservations existing in the Council have been lifted , I propose that Parliament gives its consent to the conclusion of this protocol , and I hope that Liechtenstein can join Schengen as soon as possible .
I voted for this report as I think that it is necessary and natural to remove border controls with Liechtenstein , given both the size of this state and its relations with its neighbours , Austria and Switzerland , with which it enjoys a tradition of free movement .
In addition , Liechtenstein 's effective association with the Schengen and Dublin acquis will happen naturally as this country has already implemented a large amount of EU legislation and uses the same infrastructure for accessing SIS and VIS as Switzerland , a country which is already part of the Schengen area .
Given the open borders policy between the Principality of Liechtenstein and the Swiss Confederation , it was expected that the countries would join Schengen at the same time .
However , this did not happen .
Switzerland joined the Schengen area alone , on 12 December 2008 .
However , there was already provision in the agreement on the accession of Switzerland for Liechtenstein 's possible accession by means of a protocol , which is now being approved by Parliament .
This accession made it necessary to put in place border controls for the first time between Liechtenstein and Switzerland at places where there had been no real border for a century .
This recommendation advises Parliament to approve the establishment of a protocol between the European Union , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on the accession of the Principality of Liechtenstein to the agreement between the European Union , the European Community and the Swiss Confederation on Switzerland 's association with the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis , which was concluded on 28 February 2008 .
The Schengen Agreement aims to create a territory where there is free movement of people and goods , without internal borders between the states , but only a single external border .
Following the Treaty of Amsterdam in 1999 , the EU integrated the Schengen cooperation into the framework of its legal powers .
For decades , the Principality of Liechtenstein and the Swiss Confederation have practised an open borders policy with free movement of people .
Switzerland 's accession to the Schengen area in 2008 created a problem for movement between the two states , transforming the border between them into an external one , and the aim is now to resolve this problem .
Thus , in view of the advantages that arise from the entry into force of this protocol , there is nothing to prevent its adoption .
The Schengen Agreement dates back to 1985 , when it was concluded between Germany , Belgium , France , Luxembourg and the Netherlands .
The agreement and the subsequent convention adopted in 1990 are aimed at abolishing systematic controls on common borders and introducing a system where people can move freely .
The Schengen Convention abolished checks at the internal borders of the signatory states and created a single external border with common rules on external border controls , a common visa policy , police and judicial cooperation and the establishment of the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) .
The Schengen area currently comprises 25 Schengen Member States : the EU Member States of Austria , Belgium , Denmark , France , Finland , Germany , Greece , Italy , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Portugal , Spain , Sweden , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Malta , Poland , Slovakia and Slovenia , as well as the three associated non-EU countries - Norway , Iceland and Switzerland .
At present , Bulgaria , Romania and Cyprus only partially apply the Schengen acquis and checks are therefore still carried out at their borders .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Coelho report .
Whilst Scotland is not a part of the Schengen area , we do opt in to certain parts of the Schengen acquis .
The Scottish Government has been actively involved in this area at Council level and I am happy to support that work .
I voted in favour of the recommendation , according to which the signature of the protocol between the European Union , the European Community , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on the accession of the Principality of Liechtenstein to the EU Agreement on the Swiss Confederation 's association with the implementation , application and development of the Schengen acquis took place on 28 February 2008 .
Switzerland joined the Schengen area alone , on 12 December 2008 , with the abolition of border control at land borders , followed by the abolition of border checks on intra-Schengen flights at airports on 29 March 2009 .
For the first time , it was necessary to put up controls at a place where there has been no real border for 100 years .
The 41 kilometres that separate the two countries became an external Schengen border .
I welcome the new rules introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon allowing the European Parliament to be more closely informed about international agreements .
The gradual expansion of the Schengen area has led third countries that have particular relations with the EU to take part in Schengen cooperation .
The precondition for association with the Schengen acquis by non-EU countries is an agreement on free movement of persons between those states and the EU .
For these countries , this participation involves the following : being included in the area without checks at internal borders ; applying the provisions of the Schengen acquis and of all Schengen-relevant texts adopted pursuant to it ; being involved in decisions relating to Schengen-relevant texts .
A protocol was signed in 2008 for the accession of the Principality of Liechtenstein to the Agreement between the European Union , the European Community and Switzerland .
This resulted in the requirement of said principality to implement , apply and develop the Schengen acquis .
Yet , despite having become a member of the European Economic Area as early as 1995 and having progressively brought itself into line with European laws by transposing many directives into domestic law , the Principality of Liechtenstein had not yet begun negotiations for accession to the Schengen agreements .
Through this agreement - which I supported - the rights and duties of both parties have been established , thereby permitting the free movement of persons .
Furthermore , a series of implementation rules have been introduced for the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon dealing with international agreements , so as to give the European Parliament a more assertive role in terms of their communication and adoption .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Liechtenstein is a doubly landlocked Alpine microstate in Western Europe , bordered by Switzerland to the west and south and by Austria to the east .
It has an area of 160 km2 , an estimated population of 35 000 and has the highest gross domestic product per person in the world .
Liechtenstein has been steadily integrating into the European trade area since its accession to the European Economic Area ( EEA ) in 1995 .
The jurisdiction has now implemented 98.4 % of EU directives into domestic law .
Liechtenstein is also part of the Single Market , in which the same basic rules apply to all participating states .
The accession of new countries to the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) is essential for achieving a Europe without borders .
Liechtenstein has been part of the European Economic Area since 1995 and has been steadily integrating into the European trade area .
It has been subject to various evaluation procedures , in particular , on matters of data protection , the SIS , air , land and sea borders , police cooperation and visa policy .
By acceding to this agreement , Liechtenstein will become part of the Schengen acquis .
The Schengen Agreement was concluded on 14 June 1985 between Germany , Belgium , France , Luxembourg and the Netherlands .
Schengen cooperation is now integrated into the European Union legal and institutional framework and comprises 25 Schengen Member States , along with three countries that are associated with the EEA : Norway , Iceland and Switzerland .
Switzerland joined the Schengen area alone on 12 December 2008 , with the abolition of border controls at land borders , followed by the abolition of border controls on intra-Schengen flights at airports on 29 March 2009 .
Since Liechtenstein did not accede , and there is a very active policy of free movement between these two countries , for the first time , it was necessary to put up controls at places where there had been no real border for 100 years .
The 41 km that separate the two countries became an external Schengen border .
This agreement removes that barrier through the accession of the Principality of Liechtenstein to Schengen .
I welcome the new rules introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , enabling Parliament to have an active role in adopting these agreements .
For all of the above reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
The agreement on the Swiss Confederation 's accession to the Schengen acquis , which has been in force since 1 March 2008 , explicitly anticipated Liechtenstein 's possible accession by means of a protocol .
Given the open borders policy which has existed for decades between the Principality of Liechtenstein and the Swiss Confederation , it was expected that both countries would join the Schengen area at the same time .
In fact , this did not happen , with Switzerland joining the Schengen acquis alone on 12 December 2008 .
This ultimately made it necessary to put in place controls at places where there had been no real border for 100 years .
In order to overcome this barrier , and given that Liechtenstein is part of the European Economic Area and the Single Market , I have supported the conclusion of this protocol in the expectation that Liechtenstein 's accession to the Schengen acquis can now finally be achieved .
in writing . - In 2007 , Parliament was asked to give its opinion regarding the conclusion of this protocol for the first time .
Following a request from the rapporteur at that time , Ms Klamt , the Legal Affairs Committee issued a unanimous opinion , on 11 June 2007 , recommending that the legal basis should be changed so as to refer to the second subparagraph of Article 300 ( 3 ) of the EC Treaty ( the proposals for Council decisions set out to modify the ' specific institutional framework ' provided for in the main agreement , of which the proposed protocol forms an integral part ) , which requires the assent and not merely consultation of the European Parliament .
For that reason , and with the imminent entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , this report was referred back to the LIBE Committee .
I voted in favour of this recommendation because I think it can contribute to the entry into force , implementation and development of the Schengen acquis in countries such as Iceland , the Kingdom of Norway , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein .
It is indeed important for these countries to participate in the External Borders Fund for the period 2007-2013 , in accordance with current measures and agreements .
In order to bring about an ever more united Europe that does not , however , lose sight of practicality , their participation will be regulated by supplementary rules that will also ensure the protection of the European Union 's financial interests and the power of audit of the Court of Auditors .
I have voted in favour of the agreement concerning the accession of Liechtenstein to the agreement on the Schengen acquis , because this is a logical step forward which will not present us with any problems .
We can expect the agreement to function smoothly .
I am voting for this recommendation in view of the fact that the agreement concluded on 26 October 2004 with the Swiss Federation concerning the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland provides for the possible association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin acquis by means of a protocol .
Given the open borders policy between the two countries and the fact that in 2001 , Liechtenstein expressed its interest in acceding to the agreement , but that this did not happen owing to differences between the Council and Parliament , which were resolved in the Treaty of Lisbon , there is no reason for me to oppose the conclusion of this agreement .
I voted in favour of this document , which states that the agreement of 26 October 2004 concluded with the Swiss Confederation concerning the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland ( the ' Dublin agreement with Switzerland ' ) provides for the possible association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin acquis by means of a protocol .
On 27 February 2006 , the Council gave the Commission the relevant authorisation to enter into negotiations with Liechtenstein and Switzerland .
Following the negotiations , the draft protocol on Liechtenstein 's accession to the Dublin agreement with Switzerland was presented .
The legal basis for the Commission 's proposal of 4 December 2006 for a protocol on the association of Liechtenstein was Article 300 ( 3 ) , first subparagraph , of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which provided for consultation of Parliament .
I welcome the renewed referral to Parliament of the draft Council decision and thus , the continuation of the negotiations on the association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin agreement with Switzerland .
The consent of Parliament must be obtained , as it called for at first reading , in order to conclude this protocol with Liechtenstein .
In the light of the successfully concluded negotiations with Liechtenstein and the amended legal basis , consent should be given to the conclusion of the protocol .
The agreement on the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland - the Dublin / Eurodac agreement - was concluded in 2004 .
Given that an open borders policy for the free movement of people had existed for decades between Switzerland and Liechtenstein , the association of the latter country with those negotiations would have been logical .
Although it expressed its interest , Liechtenstein was left out , since it had not yet concluded a savings taxation agreement with the European Community .
In view of the new rules of the Treaty of Lisbon , which allow Parliament to be associated with the conclusion of international agreements in a much closer way , as well as the fact that Liechtenstein has concluded the agreement in question , which has been in force since 1 July 2005 , I support Parliament 's decision to give its consent to the conclusion of this protocol .
An agreement on the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State was concluded with Switzerland in 2004 .
This agreement provides for the possible association of Liechtenstein by means of a protocol .
On 27 February 2006 , the Council gave the Commission the relevant authorisation to enter into negotiations with Liechtenstein and Switzerland .
On 21 June 2006 , negotiations were finalised and the draft protocol on Liechtenstein 's accession to the Dublin agreement with Switzerland was initialled .
Now it is up to Parliament to give its approval to the conclusion of this protocol .
I believe that this should happen , so I am voting in favour of this recommendation .
The Council has submitted a draft protocol between the European Community , the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on the Principality of Liechtenstein 's accession to the agreement between the European Community and the Swiss Confederation concerning the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland .
I welcome the adoption of this protocol , which involves the European Union and two states that have a history of good neighbourly relations and free movement of people .
I agree with the conclusions presented by the rapporteur , and I welcome , in particular , the continuation of negotiations on the association of the Principality of Liechtenstein with the Dublin agreement with Switzerland , and I hope that it will be concluded quickly .
These are issues related to the right to asylum and the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland .
The agreement concluded on 26 October 2004 with the Swiss Confederation concerning the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland - the Dublin agreement with Switzerland - provides for the possible association of Liechtenstein with this acquis .
Given that an open borders policy for the free movement of people had existed for decades between Liechtenstein and Switzerland , in 2001 , Liechtenstein expressed its interest in joining the Dublin agreement with Switzerland .
However , it was not associated with the negotiations with Switzerland as it had not concluded a savings taxation agreement with the EU .
Following the subsequent conclusion and entry into force of this agreement between the EU and Liechtenstein , the latter country confirmed its wish to be associated with the Dublin acquis in 2005 .
In 2006 , the Council gave the Commission the relevant authorisation to enter into negotiations with Liechtenstein and Switzerland .
The negotiations were concluded and the draft protocol was initialled .
I voted in favour of this document , which states that the agreement of 2004 concluded with the Swiss Confederation concerning the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland ( the ' Dublin agreement with Switzerland ' ) provides for the possible association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin acquis by means of a protocol .
I welcome the renewed referral to Parliament of the draft Council decision and thus , the continuation of the negotiations on the association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin agreement with Switzerland .
In the light of the successfully concluded negotiations with Liechtenstein and the amended legal basis , consent should be given to the conclusion of the protocol .
I voted in favour of the recommendation to the Commission concerning the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State , in Switzerland and - if the protocol is ratified , as the majority of the European Parliament hopes - in the Principality of Liechtenstein as well .
The purpose of the Dublin agreement is to equip the participating states with criteria designed to establish which state is responsible for examining a request for asylum , thereby ensuring better treatment for applicants and , at the same time , providing the states with tools to fight organised crime .
The importance of these issues -namely , the protection of refugees and international security - requires a careful and constant effort from all European institutions so that refugees or asylum seekers can rely on clear legal and regulatory criteria and references .
in writing . - I welcome the renewed referral to Parliament of the draft Council decision and thus , the continuation of the negotiations on the association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin agreement with Switzerland .
The consent of Parliament must be obtained - as it called for at first reading - in order to conclude this protocol with Liechtenstein .
I support the conclusion of the protocol .
In the light of the successfully concluded negotiations with Liechtenstein and the amended legal basis , I voted for consent to be given .
I welcome the fact that Parliament has been consulted again on the draft Council decision and that the negotiations on the association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin agreement with Switzerland will therefore proceed .
In accordance with the wishes expressed by Parliament at the first reading , Parliament 's approval is necessary for the conclusion of this protocol with Liechtenstein .
Given the link that already exists between Liechtenstein and the EU , I believe that the conclusion of the protocol is important , with the relevant amendments to the legal basis .
That is why I voted as I did .
The agreement concluded on 26 October 2004 with the Swiss Confederation concerning the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland , known as the Dublin agreement with Switzerland , provides for the possible association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin acquis by means of a protocol .
In fact , the decades-long existence of an open borders policy for the free movement of people between Liechtenstein and Switzerland led Liechtenstein to once again express its interest in joining the Dublin agreement with Switzerland in 2005 .
The final conclusion of the agreement has not happened before now for various reasons : firstly , because other agreements under negotiation with Liechtenstein had not been concluded ; secondly , because there was a dispute on the legal basis , and later because of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
At last , Parliament 's objectives are met when it is heard to give a favourable opinion , instead of simply being consulted .
I welcome this fact and am voting in favour of the present report .
The agreement concluded on 26 October 2004 with the Swiss Confederation concerning the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the state responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or in Switzerland , the Dublin agreement , provides for the possible association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin acquis by means of a protocol .
Given that for decades , there was an open borders policy for the free movement of people between Switzerland and Liechtenstein , the latter country expressed its interest in 2001 in acceding to the Dublin agreement with Switzerland , but was not associated with the negotiations because a savings taxation agreement had not been concluded with the European Community .
Following the subsequent conclusion and entry into force of this agreement between the European Community and Liechtenstein , on 10 June 2005 , the latter country confirmed its wish to be associated with the Dublin acquis .
The Council 's objections with regard to the legal basis have been overcome and Parliamentary approval has become necessary , so I believe that all the conditions for consent to this protocol with Liechtenstein have been met .
in writing . - Although the rapporteur welcomes the renewed referral to Parliament of the draft Council decision and thus , the continuation of the negotiations on the association of Liechtenstein with the Dublin agreement with Switzerland , and calls for the consent of Parliament , the Verts / ALE Group decided not to follow that advice .
We therefore voted against the proposal , as we did in the LIBE Committee .
I voted in favour of this report because I support the conclusion of the protocol for the accession of Liechtenstein to the Dublin agreement with Switzerland .
This agreement has already enabled Switzerland to make use of important instruments in the fight against international crime and illegal immigration .
That is not all . By establishing this kind of coordination , multiple and unwarranted asylum applications can be prevented .
Now , the aim is to enable Liechtenstein to enjoy these same benefits , bringing it ever closer to the final objective of full accession to the European Union .
I was pleased to be able to vote in favour of the accession of Liechtenstein to the agreement on the EU asylum system .
This will prevent multiple asylum applications from being made in the EU and in Liechtenstein .
If an asylum application is rejected in Liechtenstein , it will also be rejected in the EU and vice versa .
At the same time as simplifying the procedure , we have also achieved further harmonisation .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am voting for this recommendation , given that the current EU-Brazil agreement grants a reciprocal visa waiver for travel for the purpose of tourism and business to all Brazilian and EU citizens , including the nationals of the four Member States not enjoying visa-free travel to Brazil at present .
As the agreement supplements , rather than replacing , the existing agreements between several Member States and Brazil , which cover travel for purposes other than tourism and business or paid activity , there is no reason why it should not be concluded .
The length of stay in the Schengen area has been limited to three months during any six-month period , so this does not raise any concerns about Brazilian citizens taking up illegal residence .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Federative Republic of Brazil on short-stay visa waiver for holders of ordinary passports .
This EU-Brazil agreement gives a reciprocal visa waiver for travel for the purpose of tourism and business , as defined in the agreement , for all Brazilian and EU citizens , including the nationals of the four Member States - Estonia , Latvia , Cyprus and Malta - not enjoying visa-free travel to Brazil at present .
It should be noted that , due to the common visa policy and the exclusive competence of the European Union in this area , only the Union can negotiate and conclude a visa waiver agreement , and not the individual Member States .
Importantly , in order to safeguard equal treatment of all EU citizens , a provision has been included in the agreement stating that Brazil may only suspend or terminate it in respect of all the EU Member States .
Reciprocally , the Union may also suspend or terminate the agreement only in respect of all its Member States .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that we must ensure the implementation of the principle of reciprocity in EU visa policy .
In accordance with Council Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 , Brazilian nationals can travel to all Member States of the European Union without a visa for short stays .
Brazil , however , still requires a visa from the nationals of four Member States ( Estonia , Cyprus , Malta and Latvia ) to enter its territory .
The other Member States have bilateral visa agreements with Brazil , allowing their nationals to enter Brazil for short stays without a visa .
Due to the exclusive external competence of the European Union in this area , only it can negotiate and conclude a visa waiver agreement , and not the individual Member States .
Therefore , on 18 April 2008 , the Council adopted a decision authorising the Commission to open negotiations on the conclusion of a short-stay visa waiver agreement between the European Union and Brazil .
Following the negotiations , the agreement was initialled and the formal signature on behalf of the Union and Brazil took place in Brussels on 8 November 2010 .
I consider it essential to approve the conclusion of this visa waiver agreement , so that all EU citizens , including those of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , can travel without a visa to Brazil for purposes of tourism and business , in the same way in which citizens of Brazil can already travel visa-free to all EU Member States .
We need to enforce the common EU visa policy without delay .
Although Brazilian citizens can travel to all EU Member States without having to obtain a visa , in the case of a short stay , there are , however , four EU Member States - Estonia , Cyprus , Malta and Latvia - whose citizens require a visa in order to enter Brazilian territory .
Although all the other Member States have negotiated bilateral agreements with Brazil so as to ensure a short-stay visa waiver , at present , however , it is no longer possible for the Member States to conclude this type of agreement on an individual basis .
Thus , the EU has an exclusive external remit in the field of the common visa policy .
On 8 November 2010 , an agreement was therefore concluded between the EU and Brazil , granting a reciprocal visa waiver for travel for the purpose of tourism and business for all Brazilian and EU citizens .
I support the fact that this agreement thus ensures equal treatment for all EU citizens , ensuring that it can only be suspended or terminated , whether by Brazil or by the EU , if it is applied to all its Member States .
I voted in favour of this recommendation as it safeguards equal treatment of all European citizens under the common visa policy between the EU and Brazil .
The agreement does not replace but supplements the existing bilateral agreements , which cover travel for purposes other than tourism or business .
During the last Portuguese Presidency , the European Union established a special strategic partnership with Brazil .
In the spirit which should preside over this similar agreement , all measures which remove obstacles to contact between European citizens and those of this other Portuguese-speaking country are obviously to be welcomed .
Since four European countries still do not enjoy the same waiver , I believe that there is every advantage in extending the same scheme to them and thus evaluating the agreement that is proposed to us now in a positive way .
With regard to EU-Brazil relations , it should be remembered that the strategic importance of this country has long justified the establishment of a specific delegation , as already happens with the other countries making up the quartet of Brazil , Russia , India and China , as well as with countries that are objectively less important in the international arena .
in writing . - ( PT ) Under the terms of Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 , Brazilian citizens can travel to all Member States of the European Union without a visa , provided that this is for short stays .
However , not everyone from the European Union has the same privileges .
Nationals of the following countries find themselves in this situation : Estonia , Cyprus , Malta and Latvia .
This means that the ' reciprocity principle ' is not being respected .
In order for these citizens to be on an equal footing with the other inhabitants of the EU and Brazil , it is necessary to establish an agreement between the EU and Brazil .
We cannot have a two-speed EU , so I welcome the adoption of this agreement , not only because it seems inherently fair , but also because it puts an end to one of the few cases of negative discrimination that still exists between people in the EU .
Together with my Italian colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I decided to abstain in today 's vote regarding relations between the European Union and Brazil on short-stay visa waiver for holders of ordinary passports .
This is because , in the light of the content of the resolution on the Cesare Battisti case , I would have preferred it if the vote had been postponed ahead of the new decision of the Federal Court in Brazil on the extradition of Cesare Battisti , a criminal .
Given the non-urgent nature of the dossier , postponing it to the next part-session or the one in April certainly would not have been a problem , especially if we think about the pain of the families of the victims of this mass-murderer .
These same families have been waiting 31 years for justice to be done and for Cesare Battisti to serve the sentence handed down by Italy 's justice system in our own prisons .
This matter concerns the extension of a common passport to EU countries that are still subject to short-stay waivers .
The report is in favour of approving the conclusion of this agreement on visa exemption as soon as possible , in order that all EU citizens , including citizens of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , can travel to Brazil for tourism and business purposes , just as Brazilian citizens can already travel without a visa to all EU Member States .
This is about implementing the visa reciprocity policy .
Parliament believes that it should proceed with visa reciprocity until all its citizens from all the Member States can enter , without a visa , all the countries whose citizens can already travel to the EU without a visa , including the US and Canada .
We believe this to be fair .
in writing . - The European airline industry and its customers have not had an easy ride over the last few months !
The infamous volcanic ash crisis occurred precisely when the airlines , and its passengers of course , were coping with the effects of a very difficult recession .
However , in the midst of these challenges comes some good news for business and passengers alike !
Today 's vote on the EU-Brazil Air Service Agreement brings significant mutual benefits .
Firstly , Brazil is a very strategically important partner for the EU with an enormous potential future market .
Currently , more than four million passengers per year fly between Brazil and the EU . A country with a rapidly developing tourism sector , this number can only rise .
From a business perspective , Sao Paolo is the financial capital of South America .
The development of the highly specialised oil and financial industry will lead to greater demand for air travel .
The main achievement of this is the removal of nationality restrictions in the existing bilateral agreements between Member States and Brazil .
This is an extremely important first step in strengthening EU-Brazil aviation relations which has allowed Brazil and the EU to move towards negotiating a comprehensive air transport agreement .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 )
I abstained in the final vote on the report by Mrs Macovei , as I also did on the reports by Mrs Ţicău and Mr Enciu , in order to express my disappointment in the conduct of the Brazilian Government over the extradition of the terrorist , Cesare Battisti .
The agreements on visa waivers and air services confirm the good relations between Brazil and the European Union .
During the meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs ( LIBE ) , I asked that we might hear from the Brazilian Ambassador to the European Union in order to discuss some fundamental issues such as the respect of human rights , the fight against terrorism , and views on freedom and security in Europe and Brazil .
I feel confident that we can achieve tangible results for both European citizens and the people of Brazil .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Federative Republic of Brazil on short-stay visa waiver for holders of ordinary passports .
In accordance with Council Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 , Brazilian nationals can travel to all Member States of the European Union without a visa for short stays .
Brazil , however , still requires a visa from the nationals of four Member States ( Estonia , Cyprus , Malta and Latvia ) to enter its territory .
The other Member States have bilateral visa agreements with Brazil , allowing their nationals to enter Brazil for short stays without a visa .
Due to the common visa policy and the exclusive competence of the European Union in this area , only the Union can negotiate and conclude a visa waiver agreement , and not the individual Member States .
It is essential to approve the conclusion of this visa waiver agreement , so that all EU citizens , including those of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , can travel without a visa to Brazil for purposes of tourism and business , in the same way in which citizens of Brazil can already travel visa-free to all EU Member States .
We need to take measures in this area without delay .
in writing . - I voted in favour of Parliament consenting to the conclusion of this visa waiver agreement as soon as possible , so that all EU citizens , including those of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , can travel without a visa to Brazil for purposes of tourism and business , in the same way that citizens of Brazil can already travel visa-free to all EU Member States .
We need to enforce the EU 's visa reciprocity policy without delay .
My abstention in the vote on the report regarding the agreement between the European Union and the Federative Republic of Brazil on short-term visa waiver for holders of ordinary passports expresses a position that goes beyond the scope of the matter .
I do not approve of the conduct of the Brazilian Government in the Cesare Battisti case .
Extradition -procedures for which are defined in a bilateral agreement - should have been granted .
The interpretation provided by the judicial authorities violates the commitments undertaken .
The sentence -which Mr Battisti should serve in Italy - was handed down by an ordinary judge , applying ordinary laws to a common crime : mass murder .
It is difficult to support international relations , such as those defined in the reports voted on by Parliament , with a country that does not respect agreements and which , above all , takes a stand on the fundamental right to the protection of life .
in writing . - ( PT ) All European Union citizens who want to travel to Brazil for tourism and business purposes will not require a visa for stays of up to three months , just as Brazilian citizens can already travel without a visa to all EU countries , in line with the agreement that has just been adopted by Parliament .
This agreement will mainly benefit citizens of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , who still need a visa to enter Brazil .
This agreement affects holders of ordinary passports .
Following the adoption of this agreement , all EU citizens - including citizens of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , for whom Brazil continued to require a visa - will be able to enter the country without a visa for tourism and business purposes , just as Brazilian citizens can already travel to all EU Member States without a visa .
The length of stay in the Schengen area is limited to three months during any six-month period .
This agreement will cover about 90-95 % of all travellers .
in writing . - I voted in favour because I consider it essential to help Brazilian people to settle the huge territories .
Technological and financial aid will ensure food competitiveness and low prices .
Brazil can turn from an agricultural producer into a great consumer of European goods , open a new sales market and widen its tourist services if support is given in the right areas .
in writing . - ( PT ) Brazilian citizens can travel to all Member States of the European Union without a visa , provided that this is for short stays , under the terms of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 .
However , Brazil still requires a visa in order for citizens from four EU Member States to enter its territory : Estonia , Cyprus , Malta and Latvia .
The other Member States have concluded bilateral agreements directly with Brazil .
In order to address this , and given the exclusive external remit of the EU in this area , the Council has adopted a decision authorising the Commission to open negotiations for the conclusion of a short-stay visa waiver agreement between the EU and Brazil .
The current EU-Brazil agreement , for which I voted , grants a reciprocal visa waiver for travel for the purpose of tourism and business to all Brazilian and EU citizens , including the nationals of the four Member States that do not enjoy visa-free travel to Brazil at present .
The agreement does not replace but supplements the existing bilateral agreements between several Member States and Brazil , which cover travel for purposes other than tourism or business , such as for students and researchers .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the conclusion of the EU-Brazil agreement on the short-stay visa waiver for holders of ordinary passports in order to guarantee that , in line with the requirements of the principle of reciprocity and the principle of equality of treatment , all EU citizens - including citizens of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , who , until now , have continued to need a visa to enter Brazilian territory - can travel to Brazil without a visa for tourism or business purposes , just as citizens of Brazil can already travel to EU Member States without a visa .
in writing . - The present EU-Brazil agreement gives a reciprocal visa waiver for travel for the purpose of tourism and business , as defined in the agreement , for all Brazilian and EU citizens , including the nationals of the four Member States not enjoying visa-free travel to Brazil at present .
The agreement does not replace but supplements existing bilateral agreements between several EU Member States and Brazil , and which cover travel for purposes other than tourism and business ( e.g. students and researchers ) .
The category of persons travelling for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity is also excluded from the scope of this agreement .
In order to safeguard equal treatment of all EU citizens , a provision has been included in the agreement stating that Brazil may suspend or terminate it only in respect of all the EU Member States .
Reciprocally , the Union may also suspend or terminate the agreement only in respect of all its Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Treaty of Lisbon established that the conclusion of agreements on the common policy on visas with third countries is the exclusive remit of the EU .
Council Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 already allows Brazilian citizens to travel to all Member States of the European Union without a visa .
However , Brazil has continued to require a visa in order for citizens from Estonia , Cyprus , Malta and Latvia , EU Member States , to enter its territory .
This reciprocal visa waiver agreement is aimed at travel for the purpose of tourism or business , which will bring economic advantages for both parties .
The length of stay in the Schengen area is limited to three months during any six-month period .
I believe that it is important to stress that this agreement takes into account the Member States that do not yet fully apply the Schengen acquis , namely Cyprus , Bulgaria and Romania , granting visa-free access to Brazilian nationals for a period of three months in the territory of every Member State , independently of the period for the whole Schengen area .
I am voting in favour of this agreement as I believe that it is essential to avoid discrimination between citizens of different Member States , and to properly implement the reciprocity principle , which is one of the European Union 's guiding principles .
I welcomed the results of the vote .
It is my firm belief that every measure which means that the citizens of all the EU Member States enjoy equal rights deserves our support .
I am all the more pleased because these equal rights relate to key matters such as the freedom to cross borders .
As a Pole , I remember the numerous difficulties involved in crossing the border before Poland became a member of the European Union , and so I regard every step we take towards the full and mutual abolition of visas as being of huge significance .
The Macovei recommendation is also significant for another reason .
In the explanatory statement , the rapporteur notes that two third countries , namely Canada and the United States , are still imposing visa obligations ; on three Member States in the case of Canada , and on four Member States in the case of the United States .
I believe that the measures taken recently by Parliament , such as Written Declaration 89 / 2010 , will have the intended effect and bring about a change in the visa policies of the United States and Canada .
I am voting for this recommendation because , under Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 , Brazil is not included in the list of countries whose citizens can cross the external borders of the EU without a visa .
However , four Member States still do not benefit from the reciprocity that has been implemented . Since the changes introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon imply that the common policy on visas with third countries is now the exclusive remit of the EU , all the Member States will benefit from the visa waiver with Brazil .
In addition , the existing bilateral agreements between the Member States and Brazil are still ensured , as they include some categories of passengers that are not covered by the EU-Brazil agreement .
I also agree with the rapporteur 's position in stating that this agreement should serve as an example for reciprocity with other countries , namely , the US and Canada .
This agreement gives reciprocal access to short-stay , visa-free travel for all EU and Brazilian citizens holding a diplomatic , service or official passport .
To ensure equal treatment of all EU citizens as regards visa-free travel , Article 8 of the agreement provides that Brazil can suspend or terminate the agreement only in respect of all Member States of the Union and , reciprocally , the EU may suspend or terminate the agreement only with respect to all Member States .
The agreement provides for the establishment of a committee of experts to settle disputes that may arise from the interpretation or application of its provisions .
The agreement also provides for the exchange of passport specimens between Brazil and the Member States .
I believe that the safeguarding of existing bilateral agreements should remain of the utmost importance for the European Union as these are providing a short-stay visa waiver for categories of travellers not covered by the EU-Brazil agreement .
In this regard , it should be recalled that the European Union might apply the suspension clause of the EU-Brazil visa waiver if Brazil were to denounce the bilateral agreements .
This visa waiver agreement for holders of diplomatic , service or official passports represents a step forward in the establishment of full reciprocal visa exemption in accordance with Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 .
Although Brazil is part of the so-called ' positive list ' of countries whose nationals are exempt from visa requirements when crossing the external borders of the European Union , the nationals of four EU countries - Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus - still cannot benefit from a similar law when they travel to Brazil .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , the common policy on visas in relation to third countries is the exclusive remit of the EU , so it is up to the EU to negotiate this agreement so that it ensures equal treatment of all EU citizens .
It was agreed that two separate agreements would be signed : one for holders of ordinary passports , and the other for holders of diplomatic , service and official passports .
I support this decision as it allows the agreement concerning diplomatic , service and official passports , at least , to enter into force faster , since , unlike the agreement on ordinary passports , it does not require ratification by the Brazilian Congress .
Existing bilateral agreements will remain valid , since they grant short-stay visa waivers for certain categories of passengers that are not covered at all by the EU-Brazil agreement .
I voted to approve this agreement as the European Parliament 's rapporteur .
This agreement will waive the visa requirement for Brazil for holders of diplomatic , service and official passports and for citizens in four Member States , namely , Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus .
I believe that the agreement marks a significant advance towards establishing full visa reciprocity for all EU citizens in relation to third countries .
The efforts aimed at ensuring full reciprocity should continue in order to waive the visa requirement for Canada and the US for citizens from five Member States : Romania , Bulgaria , the Czech Republic , Cyprus and Poland .
I voted in favour of this recommendation as it represents progress towards full and reciprocal exemption from visa requirements during short stays for holders of diplomatic , service or official passports between the EU and Brazil .
The signing of this agreement should serve as an example to other countries , namely the US and Canada , which continue to require visas for certain EU Member States .
In light of the resolution that we voted on today relating to the agreement to be signed between the European Union and the Federative Republic of Brazil on short-stay visa waiver for holders of common passports , there is even more reason for holders of diplomatic , service or official passports to also benefit from this arrangement .
Reciprocity in this type of agreement is fundamental and important , so as to ensure that such waivers are not restricted by administrative or bureaucratic requirements which could put the legitimate expectations of citizens in jeopardy .
Brazil is an increasingly important partner of the European Union , with which it shares a common history and language .
Anything that facilitates relations between this major South American country and Europe should be broadly welcomed .
Under the terms of Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 , Brazilian citizens can travel to all Member States of the European Union without a visa , provided that this is for short stays .
However , not everyone from the European Union has the same privileges .
Nationals of the following countries find themselves in this situation : Estonia , Cyprus , Malta and Latvia ; which means that the principle of reciprocity is not being respected .
In 2008 , the Council adopted a decision authorising the Commission to negotiate the signing of an agreement between the EU and Brazil that would put an end to violations of the principle of reciprocity .
In order to speed up the process and not delay its entry into force , the contracting parties decided to draw up two agreements : one for holders of common passports and another for holders of diplomatic passports ( the latter not requiring ratification by the Brazilian Congress ) .
I therefore applaud this initiative , which will guarantee equality of treatment for all European Union citizens , respecting the principle of reciprocity in full .
Together with my Italian colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I decided to abstain in today 's vote regarding relations between the European Union and Brazil on short-stay visa waiver for holders of diplomatic , service or official passports .
This is because , in the light of the content of the resolution on the Cesare Battisti case , I would have preferred it if the vote had been postponed ahead of the new decision of the Federal Court in Brazil on the extradition of Cesare Battisti , a criminal .
Given the non-urgent nature of the dossier , postponing it to the next part-session or the one in April certainly would not have been a problem , especially if we think about the pain of the families of the victims of this mass-murderer .
These same families have been waiting 31 years for justice to be done and for Cesare Battisti to serve the sentence handed down by Italy 's justice system in our own prisons .
Brazil forms part of the so-called positive list of countries whose citizens are exempt from visa requirements when they cross the external borders of the European Union .
In line with the principle of reciprocity , which underpins this regulation , all EU citizens should enjoy a similar right when they travel to Brazil .
Until now , the principle of reciprocity has been applied through bilateral visa waiver agreements concluded between Brazil and Member States on an individual basis .
However , four EU countries - Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus - have not signed agreements of this type .
As a result , their citizens are still required to have a visa to travel to Brazil , which violates the principle of reciprocity .
The EU-Brazil visa waiver agreement , which does not replace the other bilateral agreements signed with different Member States , now covers travel for tourism or business purposes by holders of diplomatic , service or official passports .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because the agreement gives reciprocal access to short-stay , visa-free travel for all EU and Brazilian citizens holding a diplomatic , service or official passport .
To ensure equal treatment of all EU citizens , Article 8 of the agreement provides that Brazil can suspend or terminate the agreement only in respect of all Member States of the Union and , reciprocally , the EU may suspend or terminate the agreement only with respect to all Member States .
This visa waiver agreement for holders of diplomatic , service or official passports represents a step forward in the establishment of full reciprocal visa exemption in accordance with Regulation No 539 / 2001 .
in writing . - I voted in favour of giving the EP consent to conclude the two visa-waver agreements with Brazil .
At present , Brazilian citizens do not need a visa to enter the EU , while citizens of Estonia , Latvia , Malta , and Cyprus do need a visa to enter Brazil .
These agreements will ensure the application of the principle of reciprocity regarding visa wavers between the EU and Brazil .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
The visa waiver covers the holders of diplomatic , service or official passports travelling for purposes of tourism or business .
The citizens of the contracting parties may stay in each other 's territory for a maximum period of three months during a six-month period following the date of first entry .
Visa exemption for travel purposes other than those stipulated in the agreement is still possible under the provisions of bilateral agreements signed by Brazil with 23 of the 27 Member States .
The agreement takes into account the situation of Member States that do not yet fully apply the Schengen acquis .
As long as these Member States ( Cyprus , Bulgaria and Romania ) are not part of the Schengen area , the visa waiver confers a right on Brazilian citizens to stay for three months on the territory of each of them , irrespective of the period calculated for the entire Schengen area .
My abstention in the vote on the report regarding the agreement between the European Union and the Federative Republic of Brazil on short-term visa waivers for holders of diplomatic , service or official passports expresses a position that goes beyond the scope of the matter .
I do not approve of the conduct of the Brazilian Government in the Cesare Battisti case .
Extradition -procedures for which are defined in a bilateral agreement - should have been granted .
The interpretation provided by the judicial authorities violates the commitments undertaken .
The sentence -which Mr Battisti should serve in Italy - was handed down by an ordinary judge , applying ordinary laws to a common crime : mass murder .
It is difficult to support international relations , such as those defined in the reports voted on by Parliament , with a country that does not respect agreements and which , above all , takes a stand on the fundamental right to the protection of life .
All European Union citizens who want to travel to Brazil for tourism and business purposes will not require a visa for stays of up to three months , just as Brazilian citizens can already travel without a visa to all EU countries , under the agreement that has now been approved by the European Parliament .
This agreement will mainly benefit the citizens of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , who still needed a visa to enter Brazil .
This agreement affects holders of diplomatic , service and official passports .
With the approval of this agreement , all EU citizens - including citizens of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , for whom Brazil continued to require a visa - will be able to enter the country without a visa for tourism and business purposes , just as Brazilian citizens can already travel without a visa to all EU Member States .
The length of stay is limited to three months during any six-month period within the Schengen area .
According to the Treaty of Lisbon , the common visa policy in relation to third countries is the exclusive competence of the EU .
Only the EU , and not Member States on an individual basis , can negotiate and sign a visa waiver agreement with Brazil .
This was not the case until the Treaty of Lisbon came into force .
This report analyses the EU-Brazil visa waiver agreement for holders of diplomatic , service and official passports .
Formal signature of the agreement , on behalf of the Union and of Brazil , took place in Brussels on 8 November 2010 .
This visa waiver agreement does not replace the other bilateral agreements signed with different Member States , but supplements them .
However , the agreement concluded by the Union will take precedence over the bilateral agreements in the areas covered by these , namely , travel for tourism and business purposes .
I welcome the clauses on reciprocity between Brazilian nationals and EU citizens , and the guarantee of equality of treatment for all EU citizens .
Provision has been made for Brazil and the EU only to be able to suspend or repudiate the agreement with regard to all Member States .
It was for these reasons that I voted in favour .
I voted in favour of the signing of the EU-Brazil agreement on short-stay visa waiver for holders of diplomatic , service or official passports in order to guarantee that , in line with the requirements of the principle of reciprocity and the principle of equality of treatment , all EU citizens who are holders of diplomatic , service or official passports - including citizens of Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus , who , until now , have continued to need a visa to enter Brazilian territory - can travel to Brazil without a visa for tourism or business purposes , just as citizens of Brazil can already travel to EU Member States without a visa .
in writing . - The visa waiver covers the holders of diplomatic , service or official passports that are travelling for purposes of tourism or business The citizens of the Contracting Parties may stay in each other 's territory for a maximum period of three months during a six-month period following the date of first entry into the territory of the other contracting party .
The visa exemption for travel purposes other than those stipulated in the agreement can still be realised under the provisions of bilateral agreements signed by Brazil with 23 of the 27 Member States .
The agreement takes into account the situation of Member States that do not yet fully apply the Schengen acquis .
As long as these Member States ( Cyprus , Bulgaria and Romania ) are not part of the Schengen area , the visa waiver confers a right on citizens of Brazil to stay for three months on the territory of each of those Member States independently of the period calculated for the whole Schengen area .
Brazil forms part of the ' positive list ' of countries whose citizens are exempt from visa requirements when crossing the external borders of the European Union .
Until now , this policy of reciprocity has been applied through bilateral agreements between Brazil and Member States .
However , Estonia , Latvia , Malta and Cyprus have not signed any kind of agreement and their citizens are not exempt from visa requirements .
The purpose of this agreement is exemption from visa requirements for holders of diplomatic , service or official passports , and it has the same aim and scope as the agreement relating to holders of common passports .
However , under Brazilian law , the agreement relating to holders of diplomatic passports does not require ratification by the Brazilian Congress , and it will therefore come into force sooner .
The two agreements do not replace the bilateral agreements signed between the Member States and Brazil ; they simply complement them .
I believe it to be important for this practice of reciprocity in visa waiver agreements to be applied to other third countries , in order to eliminate the existing discrimination , particularly with regard to the US and Canada .
Even though I support the content of this agreement , I decided to abstain in the vote in order to protest against the political choices that the Brazilian Government has been taking for some time with regard to Cesare Battisti .
It is a fact that this murderer , who has been convicted on multiple occasions , is not serving the sentences handed down on him by the Italian justice system .
I approve this report as I recognise the potential that the Services Directive has for improved integration of the economy , and also believe that the application of the directive can consolidate the mutually reinforcing relationship between the internal market and cohesion policy .
In order for this objective to be achieved , greater transparency with regard to information for citizens and businesses is necessary .
It is important to note the conditions for non-application of the country of origin principle in certain matters or activities , in particular , with regard to different legislation contained within other EU instruments and to the set of guarantees that the administering state should provide for posted workers .
This matter caused a long discussion , and prevented the early application of the directive .
I fear that the application of this directive at a regional and local level could work against deregulation measures and impede attempts to simplify administrative procedures , especially as its application may involve additional resources , the contribution of structural funds and other instruments being essential to make up for this during the transition period .
Within this context , I call for greater coherence and coordination among all policies .
I voted in favour of this European Parliament resolution on the implementation of the Services Directive , which entered into force in 2006 .
The aim of this directive is to open up the market for service providers in the European Union , phase out the Member States ' protectionist barriers on the exercise of service activities and fulfil the principle of freedom of movement , the basis for the common market .
In other words , European service providers must be able to work without bureaucratic hindrance anywhere in the EU .
The directive covers various services , whose gross domestic product ( GDP ) accounts for 40 % of EU GDP .
We expect the implementation of this directive to potentially bring a profit of up to EUR 140 billion and for EU GDP to grow by 1.5 % .
However , for the directive to deliver the expected benefits , it must be properly implemented .
Unfortunately , it has been established that not all EU Member States managed to transpose it fully into national law by the end of 2009 .
I agree that setting up the points of single contact is an essential part of effective implementation of this directive .
These PSCs are aimed at providing the required information and creating an opportunity to carry out all procedures by electronic means and not only in the national language .
According to European Commission data , 22 EU Member States have established such PSCs , but only 17 of these have e-government portals and these also vary greatly across the different Member States .
It must be emphasised that without properly functioning points of single contact , consumers will not receive all the information , and this will prevent us from achieving the objectives laid down by the directive .
The potential benefits deriving from the implementation of the Services Directive are incontrovertible .
The activities covered by the directive account for 40 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) and jobs in the European Union .
By implementing it correctly , we could unlock enormous economic potential , creating jobs and contributing to the economic recovery .
The quality of the implementation of the directive by the Member States is just as essential as respecting the deadlines set for that purpose .
In the negotiations preceding the adoption of the directive , Parliament has already shown that it can play a crucial role .
Consequently , I think that Parliament should provide monitoring of the process of implementation of the directive by Member States .
European service providers must be able to offer their activities throughout the European Union , without being held back by bureaucratic hindrances .
However , during the implementation phase , we must also be aware of other aspects , particularly the administrative costs that currently weigh down on Member States .
I agree with the rapporteur that the procedure for mutual evaluation introduced by the Council causes unnecessary bureaucratic burdens for Member States ' administrations at national , regional and local level .
I hope that the potential advantages of these procedures are assessed as soon as possible , otherwise high bureaucratic costs will persist .
I voted in favour of this text .
This was not about assessing the implementation of the Services Directive adopted by Parliament in 2006 , since it is still far too early for that .
This was about not only highlighting the importance , both economic and social , of this opening of the services sector in Europe ( the areas covered account for 40 % of European Union GDP and jobs , and the potential for growth would be between 0.6 and 1.5 % of GDP ) , but also emphasising the fundamental components of the directive 's transposition .
Firstly , the points of single contact ( PSC ) .
Their purpose is to facilitate the provision of services across Europe .
In practical terms , entrepreneurs who wish to set up a business abroad or provide cross-border services should be able to use a PSC , which will explain all the formalities and procedures they must complete in order to set up their business .
These PSCs are the key to the success of the Services Directive .
Secondly , the scope of the directive : I believe that we must hold a genuine political debate at European level on what we mean by services of general interest and the rules that we wish to apply to them .
I voted in favour of this document .
The aim of the Services Directive is to make it significantly easier for self-employed persons and small and medium-sized companies in particular to pursue their activities , develop new areas of business and also recruit new staff in other Member States .
The services sector , which accounts for 40 % of EU GDP , is particularly important for economic growth and for combating unemployment .
This directive is an essential step towards a single market for services , which should enable enterprises , and small and medium-sized enterprises in particular , to provide better services at a competitive price throughout the internal market and to unlock the enormous economic and job-creation potential of the European internal market in services .
For service providers to properly enjoy the benefits of the Services Directive , the full and timely implementation of the provisions of this directive should be ensured in all Member States .
I believe that the Commission must closely monitor the application of the directive in the Member States and issue regular implementation reports in order to remove the remaining obstacles in the services sector and to unlock its economic potential .
The Services Directive , adopted in December 2006 , puts the principle of free movement into practice , with the aim of creating a common market for services within the European Union .
Although it was adopted in 2006 , this assessment of its implementation has revealed several delays in its transposition in some Member States , due to both legislative and technical issues , as different legislative instruments were required for its correct implementation .
A fully functioning single market for services is essential for Europe 's economic recovery , representing more than 70 % of jobs and of net job creation within the single market .
Gains at a European Union level could reach a total of between EUR 60 and 140 billion , which represents potential growth of between 0.6 and 1.4 % of GDP .
In light of the above , I supported this report on implementation of the Services Directive as I believe assessments of the implementation of directives to be important , taking into account the fact that such assessments may reveal existing flaws in their implementation , making it possible to correct them .
The application of the Services Directive is the chance , in my opinion , to highlight its shortcomings , particularly with regard to its scope .
In my opinion on behalf of the Committee on Employment , I mentioned the legal uncertainty that currently surrounds Services of General Interest ( SGI ) and the absolute need for their specific nature to be taken into account .
While there is unanimous agreement on the need to clarify the concepts ( economic and non-economic SGI , social services ) , Parliament is still very much divided on the subject of how to achieve this .
I advocated the need for a clear legislative framework , if necessary , through a framework directive .
Although I regret that this is not in the final text , I congratulate Mrs Gebhardt , who has managed to mention these issues in her report on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , which focused mainly on mutual evaluation and the points of single contact .
Paragraph 45 mentions the need for a legislative framework , admittedly at a sectoral level , and recalls the commitment made by Mr Barnier in his recent communication to submit proposals on SGIs in 2011 .
Hence , I am waiting for those proposals to be submitted and for measures that can finally provide an answer to service providers and local and regional authorities , but also recognise the vital contribution that these services make to social and territorial cohesion .
The European Services Directive entered into force in December 2006 with the ambitious objective of opening up the market for service providers in the European Union , phasing out the Member States ' protectionist barriers on the exercise of service activities and fulfilling the principle of freedom of movement of goods and services in the Union .
According to the provisions of the directive , European service providers must be able to work without bureaucratic hindrance anywhere in the European Union .
The own-initiative report under discussion , put forward by Parliament to keep a close watching brief on the implementation process of the directive in national legal systems , assesses the work done so far by the Member States .
In particular , delays have been detected in the process of implementing the directive , as well as considerable problems of interpretation regarding the scope of its application .
Therefore , to protect operators in the market , I am calling for an urgent and unequivocal definition of the services coming under this directive .
Lastly , I believe that the effective implementation of the Internal Market Information System , the broadening of its functions and greater digitalisation of the points of single contact in Europe would doubtless represent a huge advantage for service providers and would make it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to access information .
I voted in favour of this report , because the aim of the Services Directive is to open up the market for service providers in the European Union , phase out the Member States ' protectionist barriers on the exercise of service activities and fulfil the principle of freedom of movement , the basis for the common market .
In principle , the scope of the Services Directive covers all commercial services offered by a service provider established in a Member State .
The services that are not covered include non-economic services of general interest , financial services , transport services , the services of temporary employment agencies , health services and those considered social services in the area of care , childcare and social housing .
Services of general interest are not threatened by the directive , which cannot serve the purpose of undermining public welfare provision .
There is a need not only to draw a clear distinction between the services coming under this directive and services of general interest , but also to safeguard services of general economic interest by means of framework legislation .
The Services Directive will not lead , in any way , to deregulation or liberalisation of the services sector , as indicated by some speculation .
Its purpose is to ensure access to national markets in such a way that arbitrary barriers are phased out and any rules which are maintained in Member States are proportionate and non-discriminatory .
The directive explicitly states that neither employment law nor employees ' rights will be affected by these legislative provisions .
Parliament even insisted on this point when presenting its view to the Council .
Article 16 states that no Member State is prevented from imposing requirements with regard to the provision of a service activity , where they are justified for reasons of public policy , public security , public health or the protection of the environment .
Implementation of the directive is being delayed in some Member States , but this is due , in particular , to the different ways of interpreting it .
This is why it is important for the directive 's area of application to be clearly and transparently defined .
There is a need not only to draw a clear distinction between the services coming under this directive and services of general interest , but also to safeguard services of general economic interest by means of a legislative framework with this in mind .
The aim of the Services Directive , which entered into force in December 2006 , is to open up the market for service providers in the European Union by getting rid of all protectionist barriers , arbitrary hindrances and any discriminatory rules .
In addition , Parliament has always insisted that this directive must not form a pretext for dangerous deregulation and liberalisation of the sector .
I voted in favour of this report , which does well to note the ( often unjustified ) delays and the disputes over the implementation of the Services Directive , which concerns a sector that accounts for some 40 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) and jobs in the EU .
Furthermore , the directive also has the advantage of allowing European enterprises - and particularly small and medium-sized enterprises - to provide better services at competitive prices .
The correct and transparent transposition of the Services Directive would have the positive effect of unlocking the enormous economic and job-creation potential of the internal market , estimated at 0.6-1.5 % of European GDP -something the European Union desperately needs .
Therefore , the complete transposition of the directive throughout the EU will introduce aspects of competition to the internal market that will result in advantages for citizens and enterprises .
The Services Directive constitutes a fundamental instrument for the growth of the European Union , enabling self-employed persons and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , in particular , to carry out their activities much more easily in other Member States , and to develop new areas of business and recruit personnel there .
These activities represent 40 % of GDP and jobs within the European Union , and are an essential sector in terms of economic growth and combating unemployment .
It is important to consolidate the enormous potential for economic development and job creation that the European internal market for services represents , as it constitutes an essential step towards a real internal market for services , which should enable businesses and , in particular , SMEs , to provide citizens with better quality services at competitive prices throughout the entire internal market .
I hope that the aims of the directive can begin to be achieved in the near future , and that the entire EU and its regions can benefit from this , thus contributing to real economic , social and territorial cohesion through the creation of decent , sustainable , quality jobs , and in terms of improving the quality and safety of services provided .
Parliament is voting on the implementation of the Services Directive , the withdrawal of which had been promised back when it was still called the Bolkestein Directive .
The European Parliament is now deciding whether or not it was transposed properly in the Member States .
Services account for 40 % of European Union GDP and jobs , with significant differences between Member States .
The Services Directive is proposing legal ' advances ' and standardisation that will take place at the expense of the French people and will result in social standards being levelled downwards .
The protection of markets and workers , as contributors to the wealth of our country and our continent , is imperative , but the European Union , as ever , opposes that idea .
I voted in favour of this report , as I believe that the implementation of the Services Directive by Member States has so far been partial and limited .
Despite this directive being one of the most important European laws , with the aim of opening up the services sector to free movement within the European Union , there is still a long way to go .
There is a need to guarantee that this legislation , approved more than three years ago , is correctly implemented , particularly with regard to the effective creation of ' points of contact ' , which any citizen seeking to sell services in another country can use to obtain the necessary information .
The purpose of Directive 2006 / 123 / EC on services in the internal market is to open up the market to service providers in the European Union , phase out the Member States ' protectionist barriers on the exercise of service activities and fulfil the principle of free movement , aiming to achieve a real internal market for the sector .
The services sector represents 40 % of GDP and employment within the Union , and has enormous potential for growth and job creation , particularly within small and medium-sized enterprises .
The deadline for transposing the directive was the end of 2009 , but some Member States are still failing to implement it correctly and effectively .
The online portal , with all of the necessary administrative information , is only functioning in 22 states , and of these 22 , it is only possible to carry out the necessary procedures electronically in 14 of them .
There is a need to guarantee and monitor the correct application of this directive by Member States , with the aim of eliminating arbitrary barriers and / or making the rules that continue to exist in the Member States proportional and non-discriminatory .
This draft resolution refers to the implementation of Directive 2006 / 123 / EC on services in the internal market .
The principle of the free movement of people and goods throughout the territory of the European Union is present within all of its treaties , with the aim of supporting the creation of the common market .
Directive 2006 / 123 / EC was approved with the objective of doing away with the bureaucracy restricting service activities in the Member States .
However , it can be seen that not all Member States are implementing this directive , due to certain aspects that they consider have not been properly clarified .
That is why this resolution is relevant .
I applaud the creation of a rapid and effective means of responding to requests from business people and workers ' representatives in the form of ' points of single contact ' , and I hope that these are not reduced to an electronic format but also involve personal attention , as we know how important this is when we are in a foreign country .
We voted against this report , in keeping with all our earlier positions relating to the infamous Bolkestein Directive and its unacceptable aims of facilitating the liberalisation of services , including public services , to favour the interests of economic and financial groupings within the European Union , at a cost of increased unemployment and inferior services provided to the respective users , as is already plainly visible within sectors that have gone down this road .
This report seeks to put pressure on Member States that have not advanced as rapidly as the majority of Members of the European Parliament would like - to protect the interests of European economic groupings - in transposing Directive 2006 / 123 / EC on services in the internal market .
This directive came into force on 28 December 2006 and aims , as stated within this report , ' to open up the market to service providers in the European Union , phase out the Member States ' protectionist barriers on the exercise of service activities and fulfil the principle of free movement , the basis for the common market ' .
What was required , though , was an objective assessment of the consequences of implementing the liberalisation and subsequent privatisation of services , in some cases , essential public services , in order to return to an uncompromising defence of the rights of people and workers .
The Bolkestein Directive has fallen behind schedule because the Member States are said to have taken too long to transpose it and to have applied it incorrectly .
It is true that in France , it has been only partially transposed into national law .
And with good reason !
To avoid a public debate , and therefore any further outcry , Mr Sarkozy 's government deliberately chose not to use a framework law but to integrate the principles of the directive into all relevant texts .
In fact , there is only one principle : the full and absolute freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services !
Splitting up the legislative amendments has resulted in a process that lacks transparency .
The scope of the text is still not clear : some social services that are supposedly excluded are , in fact , covered by the directive .
Those that are actually excluded today have simply been put on the back-burner : every three years , the Commission can suggest getting rid of the exemptions .
Moreover , as for the most scandalous clause in the text , the country of origin principle , although it has been formally deleted , it has sneaked back in thanks to the possibilities opened up by the directive on the posting of workers and the regulation on the law applicable to contractual obligations .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report on the basis that services account for 70 % of all jobs and for all net job creation in the single European market and represent the most important source of foreign direct investment .
The Services Directive creates the fundamental framework for a higher degree of free movement of service providers , strengthens the rights of consumers as recipients of services and enhances the availability of information , assistance and transparency with regard to service providers and their services .
For these reasons , proper implementation of the Services Directive should remain a top priority for the Commission .
Therefore , the Commission must work with Member States to further improve administrative cooperation of mechanisms that fall within the scope of the directive , in particular , by ensuring that Member States put into place fully operative points of single contact .
Furthermore , I encourage the Commission , together with the Member States , to continue to develop the single market in services on the basis of the ' mutual evaluation ' process set out in the Services Directive , in order to receive updated feedback from consumers , citizens and businesses with regard to national measures for implementation of the Services Directive in their respective Member States , thereby ensuring that Member States truly take ownership of the single market .
Adopted in 2006 , the Services Directive , which should have been transposed into national law before 28 December 2009 , continues to raise questions in the Member States and within local authorities that are directly affected by it .
The parliamentary own-initiative report by Mrs Gebhardt , which proposes an initial assessment of the directive 's implementation , thus touches on some of these difficulties , and especially the uncertainty surrounding social services and services of general economic interest ( how are they defined ? which areas are affected ? ) , as well as the lack of transparency of the transposition process in some Member States .
Moreover , it must be said that France stands out due to its problematic lack of transparency and inflexibility in implementing this directive .
It has scores of decrees and implementing laws , and a restrictive interpretation of the exemptions set out in the directive , which raises doubts as to the future of some services , such as childcare and care for the disabled .
Now more than ever , this own-initiative report , which has been adopted by a large majority , is an opportunity to point out that MEPs , and especially the Socialists , will continue to be vigilant with regard to the implementation of this directive and its impact on public services .
Four years after the adoption of the Services Directive , the European Parliament gave its verdict this week on the implementation of the directive in the Member States .
A shortage of information , standstills in terms of cross-border services , unnecessary administrative constraints , and so on , are the criticisms voiced by the European Parliament in the report that we have adopted and of which I have voted in favour .
Indeed , Member States need to make progress in implementing this directive in order to improve and facilitate the provision of cross-border services .
Aside from that , I would like to emphasise the difficult issue of the directive 's scope , which excludes a number of areas , such as non-economic services of general interest and some services ( social services , childcare , assistance to people , and so on ) carried out by providers mandated by the State .
Two concepts , ' non-economic service of general interest ' and ' mandating ' , are not clearly defined and / or their interpretation differs from one Member State to another .
This has resulted in a lack of legal clarity , which I deeply regret .
It is of major significance for the common European internal market that the Member States implement the Services Directive quickly and effectively .
It is particularly important for small and medium-sized businesses which want to be able to offer their services across national borders to have a point of single contact that can provide them with essential information and explain the necessary procedures .
More than a year has now passed since the deadline for the Member States to implement the Services Directive .
It does not make much sense for us to continue discussing the numerous amendments .
It would be more useful to investigate the implementation process more closely .
Although some Member States have already taken the necessary measures , others seem to have forgotten about the document that they signed .
Therefore , we must ensure that the directive is implemented immediately and correctly in all 27 Member States , in order to simplify the process of providing services in other countries as quickly as possible .
I voted in favour of this European Parliament resolution on the implementation of the Services Directive , which entered into force in 2006 .
The aim of this directive is to open up the market for service providers in the European Union , phase out the Member States ' protectionist barriers on the exercise of service activities and fulfil the principle of freedom of movement , the basis for the common market .
The purpose of the directive is to influence access to the markets in such a way that arbitrary barriers are phased out and any rules that are maintained in the Member States are appropriate and non-discriminatory .
It has been expressly confirmed that neither employment law nor employees ' rights are affected by the legislative project , an aspect to which Parliament has attached special importance .
European service providers must be able to work without bureaucratic hindrance anywhere in the EU .
The directive covers various services , whose gross domestic product ( GDP ) accounts for 40 % of EU GDP .
I agree that setting up the points of single contact is an essential part of the effective implementation of this directive .
The Services Directive is a vital step towards a genuine single services market , which will enable businesses , especially SMEs , to offer citizens better services at competitive prices .
I supported the position of the rapporteur who thinks that setting up points of single contact ( PSC ) is a key element to implementing this directive effectively .
This instrument may be significantly important to small and medium-sized enterprises .
PSCs must make available precise , complete and comprehensive information on formalities , administrative procedures , employment law , taxation systems in operation in Member States , especially for VAT , and so on .
Moreover , business people should receive assistance in completing the necessary administrative procedures .
I think that , after full transposition , it is crucial that a comprehensive assessment should be carried out of the impact of the Services Directive on economic activity , qualitative and quantitative levels of employment , social protection , fulfilment of environmental objectives and the quality of services offered to consumers .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution .
The Services Directive adopted in 2006 aimed to harmonise certain aspects of the single market related to the provision of services .
Full implementation by Member States should have been achieved by the end of 2009 .
I call on those Member States who have not fulfilled their obligations to do so as a matter of urgency .
The only positive contribution of this text is the invitation for Member States to ' ensure greater transparency ' when transposing this Services Directive .
The French Government is not taking any notice !
Apart from that , this report by a social-democrat MEP validates the neoliberal diktat of this harmful directive and even goes as far as to call to order Member States which ' lack ambition ' in implementing it .
Worse still , this House admits to being unable to assess the consequences of its implementation !
This is probably why there is no roll-call vote .
The names of those responsible will not be known .
I shall vote against it .
Directive 2006 / 123 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on services in the internal market seeks to eliminate the barriers that still exist to the cross-border provision of services .
After some difficulties with the transposition of the directive , due to doubts on the part of some Member States , the guidelines of this procedure , designed to simplify coordination between Member States with regard to consumer protection , environmental protection , and public health and safety , will finally be put into practice in all Member States , and this report will contribute to the even more effective implementation and improved operability of the measures put forward .
That is why I voted as I did .
The EU provides a wide range of opportunities for service providers in particular .
Standardised EU regulations have made cross-border working much easier and employees are being offered an increasing number of incentives to spend a few years working abroad .
However , they are often confronted with national laws relating to services which they do not understand and which frequently lead to problems or misunderstandings .
I have not voted in favour of the report , because it does not provide enough information about the costs of the points of single contact .
The adoption of the Services Directive is aimed at making it easier for businesses to operate beyond their national borders .
The system established has significantly reduced the amount of administrative obstacles .
Nevertheless , experience shows that there are still a lot of bureaucratic pitfalls for small businesses to overcome in some European Union Member States .
The planned principle of one-stop shops is not working in many countries or is not working appropriately , and entrepreneurs sometimes still have to obtain endless licences which must be checked by a whole host of inspection bodies .
Such inconveniences are faced not only by local entrepreneurs , but also service providers wishing to provide services in other EU Member States .
I therefore agree with the text of the report and also call on the EU Member States to continue to make life easier for business and ensure the free movement of services .
The process of transposing the Services Directive is based on a delicate procedure that aims to create transparency and consistency in the Member States ' systems with reference to the outcomes of the implementation of the directive itself , as well as to evaluate the outcomes for the internal market following transposition .
This is the objective of the report , which I voted in favour of given the need to verify the work of the Member States .
Promoting the convergence of regulations through mutual assessment of their effective transposition would not only facilitate the work of the Member States ( which are running so late that in this report , Parliament deems it necessary to monitor their work ) but would also set a definite framework for the system of points of single contact , which will guarantee the flow of information to small and medium-sized enterprises .
I should merely like to note that our economy is based 75 % on services and that in a global market , they must certainly represent our strong point .
I believe that greater liberalisation , which does not mean a lack of rules but merely more competition , is desirable for the future .
The Services Directive seeks to contribute to the completion of the internal market for services , with the concomitant guarantee of high levels of quality and social cohesion .
It is an instrument intended to serve the purpose of growth within the EU and its implementation is included within the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy and the Single Market Act .
Transposition of the Services Directive constitutes a major challenge for Member States , public administrations and local authorities , both because of what it prescribes with regard to the right to establishment and the provision of services , and because of the creation of points of single contact to assist service providers , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
This directive enables self-employed people and SMEs , in particular , to carry out their activities much more easily in other Member States , and to develop new areas of business and recruit personnel there .
I voted in favour as I am convinced that , because the internal market information system and points of single contact require a great effort at administrative cooperation among all the authorities involved , they will give rise to greater interoperability and the creation of networks at a national , regional and local level throughout the EU , bringing the outermost regions closer to a real internal market .
The purpose of Directive 2006 / 123 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on services in the internal market ( the Services Directive ) is to open up the market to service providers within the European Union , phase out the Member States ' protectionist barriers on the exercise of service activities and fulfil the principle of free movement , the basis for the common market .
It is an important instrument on the way towards a real internal market for services , which aims to enable businesses and , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises , to provide better quality services at competitive prices throughout the entire territory of the EU , contributing to the promotion of prosperity and competitiveness , as well as to the creation of jobs .
It is therefore essential , as the rapporteur rightly points out , to ensure its satisfactory transposition and implementation by Member States , which need to guarantee the elimination of bureaucratic barriers and access to the relevant information for business people , specifically by promoting the creation of points of single contact .
I have voted in favour of the report on implementing the Services Directive because I believe it to be very balanced .
It focuses on assessing the practical difficulties and makes specific proposals on resolving them .
I come from a country where the Services Directive has not been implemented in national law .
I believe it is essential that the directive is implemented and it must be accompanied by measures to prevent the introduction of cheap labour and social dumping .
In my opinion , it is also important that the report on implementing the Services Directive highlights the areas which have been deliberately omitted , such as social and healthcare services .
This must be followed down to the last full stop during the implementation process .
Nearly four and a half years after the adoption of the notorious Services Directive , known as the Bolkestein Directive , this essential issue , which covers a wide spectrum of activities accounting for around 40 % of EU GDP and jobs , is once again on the European Parliament 's agenda .
Fortunately , things have now quietened down and the left-leaning parties seem to have abandoned their dogmatic posturing on the Services Directive , the purpose of which , it is important to point out , is to remove the unnecessary and restrictive obstacles to the provision of services within the European Union .
It should be said that the Gebhardt report voted on today is less concerned with the content of the text than with assessing the Member States ' efforts to transpose it .
This transposition is in accordance with the directive , since the Member States were required to simplify their administrative procedures and to set up ' points of single contact ' by the end of 2009 , so that businesses could complete their formalities more easily by electronic means .
The least we can say is that there is still progress to be made in many Member States so as to strengthen the single market and facilitate the day-to-day work of SMEs , only 8 % of which operate beyond their national borders .
Today in this House , we voted on the report on the Implementation of the Services Directive .
The aim of the directive is to open up the market for service providers in the European Union , phase out the Member States ' protectionist barriers on the exercise of service activities and fulfil the principle of freedom of movement of goods and services in the Union , which is at the heart of the single market .
In short , European service providers must be able to work without bureaucratic hindrance anywhere in the European Union .
The own-initiative report by Mrs Gebhardt enables us to assess the implementation of the Services Directive , the three-year period for the implementation of which came to an end on 28 December 2009 , this highly important directive having entered into force in December 2006 .
The rapporteur 's assessment indeed demonstrates that some Member States have still not adopted all the horizontal legislation that this directive requires in order to be correctly implemented , which is why work is still required to try and put in place all the mechanisms provided for by the Services Directive .
in writing . - We finally voted against the text because , regarding services of general interest , the report considers that the majority of Member States did not encounter any significant problems .
Although this wording waters down a bit the initial proposal by the EPP shadow ( Handzlik , Poland ) according to which there has been no problem at all , this still tends to ignore the uncertainties created by the directive regarding , in particular , the social services to be included or excluded in its scope .
Furthermore , the report maintains enthusiastic expectations regarding the impact on employment , whereas there has been no impact assessment at all from the Commission , and some national impact assessments indicate very low quantitative impact figures in terms of job creation ; there are no impact figures regarding job losses ; furthermore , there is nothing regarding the impact on the quality of jobs , not to speak about the pressure on the level of labour standards created by some ECJ case-law after the adoption of the directive .

I voted in favour of this resolution because I believe that the full realisation of a dynamic services market is one of the basic priorities for the European Union .
Currently , despite the significant advances made by the single market , services represent just one fifth of total trade in Europe and a mere 8 % of small and medium-sized enterprises operate in Member States other than their own .
The figures shown in the Communication on the Single Market adopted by the Commission last October are quite clear : by liberalising services , we would obtain a 4 % growth in gross domestic product ( GDP ) over the next 10 years .
This objective can only be reached by developing and implementing shared rules .
At this time of crisis , we must exploit existing growth potential by helping enterprises to grow , innovate and create more jobs .
This is the only way we will manage to offer better and more competitive services to both consumers and businesses .
The single services market must be a tool to restore economic growth , win back consumer trust and guarantee reliable products for all .
There are still a number of restrictions on services in the single market , and so this is an important report in that it analyses the implementation of the solutions that have been adopted .
The Services Directive aims to achieve full implementation of the single internal services market .
It is also intended to make it significantly easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to start up and extend their operations .
This will promote the creation of new jobs and help fight unemployment .
Citizens will be offered higher quality services at more competitive prices , and safety levels in the sector will be improved .
However , it will be vital to assess the impact of the directive after it has been fully implemented by the Member States .
The European Parliament , as one of the key players in the project , should play a major role in monitoring this process .
Speedy and correct implementation of the directive is a key condition for achieving the goals of cohesion policy and regional policy , and may help us to achieve the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy , by serving to eliminate the single market fatigue currently apparent in the services sector .
in writing . - ( NL ) In 2006 , liberalisation of the services market was introduced .
At the time , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance voted against the Services Directive because it had many shortcomings and because it failed to guarantee legal certainty .
The report which is to be put to the vote today takes stock of the difficulties which we encountered in implementing this Services Directive .
Although it contains some good elements , such as the call for a regular review and the investigation of long-term effects , it also contains elements with which I disagree , for example , the statement that Member States have experienced few or no significant difficulties in the process of implementation .
That is simply untrue , because it remains unclear whether or not certain social services are covered by the directive .
The report is also too optimistic about the possibility of jobs being created .
No research has ever been carried out into the number of jobs created , nor has there been any into the number of job losses that have occurred or the quality of jobs available , let alone the increased pressure on labour conditions following the judgments of the Court of Justice .
Moreover , the report fails to mention a single word about the legal uncertainty which will arise as a result of the fact that no clear alternative has been formulated for the principle of the country of origin .
The Greens , however , did request a review of the ban on Member States imposing additional requirements on service providers , but that request was rejected .
I voted against .
in writing . - I supported this report on the implementation of the Services Directive 2006 / 123 / EC .
It is important that social rights and labour law are respected as the internal market is improved for services , all of which will benefit traders as well as consumers .
in writing . - I strongly endorse the Gebhardt report .
The Services Directive implementation deadline passed a year ago , and I welcome the fact that Parliament is shining the spotlight on Member States ' progress .
The services sector accounts for a large share of the EU 's GDP , yet the cross-border trading of services still falls well short of the level of trade in goods .
This report shows that implementation is incomplete and that the full benefits of the directive have not yet been reaped by citizens .
The points of single contact ( PSCs ) in each Member State , which inform service providers of rights and opportunities in other EU Member States , are an important provision of the directive .
In my view , the crucial issue raised by this report is the huge under-use of these PSCs .
I firmly support the proposal that an effective information campaign be led to raise the visibility of PSCs .
The Commission should earmark funds for a promotional campaign .
However , I also underline the role to be played by authorities on the ground in the Member States who have the contacts and expertise needed to ensure this campaign is well targeted .
Unless this is done , the Union 's efforts to foster the cross-border trading of services will be in vain .
The implementation of the abortive anti-labour law on the ' liberalisation ' of services , known as the Bolkestein Directive , promotes sweeping reactionary changes at the expense of the working and grassroots classes .
The opening up of the services markets , which account for 40 % of GDP and jobs in the EU , involves abolishing collective agreements , striking at the wage , labour , social and other rights won by the workers and selling off strategic public sectors of the economy which are the property of the people .
The European Parliament has called in its motion for a resolution on services for the EU and the bourgeois governments in the Member States to speed up capitalist restructurings , so that the directive on the ' liberalisation ' of services can be implemented in full , based on the Commission 's recent communication entitled ' Towards a Single Market Act ' in 2011 , the aim being to make further drastic cuts to the workforce and to enable the monopolies to penetrate new , profitable sectors for capital .
The creation of points of single contact ( PSCs ) for service companies in all the Member States is a pretext for speeding up the implementation of the anti-labour directive , the ratification of which has triggered a storm of protest by workers in all the Member States .
The Greek Communist Party voted against this motion for a resolution on the implementation of the Services Directive .
in writing . - I fully support Evelyne Gebhardt 's report on the implementation of the Services Directive .
The activities of the 2006 directive account for 40 % of EU GDP and jobs .
However , the different implementation methods of Member States have made it difficult for the service sector to take full advantage of the directive .
Allowing service providers to operate outside their own country is integral to the EU 's single market and reducing the bureaucracy at national level can allow the directive to make a contribution to EU economic growth and its jobs objectives .
According to the report , each Member State must ensure that more information is disseminated to businesses that want to provide services across borders .
Doing this through points of single contact ( PSCs ) will allow the service sector to benefit from cross-border trade .
Ensuring that the PSCs provide a human as well as an electronic contact point is also vital to ensure that users receive all the relevant information and that questions are answered .
The report also proposes the inclusion of services that were exempt from the original directive in 2006 : healthcare , transport and social services .
This would further expand the scope of the directive and would bring benefits to more service sector workers .
In the EU , the service sector is responsible for around 70 % of GDP .
In some countries , such as Austria , where I come from , this sector is an engine of economic growth .
The aim of the directive is to remove unreasonable obstacles to the provision of cross-border services .
Small and medium-sized enterprises in particular are frequently confronted with bureaucratic barriers and discrimination which prevent them from benefiting fully from the common internal market .
The directive takes into consideration the specific social circumstances of the individual Member States .
Strengthening the control options in the destination country represents an important step forward .
However , we need to put in place quickly a mechanism for imposing effective sanctions on foreign service providers which break the law .
I have voted in favour of Mrs Gebhardt 's report , because I hope that the implementation of the Services Directive will provide a new stimulus for the labour market .
I approve this report , as I believe it to be a satisfactory and balanced compromise that succeeds in guaranteeing the rights of passengers without simultaneously imposing a heavy burden on carriers , many of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is therefore a success for Parliament , which managed to change the scope from 500 km , supported by the Council , to 250 km , as well as with regard to the rights of passengers , affecting people with reduced mobility in particular .
The following should also be highlighted : a guarantee of accommodation in the event of cancellation , a right to immediate assistance in the event of an accident , a right to compensation in the event of cancellation , and the electronic provision of up-to-date information to passengers .
in writing . - We have opposed this legislation on the grounds that it is certain that :
1. the extra costs incurred for extra rights will translate into permanently higher ticket costs across the board for all passengers ;
2. bus and coach routes which are making marginal or no profit , having no room for increased ticket prices , will be cut entirely and there will be no service .
The EU should not have the right to make laws for the UK .
We assert the right of the UK as a nation state to govern itself and make its own laws , transport and environment laws being no exception .
I voted in favour of this resolution , in which the European Parliament expresses its position on protecting the rights of passengers .
The regulation shall apply to regular services , within and between EU Member States , where the scheduled distance is no greater than 250 km .
We are talking about the rights of bus passengers when a bus or coach service is cancelled or delayed for more than 120 minutes .
Then passengers should immediately be offered a choice between continuing their journey or re-routing to their final destination at no additional cost or reimbursement of the ticket price .
If the carrier fails to offer this choice , passengers shall have the right to compensation in addition to the reimbursement of the ticket price .
In the event of cancellation or delay , it is also important for passengers to be provided with all necessary information .
Furthermore , assistance must also be offered where a journey of more than three hours is cancelled or delayed in departure for more than 90 minutes .
In such instances , meals or refreshments must be offered , as well as hotel accommodation for a maximum of two nights .
However , the obligation to provide accommodation does not apply if the cancellation or delay is caused by severe weather conditions or major natural disasters .
Bearing in mind the difficulties experienced by passengers this winter , when they were unable to reach their destination due to weather conditions and even had to spend several nights in stations , their right to accommodation should be ensured .
In the European Union , more than 70 million Europeans travel by bus and coach every year .
The firm stance adopted by the European Parliament on the rights of persons travelling by bus or coach means that , from now on , transport operators will provide information , assistance and compensation across the whole EU to comply with passengers ' rights .
Regardless of the means of transport they use , Europeans now enjoy EU-level protection .
I support this report which regulates the overbooking of buses and coaches or departures delayed by more than two hours for journeys longer than 250 kilometres , as well as the cancellation of journeys .
Furthermore , I believe that the policy of non-discrimination against persons with reduced mobility is reflected in a set of basic rights concerning the provision of assistance at bus stations , including free transport for particular items of equipment such as wheelchairs .
I voted for this report , which supports the rights of persons with disabilities and reduced mobility , such as non-discriminatory access to transport and the right to compensation for the loss of or damage to wheelchairs or other mobility equipment .
Persons with disabilities must have access to a transport system and the rights of persons with reduced mobility must be safeguarded in terms of getting assistance at stops and terminals .
While I agree that passengers have the right to get better information and help from bodies and at terminals throughout the EU , it is important not to unduly burden the small , domestic or voluntary bodies that operate in rural areas , something which would put pressure on them to cut back on the services they provide .
Often , the bus services provided by the domestic or voluntary bodies are services essential to local and rural communities .
Higher prices and a restriction on the number of available routes would be the result of the additional costs recommended in the report and some bodies would possibly be forced to close .
Excessive regulation would place a huge burden on these bodies , some of which are already under pressure , and a restricted service for rural people would be the result .
A transport system which works well on the local level is better than a service which is terminated due to excessive regulation .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this important document .
With growth in the transport sector and EU citizens ' increasing mobility , it is essential to establish EU-wide rights for the protection of passengers and to secure a level playing field between carriers from different Member States .
Air passengers have long had many rights , and two years ago , EU rail and air passengers were given the same rights and a high level of protection was ensured .
Similar rights must also be ensured for bus passengers and opportunities to travel must be improved for persons with reduced mobility .
I believe that following lengthy and complicated negotiations , it has been possible to reach a really good and balanced agreement with the Council , which fully protects passenger rights without imposing a burden on carriers , most of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
Henceforth , bus passengers will have the right to compensation if a journey is cancelled , delayed or postponed , while the issue of damaged or lost baggage has also been addressed and clear rules have been laid down on rights to compensation in the event of an accident .
in writing . - We have opposed this legislation on the grounds that it is certain that :
1. the extra costs incurred for extra rights will translate into permanently higher ticket costs across the board for all passengers ;
2. bus and coach routes which are making marginal or no profit , having no room for increased ticket prices , will be cut entirely and there will be no service .
The EU should not have the right to make laws for the UK .
We assert the right of the UK as a nation state to govern itself and make its own laws , transport and environment laws being no exception .
Bringing the rights of bus and coach passengers into line with those of rail and air passengers is , of course , an excellent intention .
Nevertheless , I abstained because in my opinion , the text does not go far enough .
Indeed , limiting to 250 kilometres the threshold for compensation in the event of a major problem means effectively excluding three countries of the European Union . Yet a simple derogation mechanism for the countries concerned could easily have been introduced .
More generally , bus and coach passengers are , on the whole , less well off .
Since mobility is an issue that comes up often , it would have been a good idea to send them a message concerning much shorter journeys than 250 kilometres .
Regarding the text in question , I cannot but support the report by Mr Cancian whereby , at the heart of institutional debate , we are not only striving to create a common body of guarantees for the rights of bus and coach passengers , but also to give proper consideration to the mobility requirements of handicapped and disabled persons .
For this reason , bus and coach companies are urged to be equipped and trained to provide a minimal level of assistance to disabled persons or persons with reduced mobility , as long as the passenger informs the company of their needs not less than 36 hours prior to departure .
The compromise reached therefore seems to establish shared minimum standards very much in passengers ' favour , without putting excessive burdens on carriers , which are mostly small and medium-sized enterprises .
Based on the outcome of the vote on Tuesday , the European Parliament has successfully added the missing piece to European passengers ' rights legislation , which is to be implemented across the board from spring 2013 .
The negotiations have been difficult .
However , they will cover all national or cross-border road transport services over distances in excess of 250 km .
Road transport norms had to be standardised at a time when European citizens are increasingly using this form of transport as it offers a cheaper and more convenient option for short distances not covered by air transport .
In the context of European traffic , it is only natural that the road transport sector has similar compensation rules to those applied to air transport , which were standardised a long time ago .
In too many instances , road carriers apply the rule of using their own discretion , especially in the countries which have recently become Member States .
However , making them liable can only help improve the services offered .
Every passenger , whether travelling by air or road , must be aware of their rights , especially in situations where they pay for a certain service and sometimes receive something completely different .
I hope that not very many states will request a temporary exemption from these regulations and that they will be applied across the board from 2013 .
I should like to congratulate Mr Cancian for his excellent work , thanks to which we were able to reach a satisfying and well-balanced compromise .
Indeed , as a result of this report , from this day forth , the rights of bus and coach passengers - the only ones hitherto not specifically protected at European level - will also be guaranteed .
I therefore voted in favour of this document , in which I also appreciate the attention paid to the automotive companies operating in the sector .
In fact , the agreements reached managed to avoid putting excessive burdens on carriers , which are often family-run and of modest dimensions .
At the same time , I think it is important that the European Union adopt a specific regulation that will lead shortly to a charter of passengers ' rights , focusing , in particular , on the needs of disabled persons or persons with reduced mobility .
I regard the approved text of the regulation as a balanced compromise , securing rights for passengers without , at the same time , representing an excessive administrative burden for transport operators , most of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
I consider it a success that the European Parliament has , against the will of the Council , extended the scope of the regulation to all regular domestic and cross-border transport with a distance of 250 km or more , while the Council was proposing a minimum distance of 500 km .
I welcome the fact that in case of a cancellation , a delay longer than 120 minutes or over-acceptance of reservations , passengers will , in addition to the right to continue with their journey or take another route to their destination or reimbursement of the ticket price , have the right to compensation amounting to 50 % of the ticket price .
In view of the fact that the regulation on bus passenger rights is linked to the regulation on rail passenger rights , I am not pleased that , in contrast to bus passengers , rail passengers in many EU states must wait for their rights to be applied , especially regarding the right to reimbursement of a quarter to half of the fare where there is a delay of more than one hour .
The Czech Ministry of Transport has also made use of the option to postpone the implementation of this European legislation by five years .
The reason it gave for this was the relatively extensive construction activities on the Czech rail network , which cause trains to be delayed .
In the final analysis , this means introducing a system of double standards , disadvantaging one group of passengers compared to another .
in writing . - We have opposed this legislation on the grounds that it is certain that :
1. the extra costs incurred for extra rights will translate into permanently higher ticket costs across the board for all passengers ;
2. bus and coach routes which are making marginal or no profit , having no room for increased ticket prices , will be cut entirely and there will be no service .
The EU should not have the right to make laws for the UK .
We assert the right of the UK as a nation state to govern itself and make its own laws , transport and environment laws being no exception .
Given that the transport sector is constantly expanding , it has become essential to ensure that passenger protection rights , comparable to those applying to other modes of transport , also apply throughout the whole of the EU to bus and coach transport , which has seen growth above 5 % and has recorded an annual volume of 72.8 million passengers .
It is also important to ensure that there is a level playing field , in terms of competition , between transport companies in different Member States and between different modes of transport .
I therefore consider it important that it has been possible to reach an agreement , after nearly two years of negotiations , that will enable this type of passenger to benefit from an entire set of rights , particularly in terms of assistance in the event of accidents , delays , cancellations , refunds , etc . , at the same time as special attention is paid to the rights of people with disabilities and reduced mobility .
I support this compromise as I believe it to be quite satisfactory and balanced , since it succeeds in guaranteeing the rights of passengers without simultaneously imposing a heavy burden on carriers , which , in the majority of cases , are small and medium-sized enterprises .
I feel it bodes well that the final text can be regarded as a very satisfactory and well-balanced compromise as it manages to secure the rights of passengers without , at the same time , imposing excessively restrictive measures on carriers , most of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
In December 2008 , the Commission submitted a proposal for a regulation concerning the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
The main purpose of this proposal was to introduce common provisions concerning these rights .
This has now been done , and I am delighted that passengers travelling at least 250 km by bus will now have the same EU-wide rights to information , assistance and compensation in the event of a cancellation , overbooking or delay of two hours or more .
Passengers should have the choice between receiving a refund for the price of the ticket or continuing their journey under the same conditions and at no additional cost .
If a refund is the only option available , compensation amounting to 50 % of the ticket price will have to be paid .
Moreover , passengers will also be entitled to compensation if their luggage is lost or damaged .
in writing . - ( SV ) The European Parliament has this week voted on a report that is intended to secure rights for bus and coach passengers at European level .
The compromise with the Council is a step in the right direction , but unfortunately , the scope of the regulation is limited and we therefore chose to abstain from the vote .
We believe it to be problematic that three Member States - Luxembourg , Malta and Cyprus - have been excluded from the agreement , as this considerably weakens the overall protection of passengers in Europe .
We also believe that the distance of 250 km is too long to be used as a basis for EU legislation , as it means in practice that bus and coach passengers travelling from Luxembourg to Strasbourg or from Malmö to Växjö would not be protected by the legislation .
That is regrettable .
We are also opposed to the force majeure clause that limits the liability of carriers in the event of cancellations or delays if they are caused by difficult weather conditions or major natural disasters .
We consider this to be setting a worrying precedent for the forthcoming review of the regulation on the rights of air passengers .
However , we welcome the improvement in the rights of people with disabilities that this agreement entails and the additional assistance that these people will now receive .
I voted in favour of this report on the rights of bus and coach transport passengers , as they are granted rights comparable to those of passengers on other modes of transport .
The new regulation includes important provisions , particularly with regard to the rights of people with disabilities or people with restricted mobility , as well as the rights of passengers in the event of cancellation or delay .
Whatever means of transport is used , passengers have the right to be provided with a quality and safe service , for which reason I consider the intention to introduce harmonised rules on passenger rights for bus and coach transport throughout the entire territory of the EU to be positive .
Furthermore , I believe that passenger rights should essentially be the same , whatever type of transport is used , except in cases where this would be incompatible with the characteristics of the means of transport in question .
Finally , I would like to congratulate Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , Mr Simpson , the rapporteur and everyone else involved in the negotiations in the Conciliation Committee on the work carried out and on the agreement reached with regard to the final version of this regulation .
This report relates to a joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the basic rights of passengers who use bus and coach transport .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate the Conciliation Committee on the work carried out and the consensus achieved .
From the three rights initially put forward by the Council , it has actually been possible to arrive at 12 , among which I would highlight the rules on accountability , compensation , assistance , alternative transport and special attention to passengers with disabilities or reduced mobility .
I therefore welcome this additional step taken by the European Union , which , I am sure , will increase the number of passengers travelling by bus and coach due to the feeling of safety and comfort that it will introduce , which will contribute significantly to the reduction of CO2 emissions .
The agreement on the rights of bus and coach passengers that was reached by Parliament and the Council within the Conciliation Committee redefines the scope of the regulation established at second reading , restricting it to passengers using road services known as ' long distance ' - defining these as services involving a journey of 250 km or more .
At the same time , it defines 12 basic rights for short-distance passengers , focusing on the needs of people with disabilities and reduced mobility , such as compensation in the event of loss or damage caused to wheelchairs and other mobility equipment , non-discriminatory tickets and terms of carriage , and rights to information .
These are proposals that we naturally support .
However , we must express some doubts with regard to the amendments introduced within the Conciliation Committee , as well as the criteria used for the implementation of the regulation .
The different sizes and characteristics of EU countries may make it difficult to apply the regulation in some of them , especially in the smallest ones , where it is difficult to include many journeys within the adopted concept of a ' long-distance ' journey , which may result in their passengers being deprived of the rights in question without reasonable justification .
After many years of procedure , the adoption of this text represents significant progress for passenger rights in Europe , and particularly for disabled people and people with reduced mobility .
With the adoption of this regulation ( which concerns journeys by bus and coach ) , all modes of transport in the European Union will henceforth be covered by legislation offering rights and guarantees to passengers if their journey is , for instance , cancelled or delayed , or if their luggage is lost and so forth .
That being said , I regret the fact that this regulation only applies from 250 km , since this effectively excludes three Member States of the European Union ( Luxembourg , Malta and Cyprus ) , but also many journeys , such as Brussels-Amsterdam or Budapest-Vienna .
Finally , I also deplore the lack of flexibility for ' journeys ' in cross-border areas , as this impedes Europeans ' mobility .
In other words , this text is much less ambitious than what we defended in the Conciliation Committee a few months ago and much less ambitious than what I would have wanted for passengers in Europe .
I voted in favour of this text , not only because it seeks to improve the rights of bus and coach passengers in terms of compensation and assistance in the event of an accident , but also because it emphasises the principle of non-discrimination with regard to people with reduced mobility , who should also have proper access to these modes of transport , which now account for 10 % of all passenger land transport in Europe .
Furthermore , I welcome the fact that , thanks to this text , passenger rights are now protected for all modes of transport .
in writing . - I voted in favour of giving important new rights to bus and coach passengers .
I think that we have struck a fair balance between the rights of consumers and the needs of transport providers .
Today 's vote will be particularly important for disabled passengers , who will benefit as a result of today 's vote .
I voted in favour of this resolution , in which the European Parliament expresses its position on protecting the rights of passengers .
I believe it will contribute towards improving conditions for passengers and will give them more legal clarity in the case of an accident or other unforeseen events .
At the same time , the enhanced passenger rights in this document will be implemented without imposing a heavy burden on carriers , most of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
Most importantly , the rights enjoyed by bus passengers will be comparable to those in other modes of transport .
Following troubled negotiations between the Council and Parliament , only today can we finally pass the report drafted by Mr Cancian .
For me , there was no alternative to voting in favour because this report allows the European Union to insist that the individual Member States bring in legislation on this issue in accordance with the directives of the report , which target greater respect for bus and coach passengers .
Given that buses are the most commonly used means of transport after the car - and this is a growing trend - Europe has the duty to stand up for its citizens who use these services .
The report represents a good compromise , and I feel I really must emphasise the fact that proper attention has been given to the rights of disabled persons by requiring greater assistance from bus and coach companies for all disabled persons or persons with reduced mobility .
The entry into force of this legislation means that citizens will have the right to clear and shared rules on compensation for damage or reimbursements in the event of delays to the scheduled timetable .
On Tuesday , 15 February 2011 , the European Parliament adopted a report which will bring about a long-awaited result , namely , equal rights for passengers in all branches of transport .
The rights of passengers travelling on regular bus services have been strengthened in relation to the loss of luggage , the loss of personal possessions , death or loss of health , problems which are the carrier 's fault and so on .
A positive feature of the regulation is that it regulates the rights of passengers throughout the European Union .
It should be stressed that these fundamental rights incorporate the needs of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
The regulation is intended to ensure access to transport without discrimination .
It also regulates passengers ' responsibilities and the consequences of them neglecting these responsibilities , which may include forfeiting the opportunity to claim compensation .
In view of the above , I voted in favour of the regulation , which is well-drafted and which completes the set as regards the regulation of passengers ' rights in the European Union .
Today , after two years of difficult negotiations with Member States , the European Parliament voted on adopting an agreement on a regulation which will cover all the rights of passengers using national or cross-border long-distance transport services .
I voted for this agreement because it contains 12 fundamental rights which are of paramount importance to improving the quality of transport services .
They concern , in particular , the right of passengers to be kept informed prior to and during their journey and the needs of people with disabilities and reduced mobility .
The introduction of these rights will allow us to ensure non-discriminatory access to transport .
In addition , this report features passenger rights which I regard as very important , namely , compulsory compensation for lost luggage , reimbursement of a certain amount of costs in the event of a passenger 's death or physical injury , as well as compensation of up to 50 % of the ticket 's value , in addition to full reimbursement of the ticket price , if an operator cancels a journey and is therefore unable to honour its transport contract .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which sets out a new set of rights for bus and coach passengers and should enhance the quality of the services on offer to them , putting pressure on transport service providers to clean up their acts when it comes to delays , cancellations and lost or damaged luggage .
The report also includes key provisions to improve the accessibility of local bus services for disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
in writing . - This regulation is a step in the right direction as it creates an EU set of rights for bus passengers .
However , except for some basic rights , it applies to regular services equal to , or longer than , 250 km .
Such a limited scope can hardly be a basis for truly European legislation in the interest of all bus passengers and ALDE cannot support such a deal .
We also oppose the force majeure clause exempting carriers from the obligation to provide accommodation for passengers in case of cancellations or delays if these are caused by severe weather conditions or major natural disasters , as it can set a precedent for other EU passenger rights legislation .
Even though this is not a triumph , it is an improvement , especially for travellers with disabilities and reduced mobility .
We managed to ensure non-discriminatory access conditions , disability-related training for the staff of carriers and terminal authorities who deal directly with passengers and compensation for damage or loss of mobility equipment on all routes , regardless of distance .
Keeping that in mind , and with a view to creating a harmonised EU set of rights for all passengers , we did not oppose the agreement and abstained in the final vote .
Until now , only aeroplane , train and boat passengers have been covered by specific legislation .
From now on , passengers travelling by bus and coach will also have their rights safeguarded .
Passengers who travel by bus and coach will therefore have rights that are comparable to passengers on other modes of transport .
The regulation approved by us today provides for assistance and compensation for passengers in the event of accident , cancellation or delay , and for non-discriminatory access for passengers with disabilities .
The new rules will apply to all scheduled national and cross-border services with itineraries of at least 250 kilometres .
This represents important progress with regard to defending citizens ' rights .
in writing . - I voted in favour , but I would like to add that bus and coach companies should also have to comply with a requirement to create security and emergency aid systems for international and long-distance routes , because people can be injured during accidents .
It is also necessary to introduce additional regulations relating to the responsibility of bus companies for the life and health of passengers , including obligatory medical checks on the state of health and wellbeing of bus and coach drivers , who are responsible for the health and safety of passengers .
Today , we voted in favour of a document which , although not ideal , is still a good compromise and which has helped the Council and the European Parliament reach an agreement .
This regulation discussing passenger rights lays down rules as regards compensation in the event of an accident or postponement , the treatment of passengers ' complaints and the rights of disabled persons .
Clearly , it is unsatisfactory that the regulation will apply to a distance of 250 km or more .
In the case of small countries , this could not really be justified , but here we are not just talking about local , but international routes , and therefore I believe that for EU citizens who are travelling , this document will become a guarantee of their rights , with particular attention being paid to the rights of disabled persons .
I voted in favour of this draft resolution extending the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
This document is the result of a compromise following lengthy negotiations which enhances the implementation of passenger rights without imposing an additional burden on carriers .
I feel that it is important to ensure that the rights enjoyed by bus passengers are comparable to those in other modes of transport , and that carriers are guaranteed a level playing field .
While seeking the legalisation of adequate compensation for damage experienced , I agree with the proposal to set limits for compensation which the Member States will have to follow .
It is particularly important to ensure fair and ample compensation in the event of death , and I therefore believe that the ceilings for such compensation under national law must not be lower than the minimum amounts laid down in the regulation .
Furthermore , proper operational assistance must be ensured in the event of an accident , providing passengers with the services and items they most need .
I agree with the provisions of the regulation which give passengers appropriate guarantees should a journey be cancelled or delayed , even providing for additional compensation .
I welcome the fact that the regulation focuses , in particular , on disabled passengers and passengers with reduced mobility , and on providing them with the assistance they require while travelling .
The work carried out in conciliation by Mr Cancian regarding the regulation concerning the rights of passengers has led to the adoption of a European legal framework for the protection of bus and coach passengers to stand alongside the creation of a single transport market .
Until now , the legal vacuum left regulation up to national laws to the detriment of competition ( given the various differences ) and to the detriment of disabled citizens and / or citizens with reduced mobility , whose rights are now guaranteed by the European Union .
I voted in favour of the report because I think it is a great piece of work which , by striking a good compromise , forces European transport policies to move forward decisively , not only by guaranteeing the rights of passengers , but also by not overburdening the transport enterprises that provide this service .
The motion for a resolution on the draft regulation concerning the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport significantly improves passengers ' rights .
Despite negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council lasting several months , the final compromise text makes provision for a series of rights for bus and coach passengers travelling 250 km or more , rather than the 500 km initially put forward by the Council .
Within four years , which is the deadline for the application of this particular provision , Greek bus and coach passengers and their partners will be able to claim compensation for delays , cancellations or unwarranted timetable changes .
It is only right and proper that such rights should be safeguarded , which is why I voted in favour of this particular report .
I voted in favour of this report on the rights of bus and coach passengers .
I welcome the fact that the final text constitutes a satisfactory and balanced compromise , since it succeeds in guaranteeing the rights of passengers without simultaneously imposing a heavy burden on carriers , many of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
The Commission 's proposal to implement EU-wide passenger protection rights comparable to those applicable to other modes of transport , as well as ensuring a level playing field for competition between transport companies in different Member States and between different modes of transport , is a measure that can benefit everyone .
The negotiations were long and ended in a conciliation process , the main impasses within which were national enforcement bodies and the scope of the regulation .
In the end , the regulation is to apply to all regular national or cross-border services , provided that the scheduled distance travelled is equal to or greater than 250 km ( ' long distance ' ) .
The regulation also provides for compensation and assistance in the event of an accident , passengers ' rights in the event of cancellation or delay , and the rights of people with disabilities and / or reduced mobility .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report as I believe that the final text of the regulation , as approved by the Conciliation Committee , represents a balanced compromise which ensures adequate protection for bus and coach passengers , recognising an important set of rights for them , specifically in the event of accident , cancellation or delay , with regard to access to information and the submission and treatment of complaints , and with regard to the needs of people with disabilities and people with reduced mobility .
I abstained on this regulation concerning the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport , which was adopted by a large majority of socialists and conservatives .
I regret the considerable step backwards from the position initially adopted by this House , on three main points . 1 .
Only distances greater than 250 km will be covered .
In practice , people travelling by coach from Brussels to Amsterdam will not be protected whereas those travelling by air will be !
This is unjust , especially when we know that it is often the least well off who use this mode of transport . 2 .
The force majeure clause ( adverse weather conditions or natural disasters ) can be invoked all too easily by coach companies to avoid paying compensation to passengers in the event of a delay or cancellation .
3 . The derogations will allow countries that so wish to postpone the entry into force of this regulation until 2021 !
Nonetheless I welcome the advances of the text : compulsory assistance to disabled people and people with reduced mobility , and rights and compensation in the event of an accident , delay or cancellation .
Parliament has , however , settled for a cut-price , poorly drawn-up agreement .
The many exceptions and derogations will mean that the scope of these rights will be considerably limited , to the detriment of coach passengers .
Today , this House voted on the report on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
In December 2008 , the Commission tabled a proposal for a regulation on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
Through this proposal , the Commission set itself the target of establishing , at European Union-level , rights that would protect passengers comparable to those applied to other means of transport , as well ensuring equal conditions of competition between the carriers in the various Member States and between the various means of transport .
The main points that led to an agreement during the Conciliation Committee are : scope , time derogations , compensation and assistance in the event of accidents , rights of passengers in the event of cancellations or delays , and rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
The final text can be considered very satisfying and well-balanced , since it succeeds in guaranteeing passenger rights without simultaneously imposing heavy burdens on carriers , which are mostly small and medium-sized enterprises .
The result of the conciliation procedure must be seen as a victory for Parliament .
I am glad that the negotiations between Parliament and the Member States have finally culminated in the adoption of a regulation guaranteeing enhanced rights for passengers travelling by bus or coach .
This regulation fills a void with respect to the legislation on passenger rights : there was no European legislation on this matter until now , in contrast with the situation for the air and rail sectors .
This text provides for , among other things , the introduction of several types of compensation : snacks and refreshments if the delay is more than 90 minutes ; the cost of one night 's accommodation in the event of an interrupted journey , accident or delay requiring an overnight stay ; and an upper limit in terms of refund of at least EUR 1 200 in the event of loss of , or damage to , luggage left in the company 's care .
In addition , specific rights have been granted to disabled passengers , not least the requirement for companies to provide them with assistance - provided they have been informed of the person 's needs with 36 hours ' notice - and the payment of compensation or a refund for any specialised equipment that is damaged or lost .
This regulation will apply to all long-distance ( 250 km or more ) regular , national or cross-border services from spring 2013 onwards .
in writing . - The Council , under the Belgian Presidency , weakened considerably Parliament 's position as adopted at first and second reading .
The scope of the regulation is fixed as services for a minimum distance of 250 km , i.e. most bus services will not be included .
There is also the formulation on reimbursement in case of delay ( at least 2 hours , with half of the ticket price to be reimbursed - compare rail transport with reimbursement from 1 hour 's delay ) .
Finally , the rights for PRMs are narrowed and weakened and barrier-free access to bus services is not guaranteed .
In consequence , we voted against .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which finally recognises and protects the rights of travellers on all means of transport , thereby putting users at the centre of transport policy .
Greater protection of the rights of passengers helps incentivise the use of public transport and favours healthy competition between operators , prompting them to develop more competitive services .
It is important to emphasise that the new regulation will be applied in complete accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
Two important new developments are the provision for monetary compensation in the event of personal injury or damage or loss of luggage and the guarantee of assistance in the event of delays or travel disruptions , which will be based on the model used for trains and aeroplanes .
The final text recognises and protects passengers , paying particular attention to passengers with reduced mobility and disabled persons by guaranteeing appropriate information and services .
It is also important to emphasise that there will be no additional costs for businesses in the sector , which are protected from the risk of unbearable adjustment costs , thereby ensuring a fair balance between passenger rights and guarantees for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Through this regulation , the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport are at last recognised in law .
Despite the fact that the Commission proposed this regulation in 2008 , only now has a decent compromise been struck so that the only mode of transport that still did not have rules to protect passengers now does .
Particular attention has been paid to disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
The only contentious point of the text was the scope of the rules , which are only applicable to journeys in excess of 250 km .
Assistance in the event of delays will include an obligation to provide meals , drinks and alternative transport .
If a service is suspended , the passenger shall not only be reimbursed but , where necessary , will also be provided with overnight accommodation for up to two nights .
Loss or damage of luggage can be compensated by up to a maximum of EUR 1 200 .
I voted against the report under discussion today concerning the rights of coach passengers because I believe that it does not take all the Member States of the European Union into account , and leaves a large number of coach services out of the scope of the directive .
250 km is clearly too large a distance , since it completely excludes Malta , Cyprus and Luxembourg .
Most Estonian , Latvian , Lithuanian , Danish , Dutch and Belgian coach services are also excluded .
Unfortunately , I must admit that , during the conciliation procedure , the Estonian Government supported an even longer distance of 500 km , which would have excluded Estonia entirely .
I hope that the day is not far off when the Estonian Government will stand up for coach passengers ' rights , instead of the profits of the coach companies , as the directive makes its way through the legislative process .
in writing . - ( NL ) This is the fourth package on the protection of passenger rights .
Following schemes establishing passenger rights in air , rail and water transport , we have now turned to the rights of bus passengers .
From now on , they will receive compensation in the case of delays to journeys of more than 250 km , assistance if their travel arrangements are cancelled , protection in the case of accidents and fatalities , as well as reimbursement for lost or damaged items .
Passengers with reduced mobility will also be entitled to special assistance , as is already the case with airlines .
The European Parliament 's position at first and second reading was watered down considerably in the eventual outcome .
Parliament wanted to apply the rules to journeys of more than 50 km .
The Council wanted them to only apply to journeys of more than 500 km .
The compromise was 250 km .
That means that they do not apply to many current routes , such as Brussels-Amsterdam , Luxembourg-Strasbourg or Vienna-Budapest .
What is positive , however , is that this legislation provides a list of 12 basic rules - valid for any distance - which are focused on the needs of disabled people and other individuals with reduced mobility .
Nevertheless , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is extremely disappointed with the very poor result .
Therefore , together with the rest of the Greens , I voted against this agreement .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which aims to provide passengers travelling by bus or coach with more rights , including the right of assistance for disabled passengers and those with reduced mobility .
Protecting consumers is a key priority of the Labour Party in Europe .
I welcome the adoption of this report , particularly because of the advances it introduces to help disabled people and people with reduced mobility , to promote the lodging and processing of complaints , and to promote compensation and assistance in the event of an accident .
Nonetheless , I would stress the urgent need to ensure that Member States strictly comply with the provisions relating to passenger rights in the event of a cancellation or delay , in order to prevent the many abuses observed in the application of the regulation on the rights of passengers travelling by air .
in writing . - ( PT ) The main objective of the European Commission 's proposal is to ensure that bus and coach passengers have the same rights as for other modes of transport , as well as ensuring a level playing field for competition between carriers in the different Member States and different modes of transport .
Despite disagreements during the course of the process , I welcome the fact that this regulation has been adopted , as it will enable the rights of bus and coach passengers to be safeguarded without placing too many burdens on small and medium-sized enterprises that operate within this sector .
This regulation provides for a set of basic rights , of which I would highlight the special attention paid to people with reduced mobility and people with disabilities , and the right to compensation and assistance in the event of accident , cancellation or delay .
These rights apply to all regular national and cross-border services , provided that the distance travelled is equal to or greater than 250 km .
Passengers who travel for part of these long-distance journeys are also covered .
A series of rights provided for passengers on short-distance regular services has also been established , in particular , non-discriminatory access to transport and the right to information while travelling .
The regulation on the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport is an excellent example of how the European Parliament demonstrates its concern for consumer rights .
Following difficult negotiations with the European Council , we have adopted a text which deals with the final means of transport for which passengers ' rights had not yet been regulated under EU law .
At the start of the negotiations , Parliament demanded that new regulations be introduced for journeys of over 50 km , whereas the Council wanted a distance of over 500 km .
By way of a compromise , the distance was set at over 250 km .
Passengers travelling on such routes will be granted a number of concessions and rights , similar to those granted to passengers travelling by air .
EU legislation clearly regulates the rights I have if my luggage is lost at an airport or a plane 's take-off is delayed for a long time .
Until now , bus and coach passengers were in a much worse situation .
Today , among other things , they will be able to demand compensation for delays or damage to luggage , while persons of reduced mobility will receive a special escort .
The creation of a Charter of Passengers ' Rights will mean that citizens will be more aware of what they can expect from carriers .
The Charter will comprise a collection of fundamental rights to which every passenger is entitled , regardless of the distance they are travelling .
This is an example of good , citizen-focused legislation .
This regulation allows us to strengthen consumers ' rights and the common market , and so I voted in favour of its adoption .
I voted for the regulation concerning the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport .
It establishes rights for passengers using bus and coach transport , which are comparable to those that apply to all other modes of transport .
The regulation applies to all regular services , both national and cross-border , covering a minimum scheduled distance of 250 km .
These rights concern non-discriminatory access to transport for persons with disabilities , as well as awarding compensation in the event of the passenger 's death , physical injury or of loss of , or damage to , luggage .
If a journey is cancelled or delayed for more than 120 minutes , passengers will be offered immediately the option either to re-route their journey to their final destination at no extra cost or to be reimbursed the price of their ticket .
If the carrier does not offer this option , passengers are entitled to compensation amounting to up to 50 % of the ticket value , in addition to the reimbursement of the ticket price .
Where a journey of more than three hours is cancelled or delayed by more than 90 minutes , the carrier must offer assistance and hotel accommodation of up to EUR 80 per night , per passenger , for a maximum of two nights .
I call for passengers to be made sufficiently aware of their rights so that they can claim for failure to respect them .
It is our duty to ensure that service providers treat passengers properly and that disabled persons do not face obstacles to using transport services .
It is important to secure a level playing field between carriers from different Member States as well as the various modes of transport .
We need a well balanced compromise that would ensure passenger rights in all EU Member States , which sometimes vary greatly in terms of size , without , at the same time , imposing a heavy burden on carriers , most of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
Most importantly , any new rules should improve the quality of the EU 's transport sector and increase competitiveness .
However , we must not forget the question of road safety .
In Lithuania , we are particularly dependent on road transport - more than 90 % of all travellers use cars .
Around 8 % travel by bus and coach .
Road safety is a very important issue which has not received enough attention in my opinion .
According to EU statistics , in Lithuania , there are 110 road deaths per million inhabitants .
By comparison , in Sweden , there are 39 deaths per million inhabitants .
In the United Kingdom there are 41 .
This Lithuanian rate is intolerable and much higher than the EU average of 70 .
This must change .
in writing . - I welcome the report on bus and coach passenger rights as it is an important step in providing greater protection to travellers , as well as in increasing the comfort and ease of disabled passengers .
The report ensures those travelling on longer-distance coach journeys across Europe have access to better information , support and compensation in case of delay or cancellation of a service .
Passengers will be entitled to refreshments in the case of short delay , a refund for over 2 hours ' delay , and up to EUR 1 200 for lost or damaged luggage .
I support the important advances this report makes for the rights of disabled travellers .
For the first time , non-discriminatory access to transport is guaranteed as the regulation states that all bus and coach staff must be trained to help people with disabilities , and where suitable assistance cannot be offered , a passenger may travel free with the disabled person to ensure their comfort .
This is an important step in uniting Europe against discrimination .
My vote in favour of this report reflects the need for a European standard of rights for bus and coach passengers that ensures their comfort , safety and fair treatment as they travel across Europe .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which proposes consistent legislation regarding the rights of passengers in public road transport .
Specific measures are thus going to be introduced to enhance the legal certainty , rights and information of bus and coach passengers .
From now on , travellers will enjoy the same compensation guarantees as they enjoy in the rail and aviation sectors , in particular , if their trip is delayed or cancelled .
This vote is part of the EU 's political will to establish common legislation for users of all modes of transport .
I also welcome the application of measures in favour of disabled people and people with reduced mobility : these measures will facilitate their access to road transport .
This decision helps remove the obstacles to freedom of movement for those travelling within the European area .
Finally , a balance has been struck with the proposal of flexible legislation , which will ensure that haulage companies , which are often small businesses , are not penalised .
In my view , these new measures help promote a mode of transport that is accessible to the greatest number of people , especially in the tourism sector .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Cancian because it finally establishes basic guarantees for the 70 million European citizens who travel by bus or coach each year within Europe and who had been waiting for their rights to be enshrined for some time .
Irrespective of their chosen means of transport , European citizens will be protected and looked after as a result of the European Commission 's commitment to thoroughly revise the existing regulations and to harmonise them in a single law providing common standards for all types of journey as well as specific provisions for the particular method of transport chosen .
Given that the average reduction in CO2 emissions during the period 2002-2007 for light commercial vehicles was only 0.4-0.5 % per year , and that EU targets for new light commercial vehicles are necessary to avoid fragmentation within the internal market , I am voting in favour of this proposal .
However , it is important to note that light commercial vehicles cannot be compared with passenger cars , and that the proposal of 150 g of CO2 / km is ambitious , but feasible .
I also agree with the possibility of manufacturers forming ' pools ' of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles , since this has been shown to reduce compliance costs for manufacturers and increase employment within a greener economy , in line with the Europe 2020 strategy .
I also agree that this question should be addressed in several phases by 2011 , and not only in 2014 as the Commission proposes .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution , in which the EP endorses a new EU Regulation introducing CO2 limits as of 2014 for light commercial vehicles ( LCVs ) .
I believe that new requirements and CO2 limits will help to fight global warming , lower running costs through savings on fuel and boost innovation and the competitiveness of European car manufacturers .
With these rules , green technologies have to be built into the vehicles which need to stay affordable .
Starting in 2014 , 70 % of new commercial vehicles up to 3.5 tonnes must comply with an average emission limit of 175 grams CO2 per kilometre .
In 2020 , the limit will drop to 147 grams .
It is an ambitious , but feasible , plan .
I voted in favour of this report .
At its meeting of 8-9 March 2007 , the European Council made a firm commitment to reduce the overall greenhouse gas emissions of the Community by at least 20 % below 1990 levels by 2020 , and by 30 % provided that other developed countries commit themselves to comparable emission reductions and economically more advanced developing countries contribute according to their respective capabilities .
Policies and measures should be implemented at Member State and EU level across all sectors of the EU economy , and not only within the industry and energy sectors , in order to generate the necessary emissions reductions .
Road transport is the second largest greenhouse gas emitting sector in the EU and its emissions , including those from light commercial vehicles , continue to rise .
If road transport emissions continue to increase , it will significantly undermine efforts made by other sectors to combat climate change .
Hitherto in the EU , there has not been legislation regulating CO2 emissions from light commercial vehicles , although demand for these vehicles is increasing in the EU .
I believe we managed to reach agreement with the Council on a balanced document , which will help reduce CO2 emissions and will encourage the automotive sector to invest in new and less-polluting technologies .
The idea is a noble one : reducing the CO2 emissions of light vehicles .
However , what is being presented to us as a realistic compromise with the Council is actually a third-rate agreement .
The approved report limits the average CO2 emissions of new light commercial vehicles to 175 g / km , while the long-term objective is 147 g / km , which will not be achieved until at least 2020 .
That is not enough .
The European Commission was proposing a limit of 135 g / km , a more ambitious and equally realistic proposal .
I voted against this report because I regret that we have not reached a compromise bringing us closer to the European Commission 's proposal .
Improvements in energy efficiency and the management of innovation are priorities today , as everyone recognises , but we still need to live up to our words by making ambitious proposals .
The proposal for a regulation to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from light commercial vehicles falls under the Commission 's strategic framework to reduce CO2 emissions in the atmosphere .
However , several graphs in the latest report by the European Environment Agency clearly show that CO2 emissions caused by road transport in the EU-15 and the EU-27 have either been stable or decreasing since 2003 .
In addition , it is worth considering that light commercial vehicles are responsible for only approximately 1.5 % of carbon dioxide emissions from the transport sector .
The lengthy and difficult negotiations held in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety focused , above all , on the long-term emissions limit , which was agreed at 147g CO2 / km .
This figure , though better than initially proposed , does not fully meet my expectations .
Indeed , in order to protect industry in the sector , Italy had asked for the level not to fall below 160g CO2 / km and , in the Council , many Member States seemed to be moving towards an agreement for a minimum threshold of 155g CO2 / km .
In conclusion , I think that the result reached in the trialogue between the Commission , the Council and Parliament on reducing long-term CO2 emissions is still out of proportion with the special characteristics of the automotive sector and I should like to express my concern about the risk of damaging the industry and employment levels in the sector .
Light commercial vehicles are mainly used by businesses , including small and medium-sized enterprises .
Currently , light commercial vehicles make up around 12 % of the fleet .
We must also recognise that these vehicles are often bought by fleet buyers in large quantities , and therefore are already closely judged on their efficiency and running costs .
The average reduction in CO2 emissions over 2002-2007 for light commercial vehicles amounted to 0.4-0.5 % per year , and these improvements in fuel efficiency have been offset by the increase in demand for transport and vehicle size .
Therefore , adopting Community-wide targets for new light commercial vehicles is necessary to prevent fragmentation in the internal market resulting from the adoption of different measures at Member State level .
Furthermore , setting CO2 emission standards for new light commercial vehicles is necessary to prevent a risk of regulatory gap resulting from a degree of overlap between the registrations for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur for his work so far .
I appreciate the essence of this text , which aims to contribute to the European Union 's aim of reducing CO2 emissions through producing better functioning light commercial vehicles as well .
However , it is well-known that these transport methods are used almost exclusively for commercial reasons and therefore , compared with passenger cars , there is less scope to modify their shape or mass .
As long as it is understood that the best way to achieve this - as the rapporteur notes - is through modifications to engines and mechanics , I do support the agreement reached on the timescale for the implementation of these changes .
I think the initial , short-term objective of reaching 175g CO2 / km between 2014 and 2017 is indeed quite reasonable , while further reducing emissions to 147 CO2 / km can logically be achieved by 2020 .
On the one hand , it is understandable that the proposal is largely based on the legislation on CO2 emissions from cars , but on the other hand , we should bear in mind that this sector does not operate in the same way .
Vans have a longer development and production cycle , and are used mainly for commercial purposes , and in contrast to cars , there are fewer options for modifying their shape and weight to reduce emissions .
The main way to achieve this with vans is to modify the engine and mechanics of the vehicle , which is a far longer and more costly process than a simple change to the bodywork .
The fact that vans make much wider use of diesel as a fuel also plays an important role .
I have reservations about the proposal that sanctions against producers who fail to reduce the CO2 emissions of vans should be higher than sanctions for failing to reduce emissions from cars .
In my opinion , the sanctions should be the same in both areas .
I understand the reasons for introducing mandatory speed limiters for vans , but I am concerned that this might set a precedent for the introduction of speed limiters for other types of vehicle .
We must think carefully about whether this is not an excessively restrictive regulation , going beyond the framework of proportionality .
The Sustainable Development strategy addresses the most pressing sustainable development problems , such as transport , climate change , public health and energy conservation .
The road transport sector is the second highest emitter of greenhouse gases within the Union and its emissions , including those from light commercial vehicles , are continuing to increase .
If emissions within this sector continue to increase , this increase will significantly compromise the efforts made by other sectors to combat climate change .
It is important to advance technologically and promote eco-innovation , taking account of future technological development for the increased long-term competitiveness of the European car industry and the creation of more quality jobs .
In recognition of high research and development costs , and in order to increase the competitiveness of the European automotive industry , incentive regimes should be applied , such as compensation for eco-innovations and the granting of super-credits .
I think that this draft regulation is based upon the premise that lowering the fuel consumption of light commercial vehicles ( LCVs ) will reduce the overall level of CO2 emissions from transport , thereby mitigating climate change and setting CO2 emission limits for new LCVs in the European Union .
I voted in favour of the report on emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles , which comes in the wake of the EU strategy to reduce emissions from light vehicles .
This report includes measures - such as super-credits for non-polluting or low emission vehicles , fines if limits are exceeded and eco-innovation incentives to help manufacturers develop new , more environmentally friendly technologies - which will benefit the competitiveness of the EU and create employment opportunities .
Now that the debate on CO2 emissions has become unavoidable , since it is central to the discussion on climate change , it is important to find solutions for the necessary reduction in emissions of light commercial vehicles .
The aim of approving EU targets for new light commercial vehicles is to avoid fragmentation of the internal market resulting from the adoption of different measures by Member States .
As the rapporteur points out , this new regulation will also serve as an incentive for the automotive sector to invest in new technologies .
The road transport sector is the second largest emitter of greenhouse gases in the European Union and its emissions are continuing to rise .
Consequently , all types of vehicles must be covered by regulations to reduce these emissions , including light commercial vehicles .
The objective of reducing greenhouse gases will be achieved more easily if there is EU legislation , instead of national legislation with different objectives .
In addition , we will have greater legal security and certainty for the motor vehicle manufacturing sector .
However , we have to combine ambition with realism and common sense .
Therefore , and knowing that it is small and medium-sized enterprises that mainly use light commercial vehicles , and that these make up more than 99.8 % of companies in the EU and 67.4 % of jobs , we cannot set targets that would put them at a disadvantage .
Therefore , I agree with the emissions limit objective of 147 g CO2 / km for new light commercial vehicles registered in the EU , provided that the viability of this option is confirmed .
I also welcome the fact that a single European speed limit has not been introduced for this type of vehicle .
We are in favour of the development and application of technologies that reduce the consumption of fossil fuels and , therefore , the levels of atmospheric gas emissions resulting from their combustion .
This is for reasons of environmental quality and the health and wellbeing of people , and for reasons connected to the progressive and inexorable worldwide shortage of fossil fuel reserves , which must be managed extremely wisely and prudently .
This approach is also inseparable from the focus on modes of transport that do not rely on this form of energy , such as rail , which requires investment to secure its development .
In this specific case , we believe that the emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles must not ignore either the diversity of the automotive manufacturers or the legitimate interests and needs of small and medium-sized enterprises in the various Member States .
The discussion of this dossier has shown that there are various possibilities for limiting vehicle emissions , with inherent investment costs and also different application horizons , which must be carefully evaluated .
These different possibilities include the introduction of speed limiters in vehicles , which , apart from reducing emissions , may also have positive implications for road safety .
I have abstained today , because I was not able to support the compromise that has been negotiated .
It falls short of what is needed and 147 grams is not a sufficiently ambitious long-term target .
However , I have not voted against the report , because the compromise will be implemented quickly and will enable the necessary innovations to be introduced rapidly .
Strict environmental standards will not harm the industry .
On the contrary , only challenging targets will generate the necessary pressure to innovate and this is the only way in which our industry will remain at the cutting edge .
The watering down of the long-term target in particular demonstrates to me that the automotive industry has not learnt from the legislation on CO2 limits for cars introduced two years ago that it will only be able to sell clean cars in the future .
The car industry does not seem to credit its customers with much common sense .
Instead of research into new technologies , the industry has put all its efforts into combating the proposed regulations .
It has exploited every single line of defence and has shown no inclination to take part in constructive cooperation .
This is disappointing .
In addition , we have once again missed the chance of making it clear that by protecting our industry in this way , we are not doing it any good .
The future is calling , but we are not listening .
Only yesterday , VW presented its 1 litre car at the Detroit Motor Show , which shows just what is possible .
The adoption of the Commission 's proposal for a regulation setting emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles seems to me , more than anything , to be a gamble on the future .
The compromise reached on limiting average CO2 emissions to 147 g / km by 2020 does not meet the initial ambitions of my fellow Members on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , who had previously advocated a decidedly more ambitious objective ( 135 g / km ) .
They were supported in this by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
Behind this ' battle of numbers ' , however , there is a balance to be struck between the environmental challenges that everyone recognises and certain social and industrial requirements which must not be forgotten .
That is why it seems appropriate to me that the compromise will be adopted only following the revision of the regulation by January 2013 and only following the feasibility study and reassessment of the objectives .
Not only will this revision allow us to return to this subject quickly and to go further in the fight against vehicle pollution , but it will also be an opportunity to address the issue of EU research and innovation in the field of road haulage .
The date is set for 2012 .
In order to respond to the European Union 's ambitious objectives in terms of sustainable development and combating climate change , it is important that the European Union takes action in the vehicle sector .
In this regard , the adoption of this report is a further step forward towards the manufacture of vehicles which pollute less .
However , I very much regret the lack of ambition in this regulation in relation to the reduction of CO2 emissions for new light commercial vehicles .
While I did , of course , vote in favour of this resolution , what I voted for was the European Commission 's initial proposal : namely , an objective of 135 g CO2 / km by 2014 and 120 g CO2 / km by 2020 ( rather than what was eventually adopted : 175 g CO2 / km by 2014 and 147 g CO2 / km by 2020 ) .
Today , technology is available that would allow us to achieve much lower thresholds , and to do so much more quickly than is envisaged by the objectives in this report .
Reducing the CO2 emissions of all forms of transport , including small commercial vehicles , is a desirable objective .
It is important to set limits in order to encourage vehicle manufacturers to take an ambitious approach .
The agreement on the limits is due , among other things , to the negotiating skills of the Belgian Presidency .
This compromise includes the short-term goal of reducing emissions to 175 grams per kilometre by 2014 .
In addition , there will be a gradual , step-by-step reduction in order to achieve a long-term target of 147 grams per kilometre by 2020 .
These targets are accompanied by measures which provide incentives for the industry to manufacture energy-efficient commercial vehicles .
Achieving these targets will not only benefit the small and medium-sized companies which are the main users of vans and delivery trucks , but also private individuals and , most importantly , the environment .
In future , we will be able to play our part not only at EU level , but also on the world market , if we can produce safe and clean vehicles .
In addition , we must not allow our expertise to be exported to other countries , such as China , as a result of delays in EU policy making .
Instead , we must take this as an opportunity to put in place a sustainable European environment policy , which will have a positive impact not only on Europe as an industrial location , but also on employment .
I welcome this compromise and have therefore supported it .
I agreed with the provision that just as the passenger car sector is making strides towards reduced emissions , so should the light commercial vehicle sector .
Manufacturers would thus place new vehicles with improved CO2 emissions performance on the market .
This would enable users to upgrade their fleets and lower their contribution to transport 's ' CO2 footprint ' .
The purpose of this proposed legislation is to reduce the CO2 emissions from light commercial vehicles .
This is harder to do than with cars , because the bodies of LCVs cannot be so readily or cheaply altered to make them more efficient .
All changes must be made to the engines or mechanics instead .
This is quite a major investment .
Nevertheless , it is questionable whether this proposal will accomplish this aim : There are significant concerns as to whether the measures will meet the original goal of preventing climate change and whether the targets and timetable proposed are realistic and feasible economically .
There is also concern that they may reduce competitiveness in this sector .
I nevertheless feel that we should give more consideration to three areas : the economic downturn and its severe impact on car manufacturers and users , the need to support industry ( manufacturers ) rather than disadvantaging it with onerous measures ( or even fines ) , and the need to support business ( users ) rather than inducing additional costs via questionable political measures .
During the legislative process , I tabled numerous amendments to the proposal for a regulation concerning emissions from new light commercial vehicles , aimed at relaxing the CO2 emission levels initially put forward , and at ensuring that a longer period would be provided for achieving the targets .
I am glad to see that my amendments were taken into consideration .
I believe that the regulation as it was voted through will help to reduce CO2 emissions .
Industry has been given the opportunity to adapt its designs and to introduce appropriate regulations within the prescribed timeframe .
N1 vehicles are used by small businesses which are sensitive to price increases , and which are , at the same time , becoming ever more common on the market .
The regulation will not burden them with excessive costs .
The regulation provides for rewards in the form of credits for the best manufacturers which meet the goals for emissions standards ahead of time .
Companies which do not manage to adapt in time risk facing fines , which it will not be possible to pass on to consumers .
I voted in favour of adopting the resolution .
in writing . - I voted for this proposal laying out higher emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles .
This should make an important contribution to improving the quality of air in city centres in particular .
Two years ago , legislation on car emissions was approved .
It is now time for the European Parliament to approve the introduction of CO2 limits for new light commercial vehicles .
These vehicles are mainly used by companies , including small and medium-sized enterprises , and make up approximately 12 % of the vehicles on the road at the moment .
Apart from contributing to improved air quality and to achieving the EU climate targets , the vehicles should provide greater fuel savings for the small companies that depend on them .
The objectives indicated aim to encourage innovation in the industry .
The regulation sets a target of 175 g CO2 / km to be implemented by 2014 , which should gradually fall to 147 g CO2 / km by 2020 .
The sanctions to be applied if manufacturers fail to comply with this regulation must be scrupulously fulfilled .
In order to be able to achieve a significant reduction in CO2 emissions , manufacturers need to redesign vehicles so that they do not exceed a specific level in future .
The measures which seem technically feasible in the case of cars may not necessarily be achievable for light commercial vehicles .
As it is not really possible to change the shape of the vehicles , the engineers will have to focus on the engine and the mechanical components , which , according to the experts , is a long-winded process .
For this reason , we need to find alternative solutions which will lead to a reduction in CO2 emissions from light commercial vehicles .
There are currently two possible options .
One is to increase the reduction for cars , in order to compensate for the emissions from commercial vehicles .
The other is to fit a speed limiter , which would also result in a significant fall in emissions .
I did not vote in favour of the report because , in my opinion , it offers too few options .
We must aim to reduce the level of CO2 emissions as much as possible , and therefore it is very important to set an emissions target for vehicles given their negative impact on the environment and human health .
However , the proposal put forward in the resolution to raise the emissions target for new light commercial vehicles , setting the same target that is applied to cars , is primarily being debated due to the measures envisaged to achieve this objective and their impact on van manufacturers .
The proposal to install speed limiters in cars would have a negative impact on businesses and would reduce their competitiveness in the international market .
Furthermore , van manufacturers would have to increase their prices , given the costs endured .
Therefore , before taking such important decisions , we should carry out extensive scientific research , proving that the introduction of speed limiters would significantly reduce the level of CO2 emissions .
We must also create a clear and adequate credit mechanism and outline promotional initiatives .
I believe that in order to increase the competitiveness of European car manufacturers , greater attention should be paid to stimulus measures .
The aims to reduce CO2 emissions from vehicles are important aspects of the European strategy for combating pollution and climate change .
Pollution from light commercial vehicles is minimal compared with the overall transport category , but each specific sector needs limits that will allow the pre-established objectives to be reached , so therefore , I voted in favour of the report .
Europe 's objective is to reduce CO2 emissions to 120g CO2 / km in order to progressively reduce average emissions , so I agree with the structure of the regulation , which , from January 2014 , requires newly registered and manufactured light commercial vehicles to produce less than 175g CO2 / km in emissions and , in the long term ( by 2020 ) to produce less than 147g CO2 / km , partly so as to reach a compromise given the requirements for designing these vehicles .
I voted in favour of the present report on new legislation setting emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles as part of the Community 's integrated approach to reduce CO2 emissions from light-duty vehicles .
My decision was based on the various data presented in the different documents informing the argument , in particular , the fact that at the moment , these vehicles make up approximately 12 % of the vehicles on the road .
It is necessary to set CO2 emission standards for new light commercial vehicles in order to avoid regulatory gaps , and it is also important to encourage the automotive sector to invest in new technologies .
I agree with the rapporteur when he highlights the need for the light commercial vehicle sector to follow the example of the car sector , which is trying to reduce CO2 emissions .
However , unlike cars , changes to these vehicles do not involve their shape or weight , but modifications to their engines and mechanics , which makes the process much slower and more expensive .
Nevertheless , it is important to encourage this technological progress to the benefit of all .
in writing . - This proposal is a follow-up to the Community strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from light commercial vehicles ( LCVs ) , as follows :
from 2020 , a long-tem target of 147g CO2 / km for the average emissions of new LCVs registered in the Union , subject to confirmation of its feasibility .
By 1 January 2013 , after a complete review of them , a proposal will amend it , if appropriate ;
the short-term target , fixed to 175g CO2 / km ; a phasing-in period from 1 January 2014 onwards with full compliance of the new fleet from 2017 ;
specific emission targets for alternative fuel vehicles will be incorporated , aimed at promoting further deployment of certain alternative fuel vehicles in the Union market ;
for multi-stage vehicles , the specific emissions of CO2 of completed vehicles will be allocated to the manufacturer of the base vehicle .
The super-credits to manufacturers producing LCVs with emissions of CO2 of less than 50g CO2 / km will be limited with a threshold of 25 000 LCVs per manufacturer ;
the penalties : from 2019 onwards settled to € 95 , being phased in gradually from 1 January 2014 to 2018 .
Helping manufactures to develop green technology for vans will be beneficial both for companies and job creation .
There can be no exceptions : commercial vehicles will also have to go green .
I voted in favour of this proposal for a directive which requires manufacturers to reduce the CO2 emissions of vans and other commercial vehicles within the next decade .
This proposal largely takes its inspiration from the European regulation on the CO2 emissions of cars , which has been in force since 2008 .
This was a reasonable vote , following an agreement with the Council which essentially returns to the main proposals of the European Commission : the obligation to reduce the polluting emissions of commercial vehicles to 175 g CO2 / km by 2014 for 100 % of the fleet , and to reduce them progressively to 147 g CO2 / km by 2020 .
Nevertheless , this is still a bit of a disappointment , as we had voted for a more ambitious objective in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in September 2010 .
As for the extra costs to manufacturers of vans and minibuses , they will be well compensated for by the fact that these vehicles will pollute less and consume less , and in the end , that is what motorists are interested in .
I should like to offer my congratulations on the excellent work carried out by Mr Callanan .
We have today adopted the agreement reached with governments of the Member States over new limits on CO2 emissions for European commercial vehicles , which also includes incentives for industry to produce vans that are more energy efficient and penalties for those who do not respect the new rules .
The legislation adopted represents a difficult balancing act and sets a series of ambitious but feasible environmental objectives for manufacturers .
The new legislation completes the European regulatory framework , adding to the rules on passenger vehicle emissions set out two years ago .
If manufacturers produce a van with emissions of lower than 50g CO2 / km then they will be awarded a super-credit , valid for a limited period of time .
Indeed , said vehicle would count towards the calculation of the average as 3.5 vehicles between 2014-2015 , 2.5 in 2016 and 1.5 in 2017 , which is the last year that the super-credit system will be in place .
On the other hand , newly manufactured vehicles that emit more than the imposed limits will , from 2019 onwards , be subject to a penalty of up to EUR 95 per gram .
in writing . - Despite voting against the report in committee ( 32 / 25 / 0 ) the Greens / EFA agreed with the other groups that negotiations for first-reading agreement with the Council should be sought , mainly due to an assessment that political majorities are not likely to improve at plenary and negotiations with the forthcoming Hungarian and Polish presidencies would be unlikely to yield a better result .
The main content of the first-reading agreement was : delaying the binding 175 g CO2 / km average limit by one year ( 2017 ) ; lowering the 2020 target to 147 g / km , requiring to be confirmed by legislative procedure ; lowering excess emissions premium to EUR 95 / g ; and a slight increase and prolongation of super-credits until 2017 .
However , the final outcome in plenary was highly unsatisfactory , and we decided to vote against .
I voted in favour of this report as I think it is worthwhile to pursue the aim of protecting the environment .
This is an important document that helps the automotive industry to plan their manufacturing more effectively , thereby ensuring reduced CO2 emissions .
This decision will stimulate innovation and research , helping both consumers and , above all , small and medium-sized enterprises to make savings .
At the conclusion of the long negotiations between Parliament and the Council , an important result was reached that is the fruit of a balanced compromise between the different positions of the 27 Member States .
The adoption of these new targets and standards will certainly produce tangible results , while also better protecting the health of all European citizens .
The fight against climate change cannot be delayed and this applies equally to reducing vehicle emissions .
Today , I voted for the report under discussion concerning emissions standards for new light commercial vehicles .
I believe that the report is necessary in view of European Union objectives relating to global warming and emission reduction .
Equally , it should be noted that as the light commercial vehicles in question provide a service and are used mainly by small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , it is important that their capacities are also taken into account when implementing any necessary changes .
I sincerely believe that , in order to achieve the level imposed by this report , we need an appropriate compromise taking account of the SMEs operating in Europe and the global aims of the European Union .
in writing . - ( NL ) I fully supported the initial proposal for the establishment of CO2 emission standards for new light commercial vehicles ( LCVs ) in order to prevent a loophole resulting from the certain amount of overlap that currently exists between passenger car and LCV registration .
Currently , many vehicles that are homologated as passenger cars , such as SUVs , are registered as LCVs , often because this latter category is subject to reduced taxation or because of other fiscal incentives .
Although the legislation covering passenger cars ( like this proposal ) is based on type approval of vehicles ( rather than registration ) , the absence of regulation for LCVs means that there is a risk that manufacturers of relatively large passenger cars will apply for LCV type approval .
This would mean that these high-emitting vehicles would remain outside the scope of CO2 emission standards .
Ultimately , the first reading agreement has turned into a very weak agreement , where the binding target to achieve 175 g CO2 / km has been delayed by a year .
The 2020 target has been left at 147 g / km and the penalties for non-compliance have been reduced from EUR 120 / g to EUR 95 / g .
This is an inadequate token gesture that will mean that this law will fail to make any significant contribution to the climate debate .
The sense of urgency has disappeared , that much is clear .
Hence , my ' no ' vote .
in writing . - I have supported this report which is part of the Community strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from light-duty vehicles .
By helping manufacturers to develop green technology , we can benefit companies and also create jobs whilst helping to tackle the environmental problems that we are facing .
The conclusion of the Sustainable Development strategy , initiated by the Commission , emphasises the most urgent problems of sustainable development , namely , energy efficiency measures in the transport sector .
Bearing in mind the fight against climate change with regard to CO2 emissions and the increased competitiveness of the European automotive industry , this regulation aims to establish incentive schemes , in particular , the granting of super-credits and payments for eco-innovations and also fewer penalties .
The agreement reached by Parliament in this respect is ambitious , but also feasible at the same time .
The phased , short-term EU target is 175 g CO2 / km , to be reached by 2017 , and the long-term target is 147 g CO2 / km , to be achieved by 2020 .
At the same time , it provides super-credits for vehicles that meet the efficiency criteria and applies reasonable penalties if the maximum CO2 limits are exceeded .
I believe that approval of this regulation is in keeping with the environmental sustainability policies of the European Union and , at the same time , safeguards manufacturers , most of which are small and medium-sized enterprises , and users , and also promotes innovation in the sector .
I voted for the proposal for a regulation setting emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles as part of the European Commission 's integrated approach to reduce CO2 emissions from light-duty vehicles .
This will allow us to encourage vehicle manufacturers to use eco-innovation to ensure the European car industry 's competitiveness .
The regulation imposes the payment of penalties on light commercial vehicle manufacturers for exceeding the average specific emissions defined in it .
I would like to point out that the restriction on polluting emissions must not only be approached from the supply angle , for instance , how light-duty vehicles need to be modernised to be made cleaner , but also from the demand angle .
It is important that new vehicles which comply with this regulation 's provisions are accessible to consumers .
This will enable the regulation both to provide incentives for the production of vehicles offering efficient fuel consumption and to impose penalties on manufacturers who fail to meet the agreed targets .
From 1 January 2012 , it will be the duty of each Member State to record every year the details of every new light commercial vehicle registered in their country and to ensure compliance with this regulation 's provisions .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report today as it signals another step in the right direction in the fight against climate change .
CO2 limits for new vans will lead to cleaner , more fuel-efficient vehicles in the EU .
Targets have been set and incentives for more efficient vans will hopefully kick-start an innovation drive across the industry .
This should give companies , including many small businesses in Wales who rely on these vans , an opportunity to use more fuel-efficient vans and control costs at a time of rising oil prices .
I have not voted in favour of Mr Callanan 's report , despite the fact that it is well-founded and represents a move in the right direction .
However , I am of the opinion that the CO2 emission limits per kilometre should be much more ambitious .
Therefore , I support the Commission 's proposal of 135 grams of CO2 per kilometre .
The combination of emission pools , which manufacturers can create across their entire product range , and a speed limit of 120 km / h , would make this target achievable , although it would require serious efforts to be made .
At the same time , we should not allow any of these deadlines to be postponed for the sake of the environment .
We should stick with 2014 .
Bearing in mind the protracted development of this issue , starting with the Commission 's proposal for a regulation in 2000 , its subsequent approval by Parliament in 2002 , the initial results of serious difficulties with its acceptance by Member States , the conclusions of the Council in 2009 , the non-transposition of its position , the insurmountable problems in the negotiation rounds in December 2010 , and the subsequent commitment of a minimum number of Member States to institute enhanced cooperation in this field , despite it not being the exclusive competence of the EU , I approve the present recommendation .
I agree with this proposal for a regulation , since a lack of unitary patent protection throughout the EU may lead to a fragmented , complex and expensive patent system .
Since all the requirements are met , this can only bring with it advantages for the internal market .
Over recent months , I have repeatedly expressed my disapproval of a trilingual language regime for patents .
Even more , I think that the use of the European institution of enhanced cooperation to circumvent Italy 's and Spain 's veto , and thereby avoid continuing the debate to find a shared , less burdensome solution , is an issue of unprecedented political gravity .
This proposal for a decision is also incompatible with the requirement of last resort set forth by Article 20 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union , which establishes that enhanced cooperation can only be permitted when , all other options having been examined , there is no possibility of reaching the objectives within a reasonable period .
Additionally , more than a year after the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , the principle of the equal standing of the European languages is already being cast aside , compromising the competitiveness and innovative qualities of millions of European small and medium-sized enterprises as well as the rights of European citizens .
This patent regime harms the internal market , subjecting it to geographical segmentation , which would be an obstacle to trade between Member States and have a negative impact on the stability of enterprises and the free movement of capital .
As I reiterate my opposition , I would say that I think it would have been a good idea to wait for the decision of the Court of Justice of the European Union on 8 March before discussing the issue in this House .
Europe is making progress .
Thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , it is now possible for a group of countries who want to move forward together on a particular subject to do so even if some countries are not interested .
This is already the case for the rules applicable to binational couples who wish to divorce .
We call this ' enhanced cooperation ' .
I wanted the same to apply to the protection of European inventions , and I wanted enhanced cooperation to be used to create a European patent .
The reason is that , while it costs 10 times as much to protect inventions with a patent in Europe as it does in the United States , in particular , because of translation costs , 25 of the 27 Member States want to create a European patent together ; such a patent would cost less because it would be unitary .
The unitary patent will be filed in French , English or German and will protect our inventions in the 25 countries involved .
Furthermore , this protection will finally come at an affordable price .
Even if Spain and Italy are not in favour of such a system for linguistic reasons , it is essential that the 25 Member States who are interested make progress together on this subject .
I voted in favour of this procedure , as it represents a big step forward for the competitiveness of European industry .
The creation of unitary patent protection in the European Union is an essential part of developing innovations and improving competitiveness .
I supported this resolution , which will authorise enhanced cooperation between the Member States in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection .
Hitherto , there has been a fragmented patent system in the European Union , caused by the high costs and complexity of validating patents in individual Member States .
Although more than nine Member States have indicated their intention to establish enhanced cooperation between themselves in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection , the Commission and the Member States participating should promote the participation of as many Member States as possible .
Enhanced cooperation would facilitate the proper functioning of the internal market and would eliminate obstacles to the free movement of goods , which would increase the number of inventors and would provide access to unitary patent protection throughout the EU .
A European patent system is a necessity .
The existence of different interpretations and decisions in each Member State causes legal uncertainty .
The obligatory translation of each patent file into the 23 official languages is expensive , lengthy and creates a loss of competitiveness .
Therefore , in general , the overwhelming majority of interested parties , including professional associations , agrees with the ' English-only ' option .
The proposal under discussion picks out three languages ( English , French and German ) , with all the other languages ranking behind .
In terms of global prominence , however , Portuguese is a much more important language than French or German .
I also have many reservations about the possibility of using enhanced cooperation in this case .
An instrument that is intended to allow a group of countries to start processes of greater integration which could progressively include all the others must not be converted into a private club and an exclusion mechanism , or one which establishes the predominance of some over others .
Therefore , I am against the Lehne report .
Although I appreciate the spirit of this reform , which aims to provide Europe with a single patent and therefore reduce translation costs , I voted against it in any case .
The proposal for a decision tabled by the European Council authorises an enhanced cooperation procedure in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection because some Member States , including my own country , were against the adoption of the planned system of translation .
This would be a trilingual system that would be discriminatory since it violates the principle of equal standing of all the languages of the European Union .
Furthermore , in my opinion , the enhanced cooperation system would damage the internal market , creating divisions and distortions of competition within it .
Therefore , it would have been desirable to wait for the decision of the Court of Justice , which is expected in the coming days , and will first of all clear up a number of technical aspects relating to the unitary patent system .
In my opinion , the fragmentary system of patent protection represents an obstacle in the internal market , and is particularly damaging to innovative companies in the category of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
I therefore support the creation of a simple inexpensive single patent for the entire EU .
I am concerned that it has not been possible to reach agreement on a common solution because of insurmountable differences of opinion over arrangements for the translation of patents .
In my opinion , the stubborn insistence on the need to translate patents into most of the official languages of the EU is a manifestation of national egotism , since the costs , administrative demands and time required for this would largely wipe out the advantages of the single patent .
I very much welcome the fact that my own country , the Czech Republic , has decided to join the calls for enhanced cooperation which we have supported today , thereby adding to the large majority of Member States already backing this .
Even though the single patent will not cover the entire EU , I do not doubt that it will be a beneficial instrument for development , and for boosting the competitiveness of SMEs .
Patent protection is one of the basic instruments for competitiveness and economic growth .
It supports scientific research activity , thereby boosting employment in a sector with high added value .
I have supported Parliament 's recommendations on the proposed Council decision permitting enhanced cooperation in the area of unitary patent protection because it is based on the conclusions of the Council from 4 December 2009 , which define the future form of the unitary patent system .
The European patent system should be based on two pillars , consisting of a unified system for resolving patent disputes ( the Court for European Patents and EU Patents ) and for creating EU patents ( an instrument applying a patent across the entire EU ) .
The enhanced patent cooperation will make it simpler to approve European patents within the territory of the Member States participating in the enhanced cooperation , which will reduce costs and simplify the procedure for obtaining patents , and , at the same time , this mechanism will contribute to scientific and technological progress and enhance the functioning of the internal market .
At the beginning of February of this year , the Czech Republic joined the calls for enhanced cooperation , and I therefore hope that accession of my country to the unitary patent protection system will help to support scientific resources and better scientific results , both in the Czech Republic and elsewhere .
The creation of a European patent will stimulate innovation and scientific and technological development in the EU .
I believe it is essential to resolve the matter of the European patent .
However , I have reservations about the language arrangements to be established .
In my opinion , the best solution would be the use of English only but , if the language arrangements are extended to other languages , Portuguese must be considered .
Competition is global , and Portuguese is the third most widely spoken western language , after English and Spanish .
A European patent system is a necessity .
The existence of different interpretations and decisions in each Member State causes legal uncertainty .
The obligatory translation of each patent file into the 23 official languages is expensive , lengthy and creates a loss of competitiveness .
Therefore , in general , the overwhelming majority of interested parties , including professional associations , agrees with the ' English-only ' option .
The proposal under discussion picks out three languages ( English , French and German ) , with all the other languages ranking behind .
In terms of global prominence , however , Portuguese is a much more important language than French or German .
I also have many reservations about the viability of using enhanced cooperation in this case .
An instrument that is intended to allow a group of countries to start processes of greater integration which could progressively include all the others must not be converted into a private club and an exclusion mechanism , or one which establishes the predominance of some over others .
Therefore , I am against the Lehne report .
I voted in favour of this legislative resolution of the European Parliament because I agree with its content .
However , I regret the absence of the Portuguese language in the European patent arrangements .
The internal market and competition policy are two cornerstones of the process of European unification which aim not only at strengthening the European Union 's economy and its businesses but , above all , at realising the fundamental freedoms of the Union .
This objective must be pursued in the interests of all European citizens and enterprises , offering equal opportunities and substantial equality while avoiding problems , additional costs and superstructures that could differentiate , discriminate between or limit the opportunities to enjoy or protect one 's own rights .
Giving all European Union citizens the right to express themselves in their own language in dealings with the EU institutions is a fundamental right in terms of equality , equal opportunities and non-discrimination .
The use of just some of the official languages can technically only be justified within the activities of the EU institutions and not in its relations with citizens , enterprises and institutions in the Member States .
Enhanced cooperation procedures are useful when they increase the opportunities for those that participate in them , without compromising them for the others .
I therefore voted against the recommendation since I think enhanced cooperation is unacceptable in such a delicate context as the political equality of languages , as it would create discrimination in terms of the right of equal opportunity to access the EU 's fundamental freedoms .
I am very satisfied with the point we have reached on this subject , which had been pending since the 1990s .
In December 2009 , the Council adopted the principle of creating an EU patent .
One year later , however , the Council confirmed that there were insurmountable difficulties regarding translation arrangements which required unanimity .
The matter was then taken up by the Belgian Presidency of the EU , but since the obstacles remained , 12 Member States requested a proposal for a regulation authorising enhanced cooperation in the creation of a unitary patent .
The Competitiveness Council thus provided for the authorisation of enhanced cooperation in March 2011 .
I would remind you that the creation of a unitary patent will bring advantages for users of the patent system in Europe and , in particular , it will allow small and medium-sized enterprises , which are often neglected , to improve their competitiveness through improved access to protection via the patent as well as a reduction in costs .
I voted for this report as I think that enhanced cooperation in the area of creating a unitary patent is the best solution at the moment , and I hope that , in the meantime , all Member States will participate in it for the benefit of Europe 's citizens .
Having a single patent will significantly reduce administrative costs for small and medium-sized enterprises , stimulate innovation and help create new jobs at a time when the EU has an ever-growing need for them .
It is vital to have EU-wide legislation that protects patents in order to defend intellectual property rights .
We will be able to have uniform protection in the territories of the participating Member States as well as reduced costs and simplified administrative procedures .
I wish to point out that , at the moment , the cost of registering a patent in Europe is about 10 times higher than for a Japanese or North American patent .
Therefore , innovation and scientific investigation will benefit and the internal market will be improved at the same time .
According to Commissioner Barnier , only Spain and Italy have shown no interest in this enhanced cooperation .
However , he does have some legal reservations about the applicability of the enhanced cooperation procedure in this specific case .
In effect , according to Article 328 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , ' When enhanced cooperation is being established , it shall be open to all Member States , subject to compliance with any conditions of participation laid down by the authorising decision .
It shall also be open to them at any other time , subject to compliance with the acts already adopted within that framework , in addition to those conditions ' .
I would point out that the language arrangements of this enhanced cooperation will consist of just three languages : English , French and German .
I am against Parliament 's green light on the use of the enhanced cooperation procedure to create a unitary patent system since I think the issue of the language regime is of fundamental importance for Italian interests , given that Italy is fourth in Europe for the number of patents filed .
I think the enhanced cooperation procedure has been used cynically .
It was created to give greater impetus to the process of integration of the European Union by providing the possibility of proceeding on an issue with a smaller number of Member States where it is impossible to reach a unanimous agreement .
Forcing this through could set a dangerous precedent since it harms a Member State and circumvents the unanimity that the Treaty of Lisbon requires for issues concerning the internal market , as well as the principle of not distorting competition within it .
Furthermore , we would have preferred to wait for the decision of the Court of Justice , which we are expecting on 8 March .
We voted against this report for three fundamental reasons .
It is inadmissible for Parliament to endorse a proposal for enhanced cooperation in this area of so-called unitary patents because it only seeks to put in jeopardy the rights that the Member States have to defend their interests , merely to benefit the more powerful countries .
This is the second time that this principle of enhanced cooperation , as provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon , has been used .
The purpose behind its inclusion is starting to become clear .
It is unacceptable for them to pressurise states which belong to the EU , but which do not accept the conditions that the majority wishes to impose on them , particularly in such sensitive areas as language , since the proposed agreement threatens the languages of the majority of the countries .
Lastly , I must just make a final comment to reaffirm the positions that the Portuguese Communist Party delegates in the European Parliament have always held in their unwavering defence of the Portuguese language .
It is not every day that we have the opportunity to discuss a subject as important as the EU patent , which is the subject of Mr Lehne 's recommendation .
I am therefore very pleased to be given the chance to contribute to this debate .
Firstly , it should be noted that we are currently at a very early stage of the enhanced cooperation procedure .
All that the European Parliament 's recommendation will do is to enable the Council to agree officially to measures being taken .
Everything is therefore still possible , or , to be more specific , amendments can be made to the European Commission 's proposals for regulations .
Without going into details as regards the proposals for regulations on the patent itself or the language regime , I would like to say that while implementing this great European project , we must bear in mind the interests of all European entrepreneurs , or , in other words , both those who patent inventions and those who are interested in easy access to technical information regarding such inventions .
I am thinking here of the manufacturers of generic medicines , for example .
Since I am a staunch supporter of the European patent and , at the same time , a representative of Poland , a country which today is unfortunately more a patent ' recipient ' than a patent ' donor ' , I will endeavour to ensure that the scope of the debate on the patent is as broad as possible , and that it pays heed to everyone 's opinions , in particular , those of small and medium-sized enterprises , which are essential for an innovative European economy .
The European patent is supposed to help us boost innovation , yet why can we not manage to be innovative ourselves when debating it ?
We should be ashamed of ourselves .
We talk of nothing but patent law ; let us also talk about establishing an optimum form for patents .
We currently have short and long patents , yet it is not necessarily the case at all that the latter are better written .
The description is frequently made more complex on purpose in order to obscure and complicate the form of the patent .
I think that we need to create a transparent form for patents and a procedure for describing them , so that the Internet and electronic recording methods can be put to good use .
Language is a related issue , and a set algorithm could be used to solve this problem .
I think that the cheapest method , which would not require translations into different languages , would be a European e-patent .
Maybe the Commission will start to think innovatively .
I voted in favour , although I believe that the Commission is showing too little initiative on this matter .
in writing . - In light of the impetus given by the Commission and Parliament to relaunch the single market , the need for a harmonised system for the issuance and regulation of patents has never been greater .
It is for this reason that I voted in favour of this legislative resolution .
Under the current fragmented patent system , patents have to be translated into the language of each of the States for which they have been granted , imposing exorbitant costs on entrepreneurs , start-ups and other innovation-based SMEs for translations : obtaining a patent is thirteen times more expensive in the EU than in the US and eleven times more expensive than in Japan .
Under the new system to be adopted by Member States participating in enhanced cooperation in this area , the unitary patent will fall under a much more affordable translation regime consisting of solely the French , English and German languages ; resulting in the cutting of costs .
The introduction of a unitary and affordable patent system , albeit only in some EU Member States , will play an important role in the furtherance of the single market , particularly by giving the Union the boost in innovation and creativity with regard to the creation of goods and services which it so desperately needs .
For several years , we have seen the European economy being held back by the absence of a competitive EU patent , in comparison with other large world powers .
For around 15 years , the European Commission has been proposing the creation of a single European patent .
Finally , thanks to the ' enhanced cooperation ' procedure , which allows several Member States to cooperate in a particular area when a legislative initiative is being blocked , we have been able to take a step in this direction .
I therefore voted enthusiastically in favour of this report , which allows us to launch this enhanced cooperation procedure in order to create an EU patent system .
This is an important step forward for all European businesses and for all small and medium-sized enterprises , which have been waiting a long time for this instrument , an instrument which is indispensable for innovation , research and development and competitiveness in Europe .
I voted in favour of this recommendation concerning the authorisation of enhanced cooperation for creating a European patent .
In December 2010 , 12 Member States , including France , wanted to use an enhanced cooperation procedure following disagreement among the 27 , due to linguistic differences , on the introduction of an EU patent system .
In the end , all the Member States except Italy and Spain decided to participate .
I would like it to be possible for these two countries to be able to get involved in the initiative at any point .
It is currently 11 times more expensive to file a patent in the European Union than in the United States .
In the future , our researchers and businesses will finally be able to start competing effectively on innovation with the United States and Asia .
After more than 10 years , work on a unitary European patent is finally coming to an end .
In spite of the fact that we have only achieved a partial success , since the unitary patent protection system does not cover the entire territory of the European Union , it should undoubtedly be regarded as a significant step forward .
The simplification of registration procedures and a significant reduction in their cost will promote the development of the internal market and stimulate scientific and technical progress throughout the EU as a whole , even if they only cover 12 Member States .
Although legislation will only be harmonised to a limited extent , this harmonisation will , in reality , affect all EU entrepreneurs , since investors based in Member States which are not participating will also be able to take advantage of unitary patent protection .
It will be up to them to decide on an individual basis whether to choose protection under the legal system of one or several Member States , or whether to use the unitary European patent .
I believe that we should continue measures aimed at extending the scope of unitary patent protection , so that it ultimately covers the entire territory of the European Union .
It is not only individual entrepreneurs that will benefit , since the European market will also become more competitive compared to other large economies such as the United States , China or Japan .
I supported this draft resolution on a proposal for a Council decision authorising enhanced cooperation in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection , as I believe that a unitary patent registration system will reduce administrative barriers for European businesses .
The European Union cannot afford a fragmented patent registration system .
Today , it has taken a giant stride forward towards a unitary registration system .
The status quo , under which a business must register its patent in every Member State separately , is a significant hindrance to business development .
The slow and complicated process for registering a patent in the European Union hitherto has restricted opportunities for our businesses to develop dynamically .
A clear and efficient procedure whereby anyone may register a patent valid throughout the European Union will ensure that new products can reach the market more quickly , thereby boosting the rate at which businesses develop .
Those countries who take part in this patent registration system and entrepreneurs in those countries , who will be able to supply new products quickly to all European consumers , will be the winners .
At the moment , the internal market is particularly fragmented due to the high costs of patent protection in the European Union , and European inventors are unable to enjoy all the benefits of the single market .
The difficulty arises when the latter try to obtain the best level of protection across the whole of the Union .
This situation has an adverse impact on the EU 's competitiveness as activities involving innovation produce human capital which tends to be more mobile than in other areas .
The current less favourable conditions for innovation make the European Union a less attractive place for creativity and innovation , for European and non-European inventors alike .
I voted for this recommendation as enhancing cooperation within a group of Member States in the area of unitary patent protection will safeguard the interests of the Union , based on the fact that it will boost the EU 's competitiveness and make it more attractive to the rest of the world .
Furthermore , creating unitary patent protection for a group of Member States would improve the level of patent protection and remove the costs and complexity associated with the relevant territories , which would facilitate scientific and technological progress and the operation of the internal market .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
I believe the permitted level of radiation in foodstuffs must be raised and , in addition , monitoring and compliance must be improved .
Depending on the outcome of the final reading , this regulation has the potential to contribute to that process .
I welcome the fact that this regulation will also apply to foodstuffs or feedingstuffs imported from third countries in customs transit or intended for export .
It is beyond doubt that the sphere of intellectual property rights , and particularly industrial property rights , deserves special care and attention .
However , EU bodies and institutions do not always succeed in this .
A comprehensive , systemic solution is often defeated by details or even by lobbying interests .
The issue of the EU patent - formerly the Community patent - is an example of this .
The possibility of at least a partial solution is now arising in the form of enhanced cooperation between some Member States in establishing unitary patent protection .
The Czech Republic wishes to participate in this enhanced cooperation and also wishes to take part in further negotiations over concrete proposals for a regulation on the unitary patent and its language regime .
Failure to participate in the enhanced cooperation would mean not being able to influence the future form of the EU patent system .
One significant aspect is the economic benefit , or the advantages for businesses deriving from the new technical solutions , in view of the size of the common market of those participating in the enhanced cooperation .
I would also like to mention that the Czech Republic retains the option of withdrawing from the enhanced cooperation , should this cooperation take a direction contrary to the positions of the Czech Republic , particularly regarding the language regime and the area of patent jurisprudence .
I am abstaining on this report .
It is not that I am against the sovereign right of the Member States to come to enhanced cooperation agreements among themselves , including in relation to patents .
However , no guarantee has been given to us concerning the ecological and hygienic standards that will be applied during the approval process for these patents , in particular , concerning genetically modified organisms .
Until the necessary requirements for preserving public health are included , I will not support this type of agreement .
With the approval of this report , which seeks to establish enhanced cooperation in connection with the registration and protection of patents , there is a risk of imposing language arrangements that are limited to three languages only - English , German and French - with translation of the patent into the respective national language in each Member State no longer being required .
Although the purpose of creating an EU patent is positive in the sense that it would help to revitalise and promote innovation in Europe , nevertheless , I would argue that this cannot be pursued with the violation of the fundamental principles of European citizenship itself , with the breaking of Community cohesion and fragmentation of the internal market or with the introduction of new factors of discrimination , inequality and imbalance .
The Portuguese language - the third most important European language of universal communication - will suffer inexplicable discrimination with the introduction of this ' enhanced cooperation ' .
That is why I voted as I did .
The dispute over the languages used in EU patents has been going on for more than 30 years .
Over the course of these 30 years , European companies have had to cope with high translation costs and , in some cases , have been put at a competitive disadvantage on the global market .
It is hard to place a value on intangible assets , such as trademarks and patents .
However , they are used as the security for loans and are also taken into account in credit ratings .
Against this background , the new patent law , which has been drawn up by means of the enhanced cooperation process , and which is valid at least in parts of the EU , only requires patents to be translated into German , English and French .
This will certainly reduce the amount of bureaucracy involved .
The new regulation also strengthens the position of the German language , which is still the most widely spoken native language within the EU , according to a survey carried out in 2006 .
In principle , the idea is a good one , but the rules on languages are not entirely clear , which is why I have abstained .
The creation of unitary patent protection in the Community ( now European Union ) and ensuring effective patent protection throughout the EU represent a step towards greater EU competitiveness .
Currently , inventors working in the European Union are at a disadvantage compared to their colleagues in other countries around the world : protecting inventions across the whole of the EU is a lengthy and expensive process .
Unfortunately , due to procedural challenges , we have been unable to establish a uniform system across the EU .
Nevertheless , I congratulate those Member States that have decided to initiate the cooperation procedure in the area of patent protection ( I am particularly pleased that the Member States include Lithuania ) , and I am voting in favour of approving this cooperation .
I voted against the introduction of a trilingual system in patent regulations .
Translating patents exclusively into English , French and German would cause serious harm to Italian enterprises , which would have to bear extremely high costs for the technical translation of patents they file .
My parliamentary group urged us to vote in favour , but I do not feel that I can approve legislation that I believe to be harmful to the interests of my country and its citizens , particularly all Italian small and medium-sized enterprises and our consumers .
It is obvious that increased costs for enterprises would then cause higher product costs , to the detriment of consumers .
Enhanced cooperation should remain a mechanism to be used in exceptional circumstances and should not be used to exclude Members States that are prepared to negotiate , such as Italy and Spain .
I support the Italian proposal to write patents in the language of the country of the inventor and to provide an English translation as well .
This way , we can preserve our linguistic independence and the interests of our country .
Indeed , enhanced cooperation between 10 or 12 countries on this issue runs the risk of distorting the conditions of fair competition , to the advantage of those countries participating .
I agreed with this resolution on the proposal for a Council decision authorising enhanced cooperation in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection .
Given the current situation where it is very difficult and expensive to obtain a European patent , I agree with the proposal to apply the cooperation procedure and to allow all interested EU Member States to create a unitary patent system .
We must make every effort to resolve the issue of the language regime , which would reduce the cost of obtaining a European patent for companies operating within the EU .
Furthermore , patent protection that functions effectively would simplify dispute settlement procedures and would reduce the administrative burden .
I am pleased that many European Union Member States are contributing to the initiative to create a unitary patent , and hope that the remaining countries will also soon help achieve the objective of creating a unitary patent for improved economic liberalisation conditions within the European Union .
Only enhanced cooperation will facilitate the proper functioning of the internal market by eliminating obstacles to the free movement of goods .
I voted in favour of the recommendation for a decision authorising enhanced cooperation in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection .
The future of Europe depends , and Member States such as Greece , which have been hard hit by the crisis , are pinning their hopes for the recovery of their national economies and productive fabric on innovation .
It is therefore economically vital and socially fair to provide legal protection for patents which cover the invention and implementation of innovative ideas and products .
I am in favour of a European patent system , but , on reflection , and for reasons of language , I abstained from voting on the present report .
I would actually have voted in favour if only English were to be used , since today it functions as a lingua franca .
I abstained for three fundamental reasons : firstly , because to create a patent system with the obligatory translation of each file into the 23 official languages would be expensive , slow and would create a serious competitive disadvantage ; secondly , because in practice , the English language is commonly used today as a lingua franca ; and , thirdly , because 90 % of patent applications are made in English anyway .
I cannot agree to the inclusion in this process of the French and German languages to the detriment of more widely spoken languages such as Portuguese or Spanish ( as if languages with different statuses existed in the EU , an idea that I reject ) .
Therefore , I abstained , in the belief that progress on a European patent system is needed , but that the best solution would be one language only : English .
I abstained from the vote because , although I believe it is essential to improve the patent system in Europe , in particular , with the creation of a unitary patent and a European and EU Patents Court , which would make it possible to overcome the problems for small and medium-sized enterprises caused by the current fragmentation in the existing system , characterised by high costs and excessive complexity , I also understand the reservations that some countries have expressed with regard to the translation arrangements for the EU patent .
Therefore , I do not oppose the start of enhanced cooperation in this field , though I believe that it is not the most desirable and most definitive solution to the problem .
The absence of unitary patent protection throughout the European Union puts European companies in a clear position of competitive disadvantage compared to their US and Japanese peers .
The costs of patenting in Europe are almost 10 times higher than the costs of patenting in the US and Japan , which is essentially because of outlay on translating patents into the languages of the EU 's various countries .
In order to make Portuguese and European industry more competitive in this context , I consider it crucial to make rapid progress towards the creation of a unitary patent protection system that is less burdensome and complex , and that can operate as a stimulus for innovation , and for scientific and technological development in Portugal and the EU .
That is why I voted for this resolution .
Nevertheless , I cannot fail to express my regret at the choices regarding the language regime .
In truth , I believe that there are weighty arguments against the current three-language solution , using English , German and French ; I therefore believe that it would have been preferable in every way to have opted for the English-only regime .
Today , I have voted in favour of the introduction of enhanced cooperation with regard to unitary patent protection because I believe that the deadlock in the Council as a result of the language arrangements is unjustified .
In my opinion , there is , of course , an important need for discussion .
For me , voting in favour does not mean that I agree in full with the contents of the Commission 's initial proposals .
We will give priority to this issue in the Committee on Legal Affairs and will definitely table amendments with a large number of improvements .
I would like to explain that those who believe that today 's vote will result in Parliament losing its rights are mistaken .
The legislative procedure is only just beginning .
By voting today , Parliament was simply giving permission for a group of Member States to start the enhanced cooperation procedure , which was only made possible by the Treaty of Lisbon .
The remainder of the procedure will involve a ) Parliament being consulted about the language arrangements ( the decision in this case must be made by the Council ) , b ) Parliament taking part in deciding on the content of the patent regulation as part of the ordinary legislative procedure , c ) Parliament 's consent being obtained for the patent jurisdiction .
There will be no change in any of these opportunities for Parliament to participate in the process .
Even those Members of the European Parliament from Member States which are not involved in the enhanced cooperation will not lose their right to vote during the remainder of the procedure , because they are European and not national representatives .
The Belgian Presidency of the European Union has been a complete success .
Among the many things it has achieved is the agreement on the European patent , a regulation which is imperative for boosting innovation and competitiveness in Europe .
Liberal Europeans had wished for this kind of harmonisation of legal protection for almost 15 years .
It will put an end to the wastage of funds , estimated at almost EUR 400 000 per year , which results from the coexistence of national patents and European patents .
Furthermore , the fact that 12 Member States ( Denmark , Estonia , Finland , France , Germany , Lithuania , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Poland , Slovenia , Sweden and the United Kingdom ) are using the enhanced cooperation procedure is all the better if it was the only way to put an end to the deadlock on this matter .
The Treaty of Lisbon has been applied fairly to authorise a ' European vanguard ' of a minimum of nine Member States to cooperate when a legislative initiative is being blocked .
For all these reasons , today 's European Parliament vote on the Lehne report at midday is essential .
It sends a positive signal , both for European businesses , which need to evolve within a stable legal framework , putting them on an equal footing with international competition , and for inventors , whose creative activity needs to be better protected by the European Union .
in writing . - Our group cannot agree to give its consent and to initiate a procedure because , in the words of the Advocates General of the Court of Justice : ' As it stands at present , the envisaged agreement creating a unified patent litigation system is incompatible with the treaties ' .
Our group has asked for the postponement of the vote as the Court decision on the above opinion of the Advocates General is due already on 8 March and Parliament should be fully aware of the legal consequences of the ' enhanced cooperation ' before embarking on such an exceptional project .
The other political groups have not supported our request for postponement .
The consent does not concern specific measures implementing enhanced cooperation .
Such proposals will be submitted at a later stage , if enhanced cooperation is authorised ( i.e. Council regulations creating unitary patent protection and translation arrangements for the unitary patent ) .
I voted against this resolution because I think that after a long legislative process that began in 2000 , it is now unacceptable that a shared solution has not been proposed on the linguistic aspect of European patents .
For many years , Italy and Spain have been pressing hard for English to be recognised as the only official language in the area of technology and science .
This one-language solution would cut costs , providing encouragement , above all , to small and medium-sized enterprises to use the European patent since their economic dimensions means they often cannot bear high translation costs .
In order to bypass the unanimity that such a delicate subject requires , the use of enhanced cooperation has been invoked ( as provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon ) which would allow decisions to be taken by just one third of the Member States .
For some months , the Italian and Spanish governments have been pointing out the unusual characteristics of this procedure which , if approved by the European Parliament and the Council with a qualified majority , would make the European patent applicable not only in States participating in the enhanced cooperation , but also to businesses belonging to other Member States .
Italy and Europe would suffer as a result of the decision to use enhanced cooperation in the creation of unitary patent protection .
Implementing an enhanced cooperation procedure on this issue is profoundly mistaken because it nullifies the efforts made to create a European patent that would be valid in all Member States .
We also contest the decision to try and force this vote through Parliament without bearing in mind the consequences of the judgment of the Court of Justice on the compatibility of the single Patents Court with the Treaty .
Italy , together with Spain , has rightly opposed the recognition of just three languages ( English , French and German ) for filing European patents instead of respecting the principle of equal status of languages , as enshrined by the Treaty .
It is obvious that this is not only a matter of discrimination but is also really economically damaging for enterprises in countries using languages other than these .
I firmly believe that the enhanced cooperation in the area of patent protection will help to eliminate the fragmentation in this area , secure better framework conditions for innovative businesses throughout the Union , lead to greater EU competitiveness on a global scale and the better functioning of the EU internal market .
The anticipated reduction in costs associated with the patent protection process is also not inconsiderable .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( HU ) I voted for the recommendation because I find it outrageous that we still have not been able to form a common position on the issue .
We must realise that Europe has fallen behind in the global innovation competition .
There can be no innovation without comprehensive patent protection , but universities , smaller research institutes and inventors are unable to bear the costs of such patenting .
By only obtaining a patent in their own country , they are essentially giving their inventions to the global market for free .
EU patenting is of vital importance .
It is extremely important to be able to obtain a European patent with a single application .
It is of vital interest that this is realised in all European countries , including my home country , Hungary .
More than 20 years ago now , the European Commission proposed creating a single European patent as soon as possible , and emphasised the pressing need for such a patent .
At the moment , patents in Europe have to be approved country by country , and they have to be translated each time into the relevant national language .
In order to get a patent approved in just half of the EU Member States , it is necessary to pay up to EUR 20 000 , of which EUR 14 000 is for translation .
In the United States , around EUR 1 850 suffices .
The lack of a European patent hinders our competitiveness , as well as European innovation , research and development .
This is why enhanced cooperation is fully justified on this subject , which is fundamental for the future of the EU .
The creation of a European unitary patent within the European Union will bring with it advantages for all the users involved and , in particular , for small and medium-sized enterprises , insofar as it will contribute to their competitiveness through a reduction in costs .
This issue , which already goes back two decades , requires unanimous agreement within the Council to determine the language arrangements applicable to intellectual property rights in the European Union .
In this respect , and bearing in mind that the creation of unitary patent protection is not included on the list of areas of exclusive competence of the European Union , the present recommendation relates to the possibility of enhanced cooperation in this field .
Although , at this stage in the process , we are only dealing with Parliament 's consent to the decision-making method in this area , which receives my vote , this House will shortly also be called on to give a verdict on the controversial language arrangements and on the two regulations to be drafted with regard to the rules of the European patent system .
I voted for the decision authorising enhanced cooperation in the area of the creation of unitary patent protection as I feel it is necessary to adopt measures to create a unitary EU patent .
According to a report produced in 2011 by Thomson Reuters entitled ' Patented in China ' , China is going to overtake Japan and the US in terms of numbers of patents .
Indeed , China 's intention with the programme launched in 2006 was to become a country focused on innovation , and it managed to increase the number of patents by 14.1 % , 33.55 % and 15.9 % compared to the US , EU and Japan respectively .
In the EU , the current patent system is fragmented and exorbitant with regard to translation requirements .
The cost of an EU patent validated in 13 countries is as high as EUR 20 000 , of which roughly EUR 14 000 are for translation costs alone .
This makes a European patent 10 times more expensive than a US one .
I think that authorising enhanced cooperation in the area of creating unitary patents can help develop a unitary patent which is attractive to users of the European patent system , offer intellectual property protection across the whole of the EU and remove the costs and complications with the aim of encouraging research , development and innovative SMEs .
Bearing in mind that the Consultative Working Party of the Legal Services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission concluded , in its opinion , that the proposal concerned does not contain substantive amendments , other than those identified as such , and that , with regard to the codification of the unchanged provisions of the earlier acts together with the included amendments , the proposal contains a straightforward codification of the existing acts without substantive alterations , I approve the present report .
I agree with the guarantee of a high level of protection of the health of European citizens in the event of radioactive contamination and with the democratic legitimacy in the adoption of the present directive , since the legal basis has to be adapted to the new Treaty of Lisbon .
I voted in favour of this important resolution on the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency .
We all remember the Chernobyl tragedy of 26 April 1986 when considerable quantities of radioactive materials were released into the atmosphere , thereby contaminating foodstuffs ( grain , vegetables , berries and mushrooms ) and feedingstuffs in several European countries , and there was a major risk to human health .
Fields were also contaminated with radioactive fallout , which increased the radioactivity of forest and agricultural foodstuffs from the affected areas .
A high level of protection of human health is one of the European Union 's objectives .
We therefore urgently need to set up a system allowing the European Union , following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency which has or is likely to lead to a significant radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs , to fix maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination in order to ensure a high level of protection of public health .
All EU citizens must have the greatest possible protection in the event of a nuclear or radiological accident , and the European Commission must be ready to react quickly .
Pre-established maximum permitted levels of contamination must be applied to foodstuffs and feedingstuffs .
This report sets the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination for foodstuffs and animal feed following a nuclear accident or other radiological emergency .
I agree that the European Parliament must play a crucial role in situations having a direct impact on the general public 's health .
I also believe that , in the wake of a nuclear accident or radiological emergency , the European Commission must play a supervisory role , declaring a state of emergency and adopting lists of basic foodstuffs and feedingstuffs .
Member States must maintain an official control system for these products and inform the general public about any risks .
I voted for this report , which guarantees the safety of European citizens ' food in the event of nuclear accidents or radiological emergencies .
A high level of protection of human health is one of the objectives that the European Union must achieve as it defines its policy .
EU regulations laying down levels of radioactive contamination in case of radiological emergency remain unchanged since 1990 , and therefore it is necessary to review and update these provisions .
We must set up a comprehensive system allowing the Union , following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency which is likely to lead to a significant radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs , to fix maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination in order to ensure a high level of protection of public health .
I agree that the permitted levels of radioactive contamination must be reviewed at regular intervals in order to take into account the latest international scientific progress and scientific recommendations and to avoid existing divergences in regulatory practice .
I voted in favour of this report which proposes to stipulate the procedure for determining the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs which may be placed on the market following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency which is likely to lead to , or has led to , significant radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs .
At the same time , Annexes I and III set out the maximum permitted levels of contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs .
Although this proposal is dealt with through the recasting technique , I believe that we must substantially amend the proposal beyond the sole grey part identified , so as to ensure the legal certainty and coherence of the text .
It is necessary to streamline the procedure in cases of nuclear emergency by clearly giving a supervisory role to the Commission and clarifying the regime of its acts ( adoption , revision ) .
Furthermore , we must attempt to serve the interests of the citizens through better management of the post-accident situation .
We must ensure legal certainty of the whole proposal through the alignment of obsolete procedures - ' comitology ' procedures in the field of Euratom adopted by analogy - which this proposal intends to codify , with the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Bearing in mind that the three regulations on radiation amended by the report in question were adopted in the wake of Chernobyl about 20 years ago , I consider that the Belet report , as it now stands after the vote , is a first attempt to improve the approach to and update the problem of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and the soil .
Although I am in favour of the change to the legal basis and of strengthening the role of the European Parliament , in order to achieve greater transparency in legislation and broader protection for citizens , I consider the report to be inadequate and several steps behind what would be a substantive approach to the problem .
It amends what has already been agreed and simply regulates the consequences , rather than the source , of the problem .
Furthermore , it has left the maximum limits for radioactive contamination extremely high and , as a result , it is far removed from the objective of protecting public health .
It is for the above reasons that I abstained in the final vote .
I believe that EU Member States are responsible for monitoring compliance with the levels laid down for protection against radioactive contamination in this regulation , in particular , through the surveillance of the safety standards of both foodstuffs and feedingstuffs , as well as through monitoring environmental parameters .
I support the idea of creating a system which will allow the EU to set the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination to ensure a high level of protection for the general public 's health , following a nuclear accident or other radiological emergency .
I voted in favour of the report relating to the radioactive contamination of foodstuffs , the aim of which is to set the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs following a nuclear accident or any other radiological emergency .
Therefore , the main objective of the regulation is the protection of public health and accordingly , the legal basis must be Article 168 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The present proposal aims to guarantee a high level of protection of the health of European citizens in the event of radioactive contamination and also to confer democratic legitimacy on the adoption of the present regulation .
There is no doubt that its legal basis must be adapted to the new Treaty of Lisbon in order to grant Parliament a role in the decision-making process concerning a regulation that potentially affects public health .
Essentially , this proposal consists of the codification of the unchanged provisions of three regulations adopted between 1987 and 1990 , which establish the permitted levels of radioactive contamination in the event of a radiological emergency .
All people have the right to a healthy diet .
This is an unquestionable right and a sine qua non for attaining the quality of life that we all aspire to , and which the Treaty of Lisbon reflects .
After the Chernobyl disaster ( 1986 ) , the question of radioactive contamination of the environment gained in importance and justified the adoption of three regulations , between 1987 and 1990 , which set the maximum permitted levels of contamination in the event of a radiological emergency or nuclear accident , seeing that these effects are long lasting and , very often , can be indirect ( contamination of woodlands ) .
Although the proposal basically entails a codification of the unchanged provisions of the regulations mentioned above , I am voting in favour of this report on the proposal for a Council regulation ( Euratom ) because the guaranteed maintenance of high levels of protection for European citizens ' health is in danger .
This proposal essentially consists of a codification of the unchanged provisions of three regulations adopted between 1987 and 1990 , which establish the permitted levels of radioactive contamination in the event of a radiological emergency .
However , the insertion of a new recital which explains the need for an existing article , reserving for the Council the use of implementing powers , implies a substantive change which justifies the use of the recasting technique .
The content of the regulation consists of a mechanism of two levels of intervention in the event of a radiological emergency or nuclear accident , as proposed by the Commission :
the immediate adoption by the Commission of an ad hoc regulation to apply the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination specified in Annexes I and III of the proposal to a specific case , in a definite area and for a limited period ;
establishment of a period of one month following its adoption for the Commission to forward a proposal to the Council to adapt or confirm this ad hoc regulation .
As shown in the debate in the specialist committee itself and in the alternative proposals which it presents , there is a power struggle going on here between the Commission and the Council .
However , the primary aim should be to serve the citizens ' interests by means of better management of post-accident situations , with respect for the competences of the Member States affected .
Therefore , our final vote was one of abstention .
in writing . - ECR Group MEPs supported this report as we believed that the legal basis of this legislation should be changed from ' Article 31 EAEC ' to ' Article 168 TFEU ' .
Under the original regulation , Article 31 EAEC ( which focuses on the group of persons who might be subject to radioactive contamination ) was considered the most appropriate legal basis as Article 168 TFEU ( which regulates public health ) did not exist .
If Article 168 TFEU was the legal base of this regulation , then this would imply a change from consultation to the ordinary legislative procedure and the proposal would then be subject to full European Parliament scrutiny and , most importantly , a full impact assessment , including consultation with food producers and consumers .
While there could be certain aspects of Parliament 's adopted report that ECR MEPs do not support , we strongly believe that the legal basis of this regulation should be changed to fully involve the European Parliament in the legislative process and additionally , that it should be accompanied by a thorough impact assessment .
The ECR Group therefore voted in favour of this report .
The regulations we have prepared today are of enormous economic significance for the European Union and its single market .
The Chernobyl disaster showed us that the linear extrapolation of radiation-related risk results in unnecessary economic losses .
Areas equal in size to many a country were evacuated in Belarus and Ukraine .
Belarusians are now returning to these areas , where radioactivity is the same as that in the centre of Warsaw , unbelievable as it may seem .
Meanwhile , some of the ' Chernobyl victims ' , the around 8 million Ukrainians who receive allowances which are , in any case , too low to live on , will not consider returning for fear of losing this meagre compensation .
The European Union should draw conclusions from this experience , which is of vital importance .
It was easy to resettle people within the former USSR , and it was accomplished efficiently after the disaster .
It is hard to imagine how this would be done in Europe 's densely-populated areas .
Who would be given the responsibility for such a task ?
Financial compensation should be awarded in particular to farmers , who may lose not only their crops , but also the opportunity to cultivate any crops for many years .
The same applies to forests , although to a lesser degree .
It is well known that the polluter should pay , but how will we decide who is responsible and who should pay if we are hit by nuclear fallout from third countries ?
Who will deal with this ?
The EU , of course .
I therefore voted in favour of adopting the report .
Regarding the Belet report , which asks , in particular , for Parliament to become a colegislator for health protection in case of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs , I could not vote in favour of a report which does not firmly reject the current doses proposed by the Commission .
The maximum contamination levels proposed by the Commission , which have been in force since 1987 , are far too high .
Studies show that even with low doses , children suffer serious cardiovascular and endocrine problems .
The proposed maximum doses would cause an unacceptable increase in the number of cancer cases .
Furthermore , given that there is no mechanism in place to compensate farmers in case of contamination which exceeds the authorised levels , the Commission absolutely must propose a compensation mechanism in accordance with the ' polluter pays ' principle .
in writing . - Parliament today voted for a change in the legal basis for legislation on radioactive contamination in foodstuffs .
This is an extremely important issue and it is only right that this House has codecision powers .
I voted in favour of this important document on the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and of feedingstuffs following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency .
It is crucially important to determine the maximum permitted levels applied to foodstuffs and feedingstuffs in order to ensure a high level of public health protection and avoid a repeat of the Chernobyl disaster when foodstuffs ( grain , vegetables , berries , mushrooms , etc . ) and feedingstuffs , as well as fields , were contaminated with radioactive fallout , which increased the radioactivity of forest and agricultural foodstuffs from the areas affected .
We must create a mechanism to adequately and effectively ensure safety in the event of a nuclear or radiological accident .
A high level of protection of human health is one of the European Union 's main objectives .
Radioactive contamination is hazardous to human health , and our role as Members of the European Parliament is to do everything in our power to ensure that the food supplied to consumers is safe and healthy .
We should therefore make the necessary preparations to enable us to respond rapidly and effectively enough in the event of a hazard , while , at the same time , constantly updating regulations and adapting them to the current state and progress of technology .
Procedures need to be simplified and competences transferred to the Member States , which will be able to deal with such situations effectively .
In this case , it would appear to be of key importance to set limits for concentrations of radioactive substances , for the safety of society and of the natural environment .
In the case of a nuclear accident or any other kind of radiological emergency , it is essential that the proper action is taken .
Preventive measures and aid for those affected are important .
Compensation payments for farmers are vital in order to help producers of agricultural products who have suffered damages through no fault of their own .
Farmers in one Member State who are affected by contamination from an accident of this kind in another Member State must also be compensated .
The effects of nuclear accidents must not be allowed to put the livelihoods of farmers at risk .
I support Mr Belet 's report , because we must guarantee protection for farmers from damages caused by external third parties .
This report and the ecological disasters that it claims to manage are a reminder to us of how urgent it is to abandon nuclear energy .
Yet there is no question of abandoning nuclear energy in this report .
That is one of the ways in which this report is lacking .
It would have been worthwhile adopting the amendment .
In addition , this report aims to grant the Commission every power necessary to introduce the security measures needed for a nuclear disaster .
It makes the capacity of the leaders of the Member States to act in this matter merely optional , even though they are the ones elected by the people .
It is inconceivable that power should be delegated in this way to the irresponsible Commission , especially when it comes to public health .
I am voting against the report .
The proposed regulation establishes the procedure for setting the maximum permitted limits of radioactive contamination for foodstuffs and animal feed which may be put on the market following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency , which may cause or has caused significant radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and animal feed .
I am of the opinion that we must remain alert and prepared for any emergency situation that may occur in Europe .
Any attempt to enable the regulations in force to be employed with greater speed and agility will create added value for the whole territory of the European Union .
Radioactive contamination can represent a problem over a number of years in some foods .
The difficulty arises when contaminated foodstuffs , such as wild produce from the forests in areas that have been exposed to radioactivity for centuries , are not only consumed locally , but are also sold in otherwise uncontaminated areas , where they are believed to be harmless .
Our current level of knowledge indicates that there are no levels of radiation that can be classified as harmless with any absolute degree of certainty .
Research into the cause of a wide range of new forms of illness , such as allergies , is still in its infancy .
Despite this fact , foodstuffs are still being irradiated and no one has considered the question of possible interaction with genetic engineering .
All of the limits are ultimately useless if the checks on foodstuffs in and around contaminated regions are not functioning properly .
I have taken these considerations into account when voting .
I voted in favour of this resolution since it streamlines the procedure for intervening in the event of an emergency and strengthens the role of the Commission by stating that it - and not the Council - is directly responsible for decision making in the event of a nuclear accident , establishing measures that enter into force immediately .
The Commission is to be assisted by a group of independent experts with competences in the health and food safety sectors .
Furthermore , the available scientific data must be made accessible by the Commission so that its significance can be assessed .
Member States must take actions to minimise the risks of contamination , including informing the public .
In essence , this report protects citizens and gives the Commission and Parliament a leading role .
Today , we voted on the regulation concerning ' the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and of feedingstuffs following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency ' , which lays down guidelines for reacting to nuclear or radiological accidents .
This document is purely technical in nature , essentially discussing limits to the competence of the Commission , the Council and Member States , and laying down levels of contamination .
I would like to highlight one amendment proposed by Parliament , which proposes the inclusion of a provision on compensating farmers whose land is contaminated with poisonous substances during a nuclear or radiological accident .
As we are living through rather unstable times , and we can see certain examples where man 's negligent economic activities are often the cause of major accidents , we must pass legislation laying down clear provisions on how to react in critical situations .
I agree with the proposal presented on the Council regulation laying down maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and of feedingstuffs following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency .
The protection of human health is one of the European Union 's priority objectives and we must therefore create a mechanism to adequately and effectively ensure safety in the event of a nuclear or radiological accident .
The levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs following a nuclear accident must be regulated particularly strictly given the possible negative consequences for the public .
We must take all possible measures to ensure that , in the event of an accident , radioactive particles released into the air contaminate foodstuffs as little as possible , and the radioactive impact is reduced to a minimum .
I agree with the proposal that the fundamental EU environmental principle of ' the polluter pays ' should be applied , thereby ensuring an effective compensation mechanism in the event of an accident , with a particular focus on farmers , who would suffer the most damage in this case .
This report relates to a legislative proposal which essentially consists of a codification of the unchanged provisions of three regulations adopted between 1987 and 1990 , following the Chernobyl disaster ( 1986 ) , at which time the question of radioactive contamination of the environment became increasingly important .
These regulations establish the permitted levels of radioactive contamination in the event of a radiological emergency .
The content of the regulations consists of a mechanism of two levels of intervention in the event of a radiological emergency or nuclear accident , as proposed by the Commission : ( a ) immediate adoption by the Commission of an ad hoc regulation whereby the maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination specified in Annexes I and III of the proposal can be applied to a specific case , in a definite area and for a limited period ; and ( b ) establishment of a period of one month after its adoption for the Commission to forward a proposal to the Council to adapt or confirm this ad hoc regulation .
I am voting in favour of this report as I think that the amendments proposed by the European Parliament are positive and confer a current logic to the text .
As the main objective of the regulation is the protection of public health , I consider that the legal basis should be Article 168 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
in writing . - The radioactive contamination of food is clearly a concern for European public health and , as such , it is essential that this legislation is decided on that basis , with the European Parliament as a colegislator .
As the proposal stands , however , it clearly falls short of what is required to protect the European public , particularly children , from radioactive contamination through foodstuffs .
The maximum levels of radioactive contamination being proposed are far too high according to expert analysis - some of them are even higher than those in place when the Chernobyl disaster occurred .
The proposed levels would imply that the public be exposed to radiation at levels higher than the maximum limits set out in existing EU legislation on safety standards for ionising radiation .
This would expose the European public , notably vulnerable groups and children , to unnecessary risk from contamination and cancer .
It is simply not acceptable that this legislative revision would fail to ensure Europe 's citizens have total protection from radioactive contaminated food .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it brings to light a fundamental problem that should never be underestimated .
More and more countries are turning to nuclear power , both for civilian and , unfortunately , military purposes .
This is now a reality of global significance which , unfortunately , also involves areas of extreme political instability .
In the event of a crisis or accident , the European Union cannot allow itself to be unprepared to manage the emergency .
Responses must be immediate , effective and perfectly coordinated between the various Member States .
The radioactive fallout following such an event then leads to contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs that , if introduced to the food chain , can cause incalculable damage and contaminate entire areas for decades .
European citizens must be able to sleep easily , safe in the knowledge that in the event of an emergency that all of us hope never to have to face , they will not be left at the mercy of events .
Streamlined procedures with clear rules and responsibilities for all are essential to serve the true interests of citizens .
We are in favour of the report laying down maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs because it streamlines the procedures for intervention in the event of an emergency and strengthens the role of the Commission , granting it the authority to make decisions in the event of a nuclear accident .
The maximum levels of radiation in both human and animal food are also indicated in the report .
During the vote , an oral amendment that provides for the compensation of farmers adversely affected by the lost opportunity of selling any contaminated products was also adopted , again with our support .
Nuclear accidents may occur wherever radioactive materials are used , stored or transported , so not only in nuclear power stations , but also in hospitals , universities , research laboratories and industrial plants , on roads and railway lines , in ports and in shipyards .
The rapporteur rightly notes that radioactive substances may continue to have an impact for a great many years , and the overriding aim should always be to protect human life and health .
At present , more and more food is irradiated in order to make it last longer .
It is worth bearing in mind that irradiation destroys vitamins - up to 90 % of vitamin A in chickens , 86 % of vitamin B in oats and 70 % of vitamin C in fruit juices .
Foodstuffs are therefore made to last longer at the expense of their nutritional value .
Research has proven that irradiation kills bacteria , but it does not destroy viruses or remove dirt or toxins which could get into meat in non-sterile and unhygienic slaughterhouses and meat-processing plants .
Irradiation also contributes to the large-scale , expensive and wasteful transport of food , particularly by large corporations .
Food which is produced and consumed locally does not need to be irradiated .
It is my belief that the Member States should keep in place their food and feed control systems with regard to maximum permissible levels of radioactive contamination and constantly improve and review them , as suggested by the rapporteur .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Adoption of modifications to the Treaty ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the adoption of modifications to the Treaty .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that no provision has been made for questions from the floor during this debate .
We are all very much aware that this is an extremely important debate , however , and so it is one to which we attach a great deal of importance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , the European Commission has expressed a favourable opinion of the decision taken by the European Council in December to proceed to a limited modification of Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
As you know , the aim is to allow the Member States in the euro area to create a permanent mechanism to ensure the financial stability of the euro area as a whole .
In 2013 , this European stability mechanism will replace the current temporary stability instruments - the European financial stability fund and the European financial stability mechanism - and we all know how useful they are .
We are talking here about a decision which is essential for confirming our determination to defend our common currency and to guarantee financial stability when faced with economic imbalances in certain Member States , imbalances which we must correct .
This is a mechanism which is necessary to complete the framework of the Treaty .
This being so , and as I emphasised myself during the last European Council , every initiative - including those concerning the competitiveness and convergence of the European economy , and I say competitiveness and convergence because this is also about the convergence of our economies - every initiative , I said , must respect the Treaty as well as the principles and rules that have been established for the Union and for its institutions .
The Commission will therefore take every initiative - legislative or otherwise - to guarantee consistency between the future stability mechanism and the economic governance carried out by the Union within the euro area .
Respect for the Treaty is , of course , very important , and I am reassured that the European Council , on 4 February , explicitly recognised that .
The mechanisms for reinforcing the competitiveness and convergence of the European economy , which apply not just to the 17 current members of the euro but to all the 27 , will be created with due respect for the Treaties - that is , for the competences of the Union and of its institutions and , in particular , the competences of Parliament and the Commission .
The opinion that the Commission has just adopted makes explicit mention of that .
What we are talking about today is a question of general European interest .
It is obvious that safeguarding the euro is not just in the interest of the Member States in the euro area .
It is for this reason that the Member States which do not belong to the euro area can be involved , if they wish , in the work of introducing the permanent mechanism .
They will also be able , if necessary , to decide to participate in the operations which will be implemented in the context of this future mechanism , as some have already done within the framework of the current temporary mechanisms .
We are also talking today about our global response to the crisis , of which the establishment of the future European stability mechanism is one of the key elements .
We must move forward quickly and properly on this subject .
Urgency does not mean haste , and it certainly does not exclude taking time for joint reflection .
The decisions that we will be taking in the coming weeks to implement the lessons of the crisis are fundamental decisions for our common future .
We must therefore be very clear on the orientation to which we want to commit ourselves .
We all agree that we must board the train of reform in order to preserve financial stability , to increase the competitiveness and convergence of our economies , and to release the full potential of sustainable growth which generates jobs .
Now what remains is to determine the track on which we will make this train run , and I believe that , in order to make this European train move forward , the best tracks are EU ones .
The way in which we will introduce the European stability mechanism will make a large contribution to answering this question .
As far as the procedure is concerned , the Commission believes that the conditions have been met for undertaking a simplified revision of the Treaty such as that envisaged in Article 48 ( 6 ) of the Treaty on European Union .
I know that many of you are wondering about the highly intergovernmental character of this permanent mechanism .
We , too , would have preferred more rapid progress that was more anchored in the system of the Union .
However , we must recognise that this new step does not reduce the current competences of the Union and its institutions .
It increases our collective capacity to respond to certain challenges which were not explicitly envisaged in the Treaty .
I would like to emphasise here certain points of substance that were emphasised in the Commission 's opinion .
They will help us , I think , to orient ourselves towards a Union which shows more solidarity , a more responsible , united and strong Union .
The first aspect is solidarity .
Here , we are talking about a fundamental value of the European Union , and I want to be very precise on this point .
Throughout the discussions on the limited draft modification to the Treaty , the Commission said that this modification would in no way harm the solidarity mechanisms provided for in Article 122 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union in the event of difficulties or a serious threat of difficulties in a Member State .
As a consequence , and contrary to some people 's opinions , Article 122 is not undergoing any modification .
Solidarity in the Union also means responsibility .
There could not be solidarity in Europe without responsibility ; nor , of course , could there be responsibility without solidarity .
This holds , in particular , for financial solidarity and responsibility , and this is the whole spirit of the transitional stability mechanisms .
This will also be the spirit of the permanent mechanism , the conditions for which will be very strict .
Let us be very clear : the Member States must all show respect for a responsible financial policy .
Solidarity and responsibility within the European Union can only be enhanced by greater coordination and better supervision .
That is the essential lesson that we have learned from the crisis .
The economic governance carried out by the Union within the euro area will thus constitute the basis on which the future stability mechanism will necessarily have to rest .
We will have to reinforce European economic governance ; that is , we will have to enlarge and deepen it to guarantee the stability of the euro area in particular , and the stability of the European Union as a whole .
Extending economic governance means including not only budgetary policies but also economic policies and structural reforms .
That is the whole aim of the European semester on which we reached an agreement .
This process was launched by the presentation of the Annual Growth Survey prepared by the Commission .
This document says and shows clearly that the current policies are not sufficient .
We must do more to respond to current challenges .
We must do more together , and we must not be divided .
We must do more to create more convergence , and not to create more differences .
Regarding the deepening of economic governance , this is the very aim of the package of six proposals which was presented by the Commission .
I know that we will be able to count on strong support for this from Parliament , and I thank you for this support .
You can be assured that the Commission will support and facilitate this process up to completion so that our ambitions can be realised .
It is precisely this package of reforms to which the future European stability mechanism will belong , as , in the more immediate future , will the reinforcement of the European financial stability fund .
I am convinced that our approach is the right one , and that everyone has his or her role to play in it .
The Commission will play its full role , and intends , in particular , to participate actively in the work of introducing the future European stability mechanism .
Now , it is not enough to have the right approach ; we must apply it .
I think that we will succeed in implementing our approach if we all respect a few simple and clear rules of conduct .
I am thinking here of democratic legitimacy based on scrutiny by the European Parliament .
I am also thinking of the strength that we gain from permanent institutions , which act transparently and which are common institutions for the 27 , also guaranteeing consistency across the Union .
I am also thinking of the principle of equality of the Member States in the Treaty and the principle of fair competition , according to which the actions decided on by the Member States cannot affect , alter or harm the efficiency of the cooperation that takes place at European Union level .
We will be vigilant in making sure that none of the carriages decouples , which would risk derailing the whole train .
We must invest more in trust between the Member States , and between the Member States and the European institutions .
We are a Union , and we must act as a Union in order to emerge from the crisis and to build solid foundations for a more competitive , more prosperous , more stable and more inclusive Europe .
This is the spirit in which our actions must take place ; this is the spirit in which the Commission has acted , and will continue to act .
I think I can say that we can count on your support here .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , we are fully aware that we need a provision in the Treaty in order to bring about legal certainty .
In my country , this is regarded as a constitutional necessity and this is why we are discussing the need for a modification to the Treaty so that we can guarantee the stability of the euro in the long term .
There are many other possibilities involving more wide-ranging modifications to the Treaty which would incorporate this fully into community policy .
Alternatively , we could use different wording at another point within the relevant article .
On the other hand , there is then , of course , the risk that the simplified procedure could no longer be applied , which would result in referendums being needed .
As a result , we would not be able to reach a decision in time , which would cause problems that would affect the financial markets .
However , it is important to explain that the monetary union is a community power .
We must ensure that this power is not undermined either by the stability mechanism or the competitiveness pact .
The Treaty has deficiencies which can , unfortunately , only be resolved by taking an intergovernmental approach , because of the circumstances that have already been described .
However , there are examples of Member States agreeing on joint regulations , such as in the enhanced cooperation procedure , but using the European Union institutions to carry out the necessary work .
This should also be possible in this context and it concerns the Commission in particular .
It would be wrong to establish parallel structures which would move increasingly far apart and prevent the community from remaining a cohesive whole in the long term .
We must avoid this at all costs .
If we do not react responsibly and correctly in the weeks to come , we could see a split starting to form .
It must also be made clear that the community method and the intergovernmental method are not of equal importance .
The intergovernmental method is simply an aid to be used when the community method is not available for reasons relating to the Treaty .
Therefore , we must ensure that in the case of a possible treaty modification , the matter can be transferred to community policy without major problems , as we have done with Schengen and with many other examples in the past .
This calls for a radical solution , which , at the same time , also provides clear legal structures , so that the countries which are not included can be certain that they will be involved when they fulfil the conditions .
It must also guarantee that the small countries are on an equal footing , because we know that the community structures not only ensure cohesion but also decision-making ability in the long term .
We have yet to find out how difficult the intergovernmental approach will be in the case of the competitiveness pact .
There are three areas .
The first of these is the stability and growth pact , which involves normal legislation and the community method .
There is also the Treaty modification , which brings with it the risk of break up , and the competitiveness pact , which definitely needs further discussion .
Parliament must demonstrate that it is responsible and we must do the same within our group .
We know how important the date of 24 March and the following Monday are .
I believe that we are not working towards an ideal solution , but if we act responsibly , the other institutions and , in particular , the Council should do the same .
Our idea is that we should accept the intergovernmental approach as a transitional solution .
This is connected with the powers of the institutions and , specifically , the Commission on this issue .
The Council should be available for discussions over the next few days .
This means that we are prepared to debate this question , in order to overcome the problems that we have in this House , because the small countries and the countries outside the euro area feel that they are at a disadvantage as a result of the specific way in which the competitiveness pact has been initiated .
All of this makes our work difficult .
I would like to help ensure that there is a majority in favour of this plan within the necessary deadline .
I hope that the Council will give us the opportunity during the course of our discussions to put this majority together .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we stand at a crossroads for the future of the Europe Union .
After the many delays that we are guilty of , it has become obvious to everyone that Europe needs real economic governance , which must be particularly stringent for those countries that have adopted the euro .
We therefore welcome the creation of a permanent stability mechanism , which we feel is a key point in the construction of genuine economic governance in Europe , even if we continue to nurture legal and political reservations on the procedure adopted , which we think is risky and does not make full use of the instruments provided for by the Treaty .
I am delighted to hear that you also share these reservations .
In any case , we are now focusing on a different point : how will the new mechanism actually work ?
Will it contribute to strengthening the economic governance of the European Union or will it be a step towards a new ( and inevitably discretional ) ' intergovernmentalism ' , which is the direction that was also taken by the unfortunate wording of the Franco-German competitiveness pact ?
Basically , in what direction is this train setting off ?
Who will be driving it ?
Indeed , on the one hand , the proposed amendment to Article 136 sets out an intergovernmental mechanism that is entirely disconnected from the Union and its institutions , while , on the other , we can read in the opinion of the Commission that the mechanism shall have to rely on economic governance exercised by the Union and that the Commission will take all measures to ensure consistency between the stability mechanism and the aforementioned economic governance .
We do appreciate these intentions but , since there is no sign of any of this in the proposal to amend Article 136 , we think that this is the time to clearly define how this mechanism will work .
What procedure will be adopted to put the mechanism in place ?
What role will the Commission have in its management and in defining the conditions for its application ?
What will be the composition of the secretariat ?
What does the Council think about what Mr Barroso has just said on the validity of the current extraordinary solidarity mechanisms ?
Will there be a role for the European Parliament ?
I believe that only a rewording of the amendment to Article 136 or , alternatively , a clear declaration from the European Council on these issues , will enable Parliament to adopt an opinion in line with the desired schedule of the European Council .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Gualtieri whether it has occurred to him that intergovernmental cooperation would be a much better path for the peoples of Europe and the unemployed in Europe than the European superstate which he seems to be advocating ?
Has that occurred to him ?
( IT ) Mr Present , ladies and gentlemen , I am a keen supporter of regard for the European Union and the competences assigned to it by the Treaties , which I believe also represent the best way to carry out our role as the direct representatives of the citizens of the European Union .
Mr President , I think that we can be satisfied with Mr Barroso 's statements on the amendment of the Treaty .
Of course , it is now up to us to draft our opinion , and we must do so before 24 March , as an important Council meeting is taking place on this date .
Can we reach a majority in favour of a simplified procedure ?
We shall see .
I think that there are still some conditions that need to be met .
The first condition that occurs to me is that we need to try to ensure that the mechanism is managed by the Commission as far as possible .
I have some good arguments for this .
You will surely have noticed that on 6 January , the European financial stabilisation mechanism ( EFSM ) , which is managed by the Commission , issued EUR 5 billion of bonds onto the market over five years .
On 25 January , the European Financial Stability Facility , which is intergovernmental , did the same , also for EUR 5 billion and also over five years .
The bonds that were managed by the Commission were issued at 2.5 % and those that were managed by the intergovernmental system were put on the market at 2.89 % .
That means that the EFSM , which is managed under the Community method , is issuing bonds at lower interest rates than the intergovernmental system .
I wanted to make this point because it is important to show that the Community method has much better outcomes than the intergovernmental system does .
Secondly , I think that we must also ask ourselves if we can use the amendment of Article 136 in order to strengthen the economic governance package which is currently under discussion .
Mrs Wortmann-Kool and other rapporteurs have tabled six proposals .
In these six proposals , however , we still need the green light from the Council so that the procedures can be initiated by the Commission .
This problem can also be resolved through Article 136 .
We could say that if Article 136 - that is , the permanent crisis mechanism - is invoked , the Commission will automatically be able to start this procedure , and that the Council will not be able to block this with a reversed qualified majority .
Thus , there is a real automatic aspect to the penalties .
That is a second observation that we will perhaps have to come back to in our opinion , as I have said to Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , the two rapporteurs for our committee .
I would like to make a third and final comment .
Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , as rapporteurs , you must try to obtain statements and assurances from the Council , not on the current package , but on all the things that have been announced in these last few days : the competitiveness pact , the intergovernmental method , the many countries who oppose this , etc .
There is a real divide in the Council on this issue for the time being .
I think that we must have an assurance from the Council that it will also apply the Community method in this second economic governance package .
Why is that ?
It is because the intergovernmental method is not working .
Imagine for a moment that the rules on competition in the European Union were managed by the Council !
How many times would fines have been given to businesses which failed to apply the competition rules ?
A company or a private business would never have been fined because it had failed to apply the rules on competition in the European Union .
The same is true of these rules , and that is why I am making a plea for the two rapporteurs to try to get an assurance that the Community method will also be applied in the second economic governance package .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe it is clear that the European Parliament understands why the Treaty modification is based on the simplified procedure .
We are dealing with an emergency situation .
However , it is also obvious that the European Parliament is of the opinion that it is not right for the procedure which puts the crisis mechanism into effect to result in the community method coming to an end in future and the European Parliament and the Commission , at least in part , being excluded .
I would also like to explain our very critical attitude to the increase in intergovernmentalism .
I believe that at the moment , fewer and fewer European citizens understand what decisions are being made in each situation .
The Germans have been set against the Greeks and the Greeks have been set against the Germans .
The Irish believe that the German banks are being rescued at their expense .
This failure to understand the situation has to do with the Council being a black box and with the fact that decisions are only taken at the last minute .
We need more transparency in this area .
Otherwise , we will lose the trust of the citizens faster than we can possibly imagine .
Therefore , you should be prepared , if you want us to submit to the simplified procedure at this point , to reinforce Parliament 's role as the representative of the citizens in the Council and the Commission , as everyone promised before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This Treaty and the case for more democracy in Europe were supported not only by you , Mr Barroso , but also by those in power in the Member States .
I would now like to see this being put into practice .
We only need to look at what is happening in Greece at the moment .
There is a plan to privatise the beaches , so that Greece 's debt can be serviced .
This represents an end to the way in which the crisis has so far been dealt with .
Focusing completely on a policy of austerity , which has been heavily promoted by Germany , will push these countries with budget deficits closer to the brink of disaster .
We must evaluate what is being done .
We need to discuss the structure of this crisis policy and the alleged policy of solidarity .
How else can we ensure that there is a clear understanding anywhere in Europe of what still needs to be done in this crisis ?
I would like to say one more thing at this point .
I believe that we should be prepared to show solidarity with other countries in Europe .
The funds that we currently have available are not sufficient .
A decision was made in Brussels today to provide more liquidity .
We will soon have to talk about this again and also about Eurobonds .
Mr Verhofstadt has provided the correct justification for this .
However , we will also need to discuss what we want our revenue policy to look like in future .
I am sorry that I have overrun .
However , we do ultimately need more time for this debate , so that we can reach a conclusion and not simply take a defensive approach .
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I support this Treaty change and my group supports it , because we want to see stability within the eurozone .
Although the United Kingdom is not a member of the euro - and I hope it never joins - we have a vested interest in its success .
Half of the UK 's trade is with eurozone countries .
The City of London is the financial capital of Europe .
So Britain wishes the eurozone well and we hope that the proposed stability mechanism will provide support in the short to medium term .
My hope is that this Parliament will act responsibly and approve the change proposed by Council .
But in the long term , if the euro is to survive and prosper , more radical change is necessary .
Mr Barroso , you can have as much supervision and surveillance as you like , as much economic governance as you like , but fundamentally , if countries like Greece and Ireland and Portugal are to remain within the eurozone , they need to become a lot more competitive , as competitive as Germany , and that is where your Commission should concentrate its efforts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon has only been in existence for a short time .
However , it is now going to be modified for the second time in just a few months because of what is alleged to be an urgent matter .
As a result , the Treaty modification will not follow the democratic process laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Instead , it will be decided by means of the fast-track procedure .
We have seen how this procedure was used to allow the rescue packages for the banks , amounting to billions of euro , to bypass Parliament .
Now the Council is once again under time pressure and many Heads of Government want the new Treaty modification to be implemented using the supposedly tried and tested fast-track procedure .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left opposes this approach , which is threatening to become a standard process , and is calling for Treaty modifications to be managed using the normal procedure , including the convention , laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , perhaps I could start at nought .
It began by being a customs union pure and simple , then it became a political union , but without proper democratic consent , then it became a monetary union - well , sort of , because ten Member States have been sensible enough to stay out - but what we now have is a debt union , and it is a debt union which simply is not working .
Let us look at the interest rate of the German Bund .
If monetary union was working , all members of the monetary union , all countries in the eurozone , would be able to borrow money at the same rate - at the same rate as the key indicator , the German Bund - but that is not the case at all .
Currently , Portugal pays 4.8 % more , Ireland pays 5.9 % more , and Greece pays 8.25 % more .
Exactly as Mr Gualtieri said , it is a crucial moment .
I do not expect the Chairman of the PPE Group , or the Chairman of the S & D Group - who was shaking his head as I spoke - to understand the critical importance of this , but I believe that very soon they will have to .
Your problem , and it is mostly your problem , would be better solved by intergovernmental cooperation .
Economic governance is a trap and moreover , it has no mandate .
Nobody ever mentioned , or even seems to consider , the hard-pressed taxpayers of the nation state as you seek to construct this fragile and vain empire .
Once again , I would remind you that there are 27 Member States : 11 of them are net contributors and 16 of them are recipients , and there is a San Andreas fault between those who contribute and those who do not .
I suspect that most of all , the German taxpayer will not put up with this expensive charade for very much longer .
In 1896 , William Jennings Bryan , in a great speech about bimetallism , said , ' You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold ' .
Now more urgently , I say to you today , and most of all to the President of the Commission , who has the executive power : you shall not crucify the taxpayers of the UK and the rest of Europe on the cross of the single currency .
( FR ) Mr President , I would first like to talk about the scandal that is the so-called ' simplified ' procedure - in reality a treacherous one - for amending the Treaty .
There is no real debate and , as usual , no direct consultation with the people .
This is not an innocuous subject , however .
This is about making the European financial stabilisation fund permanent .
What does this fund represent , though , other than the possibility of creating a European debt , to be eventually taken on by the Member States , which are already in too much debt , and which could find themselves obliged to cover this European debt before covering their own debts ?
In a way , this is the economic policy of Sapeur Camember - the main character of a humorous book in France - the soldier who is ordered to fill in the hole in the barracks yard and who , in order to fill it in , creates another one right next to it .
In exchange for Germany 's participation , we will be permitted a pact , termed a competitiveness pact , the details of which , according to a note from the French Government 's Secretariat-General for European Affairs , were not supposed to be known .
In fact , they are known only too well .
This will be a cure involving real austerity , supervision and an increased standardisation of budgetary policies .
This is about extending convergence , I quote , to all policies which have an impact on competitiveness , even if , in principle , they fall under national competences .
In short , this is about transposing to the entire euro area all those German policies of which Mr Sarkozy dreams so much .
There is nothing acceptable about this , any more than there is about the alternative of a homogeneous European sovereign debt market plus an increase in the European budget and the creation of a specific tax to fund it .
We must do something else .

First of all , I would like to thank you for your speeches , and I would particularly like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , for their comments concerning the importance of the Community method , as well as their attentiveness to what might become an intergovernmental drift .
I can only thank them for this attentiveness .
In this specific case , let us be absolutely clear : the Commission has given its support to this revision because we think that it aims to respond to a challenge regarding a competence which was not provided for by the Treaty .
The Treaty did not establish a permanent stability mechanism .
The Member States thus unanimously decided to create a mechanism and to do so on an intergovernmental basis .
This was a unanimous decision by the Member States .
I make no secret of the fact - and I have said very clearly - that I will be with all those who want to move more quickly on this .
An intergovernmental step might represent progress , but we would rather move more quickly in an intergovernmental stride .
As we know , however , some of the great steps forward for Europe in the history of European integration have begun with intergovernmental initiatives , such as Schengen or the area of freedom and justice , for example .
The question regarding political responsibility was thus the following : do we , or do we not , have to support something which , while not being absolutely in line with our preferences - that is , the Community method - nevertheless involves the strengthening of our collective ability to respond to challenges which were not explicitly provided for in the Treaty ?
Our answer to this is ' yes ' ; I think that we have to be in favour of this .
That is why the Commission 's opinion is positive regarding this reform of the Treaty .
However , I would like to say to you very openly that the Commission prefers the Community approach .
Incidentally , this is the debate that we had during the preparation of this decision .
Some people wanted - and even proposed - a modification of Article 122 , which would abolish a competence that has been in existence since the Treaties of Rome .
I personally opposed this .
I therefore think we can say that we can now develop this new competence together , even if , strictly speaking , it does not come under the Community method .
At the same time , however , we say very clearly in our opinion , and I quote : ' The Commission will take every initiative , whether legislative or of any other kind , to ensure consistency between the future mechanism and the Union 's economic governance in the euro area in particular , while respecting the competences conferred on the Union and its institutions by the Treaty ' .
This is an absolutely clear position , and I would like to share this aim with you .
During the debate , some people talked , for example , about opposition or differences between one Member State and the others , between the United Kingdom and the euro area .
Normally , I do not like to make this distinction , but there are some differences , the main one , incidentally , being the fact that the debt of the euro area is much less than that of the United Kingdom .
The debt of the United Kingdom is much higher than that of the euro area as a whole .
That is why the problem that exists in the euro area - as some of you have already stressed , by the way - is genuinely a problem of relative competitiveness .
That is why we are now looking to find a solution for competitiveness and for convergence - and I stress convergence - in the Union .
Even if some people do not agree , let us move towards greater convergence in the euro area and in the Union for those who want to move forward , because now it is not just the federalists or the integrationists who want more governance in the European Union .
The markets are also asking for such governance , and we need to listen to that .
Today , the markets are asking Europe not only to be determined to defend the euro area , but also to provide a clearer system of governance .
It is true , furthermore , that the Community approach normally gives more of a guarantee than an approach which is too often left up to the goodwill of the leaders .
( Applause )
We are now working in this direction on other projects , notably , this project on competitiveness and convergence , but that will be another debate for another day .
In any case , I believe that , on this matter , the Commission has adopted the right position : expressing a clear opinion in favour of this limited revision of the Treaty , while asking everyone to be more attentive to the need to avoid creating mechanisms which , as Mr Brok , for example , has said , could create divisions , because it is the Community institutions that can guarantee the Union as a whole , because the Commission takes actions for the euro area as well as for those Member States that are not in the euro area .
Let us therefore be attentive to this aspect .
Let us not , motivated by the need to respond to urgent challenges , now create issues which could bring up more significant problems for us in the future .
Let us guarantee a firmer governance while guaranteeing the union as a whole in the spirit which must , of course , be the spirit of the Union : the spirit of solidarity and responsibility .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , the necessary Treaty modification and the institutional debate that we are holding both demonstrate that , now the Treaty of Lisbon has been in force for just over a year , we can no longer resolve the challenges which the world is presenting us with by means of the Treaty as it currently stands .
That is exactly what today 's debate shows .
On the other hand , when we talk about the current Treaty , we are told that a wider debate about the Treaty is inconceivable and futile in the light of the situation in the Member States and , in particular in the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic .
That is the conflict which we currently find ourselves in .
We need more , but we will not be getting it from the Member States .
The European Parliament must provide an answer .
If we listen to what the citizens are saying today , it is clear that they are aware that we need to introduce changes to the Treaty now .
They are asking questions like : ' How are we going to get the markets under control in the near future ? ' .
This is why we need a strong Europe .
However , we must ask ourselves an even more important question , which is : What good is our European project doing at the end of the day ?
For decades , it has been responsible for peacekeeping and for bringing war on our continent to an end .
This morning , I was host to a group of visitors from a school .
For young people , war is , thank goodness , no longer an issue .
They cannot imagine what war might be like .
In our discussions , we now raise the threat of globalisation and explain that we need Europe to keep the evil of globalisation under control , but this is a negative argument .
If we want to win over not only the minds , but also the hearts of the people , we must take a step further on the question of what good the European project is doing .
We must talk about the pictures and ask ourselves what Europe is achieving and what its job is .
When the powerful countries in the world come together , including America , Japan , Europe , Brazil , India and so on , who will raise their hand and ask whether we are paying enough attention to social issues ?
China will not do so .
We will have to do that ourselves .
Who will raise their hand and say ' We need to think about environmental questions ' ?
The Americans will not do that .
We will have to highlight the issue .
Who will say ' We want to maintain peace throughout the world and ensure that conflicts do not turn into wars ' ?
We will have to do this with our historical experience .
If we look at Tunisia , it is clear that the people there want the same model which we have in Europe .
We have a highly attractive way of life .
Therefore , when we discuss Treaty issues , when we talk about the way in which our continent functions and the job that we have to do , we must look at the big picture , so that we win not only the minds , but also the hearts of people for our project .
Then , we will succeed in gaining acceptance for it at a national level .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Weber for taking my question , which I would hope that perhaps President Barroso might also answer , because it is primarily directed at him .
I support the intention behind this Treaty change .
Like others , I am concerned about the mechanism .
But the simplified procedure provides that all national parliaments , all 27 national parliaments , must acquiesce at least in the adoption of this Treaty change .
National parliaments are given six months to decide what they may do .
We are talking about adopting a decision in March , a Council decision that was made in December .
How can that possibly be the case ?
Surely they have to wait until June to make that decision ?
( DE ) Mr President , on the one hand , it is important that the Member States are in control of the treaties , which is why the modification must take place at this level .
On the other hand , we are faced with the question which is implicit in many of the questions that I have attempted to address .
Are we reflecting carefully on this , are we taking enough time and being allowed enough time to discuss everything in detail ?
Or are people 's expectations so high and the pressure of the global challenges so great that we need to be quicker and to act more quickly ?
For this reason , I do not regard the issue of time as a problem , but we do need to provide answers .
We must focus on that .
The next speaker on the list is Mr Martin Schulz , from whom I have received a letter .
If there is any misunderstanding over the order on the list , I can explain it after our debate .
( DE ) Mr President , it is a letter addressed to you personally , not to the Chamber .
Treaty modifications are always complex , even simplified ones .
What we are discussing here shows that we are in an extremely difficult situation .
The term ' simplified procedure ' conceals the fact that it is possible for this type of procedure to fail .
It can fail here and also elsewhere .
We have been told that if it fails , we will be in a very difficult position .
Therefore , we need to ask ourselves once again what we can do to ensure that it does not fail .
It is true that we are being listened to .
Whether just the ratification procedure fails or also the euro project as a whole will depend on the determination of the Heads of Government to take coherent and united action .
A lot of valid remarks have already been made in this respect .
I would like to add three points which are of fundamental importance .
Today , a year after the start of this serious crisis , I would like to ask you what the external value of our currency is .
The answer to that question is USD 1.35 .
When the euro was first introduced , the same figure was USD 1.17 .
Now it has reached USD 1.35 .
The value of an international currency is based on its external value .
Over the last year , the external value of the euro has been highly stable .
However , the internal structure of the euro is not at all stable .
This is because of the wildly ambiguous attitude and the double standards of the Heads of State or Government .
The problem is not that Europe cannot act in a consistent way .
After all , the instruments are in place .
The problem is that Europe cannot agree on a consistent procedure .
When we say that Europe cannot agree , we should also add ' not those of us here ' .
It is not the European Parliament or the Commission ; it is the governments of the sovereign Member States which have created a strong monetary area that is able to take external action , but which are not prepared to create the self-contained , internal instruments needed to establish a strong economic and social policy and a strong government policy alongside the strong currency .
That is the crucial point .
Secondly , everything that happens in Europe takes place in the context of the treaties .
However , when something happens within the treaties and we do not want to create something arbitrarily outside the bounds of the treaties , because some people are considering doing this , it is clear to the European Parliament that the institution at the heart of this must be the central institution within the framework of the treaties , namely the Commission .
The democratic legitimacy of our actions at European level , in direct relation to the European Parliament , is determined by the Commission .
This is why what you have explained is right , in the same way as what the rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , have also said .

My third point is that the risk for Europe lies in the fact that it is strong when it acts in a consistent way as the largest economic area in the world , with 500 million inhabitants , but if it allows itself to break down into 27 individual parts , it becomes irrelevant .
Regrettably , this became clear during the events on the other side of the Mediterranean .
If Europe does not take a consistent line , then it has no role to play .
If it takes a consistent line , then with its social and economic model , it will become the engine of the global economy and an influential partner on the international political stage .
The issue that we are discussing in the context of this simplified procedure concerns whether Europe has a future or whether it will break down into individual states and descend into unimportance and irrelevance .
That is the point which we are debating .
( CS ) Mr President , whatever our relationship is to the single currency , the euro , I believe it is in the interests of everyone living in the EU that the euro and the euro area develop in a stable way , whether we use it or not , as our economies are interlinked to an enormous extent .
Nevertheless , when President Barroso described the European stability mechanism , he used words such as improved supervision , expansion of economic coordination , coordination of budgetary policies and harmonisation of social policies .
Ladies and gentlemen , this opens the way to the creation of fiscal union , and economic history shows us that fiscal union never survives long without the creation of political union .
The minor change we are discussing today is therefore a massive change for the individual Member States of the EU .
The European Union is being politically transformed for the future .
Mr Weber said that ' European citizens want to see a stronger Europe ' .
We have known that here the whole time .
Let us ask them , because European citizens have , for decades , simply accepted , and not decided , what happens in European institutions .
Mr President , a new stability mechanism is proposed .
In the election campaign in Ireland , those parties likely to form the new government are promising a major renegotiation of the existing EU-IMF austerity plan , lessening its severity .
But this is mere speculation and it is unjust and anti-democratic that the Irish people are asked to vote for a fog of conjecture .
I wanted to ask Mr Barroso , as President of the Commission , not to intervene in the Irish election campaign , but to vindicate the democratic right of the Irish people to factual information and to the truth .
Commissioner Rehn said yesterday that renegotiation of the EU-IMF deal appeared to be possible , but I have four specific questions .
Firstly , is renegotiation possible immediately on a new government taking office in Ireland and before the new mechanism of 2013 ?
Secondly , would this mean substantial reductions in the brutal levels of interest charged ?
Thirdly , would the financial speculators be forced to take their own losses rather than crucifying the Irish people ?
Fourthly , does he understand that only a renegotiation that reverses cuts and provides substantial public investment in jobs will resolve our crisis in Ireland , while more cuts and austerity will wreck our society ?
Mr President , well , here we go again .
The failed political project that is the euro has led us to amend the Lisbon Treaty twice in its short life .
We should remember , of course , that the Lisbon Treaty was bludgeoned through the referendum in Ireland .
The Irish people said ' no ' but they were lied to ; they were told that their economy would be protected , but they were misled , and now , as the European Union does when it encounters a problem , it does not take a step back to ask ' what have we done wrong ? '
No , you want further integration and you want the small states to suffer more .
You wish to fine them if they get into further difficulties , which will then put them in more difficulties and make them more subject to your European empire .

I want to say this to Mr Barroso : yes , the UK may have a debt problem , but it is not helped by having to bail out eurozone countries like Ireland when we have had to borrow the money to do that in the first place .
Mr President , changing the Treaty is not something we should enter into lightly , especially given the fact that the Lisbon Treaty took considerable work and negotiation .
Therefore , this Parliament and the Council must be very restrained in how we now set about amending it .
This change is necessary in order to protect weaker eurozone economies .
However , the positions of those Member States who are not part of the euro must also be upheld .
This Treaty change will not solve the failure of Member States to live up to their agreements under the Stability and Growth Pact .
It will not solve the underlying problems of huge public deficits , nor will it make the EU more competitive on a global stage .
It is merely a stop-gap measure that should give us more time to get the individual eurozone and our collective houses in order .
Each of the EU Member States needs to look at its own public spending and tax policies and devise realistic programmes to reinvigorate our economies .
One line of text added into an international agreement , although necessary , will be no substitute for real reform and prudence .
Therefore , a real strategy for global competitiveness needs to emerge .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all the participants in the debate and the Members of the European Parliament for their clear support for a communitarian approach , for a strong European Union , and for an appropriate role in the future mechanism which we are discussing today .
Our opinion was very clear , which is that we fully support the creation of the European stabilisation mechanism and see it as a very important part of the mosaic for a stronger and more economically prosperous Europe .
We are working on increased supervision of financial markets , on better economic governance , with our six legislative proposals on the table .
We started the first European semester with our annual growth survey , and this should be the last piece of the puzzle .
I also think that with this and with our debate today , and what I believe will be a positive decision in March , we are sending very clear signals to all those who are betting against the euro .
If you bet against the euro , you will lose your money .
That is a very important message to send out .
Therefore , the decision on this issue will be absolutely crucial , but I know that for this House , it is also very important that we respect fully the competences of the Union , we respect fully the prerogatives and role of the Union 's institutions .
Of course , the Commission will definitely see to it that European law is always respected .
As we stated in our opinion , the Commission also stands ready to use its expertise in handling these mechanisms , because I believe that they should be in full coherence with improved economic governance , especially as regards the coordination and surveillance of economic and financial policies in the Member States , in particular , those of the eurozone .
Some of you have been concerned that we should not create a two-tier Europe .
I think that the Commission 's position on this is also very clear : even though the primary responsibility for the euro currency remains with the eurozone Member States , it is very clear that any future cooperation mechanism must be open to others and that all the work we are doing to increase competitiveness and convergence must be for all 27 Member States .
So I believe that the process which we are going through , and in which financial markets also played a role in accelerating our integration , in accelerating our cooperation in the field of economic governance , should be very much welcomed , because it is definitely making our Union stronger .

I would like to thank particularly the two rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , for their close cooperation , for the ideas which have been brought to the table , and for the consultations which the Commission has with the two rapporteurs on an ongoing basis .
I believe that their good work will lead to a report which will be approved by this House in time , before the decision of the European Council is taken .
My last remark is to Mr Higgins from Ireland .
He very correctly pointed to the quote from Commissioner Rehn , stating that the agreement was struck with Ireland - not with the government but with Ireland as a country .
Of course , we expect that any future government would respect the deal .
Having said that , it is very clear and it is very obvious that the Commission is very sympathetic to the current difficulties that Ireland is going through and will do its utmost to support a swift return to growth in Ireland .
The European institutions - be it the European Union , the Commission , or the European Central Bank , or indeed the IMF - have contributed a lot to stabilising the situation in Ireland .
I am sure that all together , we will do our utmost to bring back growth and prosperity to Ireland as well .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
This debate has made it clear that the European Commission is committed to continuing along the road on which it started out with the undemocratic way of gaining approval for the Treaty of Lisbon .
It should be remembered that , following the rejection of the so-called European constitution by the citizens of France and the Netherlands , the leaders of the European Union did everything they could to avoid further referenda .
Even after the first rejection from Ireland , they exerted every possible pressure in order to ensure that , after some time had passed , a new referendum took place .
Now , some months having passed since the new Treaty entered into force , here they are , once again , trying to change things quickly without any kind of public debate , for fear of the reactions of citizens of the various Member States of the European Union , in particular , those which are suffering the consequences of increasingly neoliberal policies .
Now , they wish to make recourse to the so-called ' simplified procedure ' in order to hide the fact that they are , in fact , changing an important issue which is linked to constitutionalisation , with a view to its transformation into a permanent fund , of the European Financial Stability Fund , with the inadmissible conditions contained in the so-called competitiveness pact and its severe consequences upon social policies : the devaluation of salaries and pensions , and the increase in retirement age .
State of European asylum system , after the recent decision of the European Court of Human Rights ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the state of the European asylum system , following the recent decision of the European Court of Human Rights .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the European Court of Human Rights ruling of 21 January on the case of M.S.S. versus Greece and Belgium clearly showed that the EU urgently needs to establish a common European asylum system and that we need to support Member States in meeting their obligation to provide adequate international protection .
The Commission has always said that in the application of the EU acquis - and the Dublin regulation is an important element of the current EU acquis on asylum - Member States are never discharged of the obligation to ensure the protection of fundamental rights .
The European Court of Justice recalled that principle in its judgment .
The judgment does not affect the underlying principles of the functioning of the Dublin system : to have a clear system to identify which Member State is responsible , to examine an asylum application , to guarantee effective access to the procedures of determining refugee status , and to prevent abuse of asylum procedures in the form of multiple applications .
However , the evaluation of the Dublin system made by the Commission has shown that there is room for improvement .
Already in 2008 , the Commission proposed a revised Dublin regulation to address the identified gaps .
It aimed to increase both the standards of protection for the asylum applicants concerned , as well as the level of efficiency of the Dublin system for the benefit of the Member States .
I welcome the European Parliament 's strong support for the Commission proposals and I invite the Council and the European Parliament to work together for a balanced compromise leading to an improved Dublin 2 regulation .
Such a compromise must also include an emergency mechanism for suspension of transfers in situations of exceptional and particular pressure on the asylum system as a matter of last resort .
It would provide a common , comprehensive solution to cases which today are treated in a discretionary manner in order to build more trust and a genuine support between the Dublin partners .
The Commission has been aware of the deficiencies of the Greek asylum system , which is confronted with exceptional pressure due to high numbers of mixed migration flows on its territory and the lack of a proper functioning national asylum system .
We have already taken steps to review them .
The Commission initiated infringement proceedings against Greece in November 2009 , setting out concerns about various provisions of EU law .
Greece itself has committed to reforming its asylum system , based on an action plan submitted to the Commission in August last year setting out immediate and long-term measures .
Since then , important legislative developments have taken place in Greece .
At the same time , the Commission is engaged in substantial efforts towards assisting Greece , together with the Member States , the UNHCR and EU agencies .
This support combines significant financial and practical assistance for the reform of the national asylum system , border and return management , and more efficient use of the EU funds for migration management and also better cooperation with neighbouring countries , in particular , Turkey .
Let me finish by recalling that our Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity , freedom , democracy , equality , the rule of law and respect for fundamental rights .
Asylum is one of the human rights which the European Union is committed to respecting and promoting .
The Commission is firmly committed to working towards a fair , efficient and protection-oriented common European asylum system .
That is the best way to jointly uphold human rights as one of the important pillars of the area of freedom , justice and security .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , asylum policy is a highly topical issue , as we have recently discovered in Lampedusa and in Greece .
It is a subject that concerns the people of Europe .
We should be proud of what we have achieved in Europe , including our common standards , the proper processing of asylum applications and our way of dealing with children and families .
We should be proud of all of this .
Europe is an area which offers help and partnership to people suffering persecution all over the world .
However , the decisive factor is not what we put on paper in Parliament 's committees , in the Commission and in the Council , but what actually happens on the ground .
Belgium and Greece have recently been condemned by the European Court of Human Rights for not implementing and not adhering to existing legislation .
This makes it clear that the enforcement process is not working .
I would like to ask the Commission to make faster progress , alongside its existing action plans .
We need to be able to put in place and implement the important standards more quickly within the European Union .
In the specific case of Greece , I would like to point out that we have a border that can be secured from both sides .
I am disappointed in the way our partner , Turkey , has behaved in this respect .
We have signed a readmission agreement with Turkey , which requires the country to do far less than it would have to if it were a member of the European Union .
Therefore , I think we should expect Turkey to make a greater effort in this area .
No one disputes our sense of solidarity .
We want to provide practical help in the form of the European Refugee Fund and Frontex , both in the case of Greece , where aid is already being provided , and in the case of Lampedusa in Italy .
European solidarity is not being called into question .
It is needed now more than it ever has been .
Mr President , as the Court judgment has illustrated , we are all trapped in Dublin II .
As a result of the unequal distribution of responsibility , Member States have been in an argument about who is responsible and complaints have been flying back and forth for years now , with the unfortunate refugees trapped in the middle .
Recently , 90 % of immigrants and asylum seekers in Europe have arrived via Greece .
Now , with Algeria , the pressure has shifted to Italy .
How long are certain parties going to insist on pretending that this is a Greek , Italian , Maltese or Cypriot problem ?
Our borders are the European borders .
Our development policy , our foreign policy , or rather the lack thereof , are European issues .
My country has recently made huge steps towards improving the asylum situation , with solid assistance from the European Commission .
However , this is obviously not enough .
The new Dublin regulation must put a stop to mass returns to the first Member State .
Proper , fundamental solidarity must be established between the Member States .
That is what Parliament has called for .
The time has come for some members of the Council to stop playing Pontius Pilate and washing their hands .
Mr President , the ruling by the European Court of Human Rights makes it clear that Belgium and Greece have contravened Articles 3 and 13 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Thus , both of these countries are guilty of inhuman and degrading treatment of an Afghan asylum seeker as he was transferred from Belgium to Greece .
Unfortunately , this case is not at all unique .
However , the ruling by the European Court of Human Rights is precedential and therefore important .
As Parliament 's rapporteur for the review of the Dublin II regulation , I welcome this ruling .
It demonstrates , with the clarity that is required , that all Member States must stop transferring people to Greece while the situation there continues to be as it is today .
It also demonstrates the need for European solidarity .
If we are serious about creating a common asylum system by 2012 , we need to share the responsibility and help each other .
I would like to ask the Commission whether this ruling changes the Commission 's view of the Dublin system as a cornerstone of the common asylum system and I would like to know whether the Commission has access to the statistics that indicate the grounds on which the Member States base their transfer decisions .
It is important that we avoid more cases like this one .
Parliament has a clear view on the Dublin regulation and we are now waiting impatiently to be able to start the negotiations .
Our priorities are the issue of custody , the solidarity mechanism , the rights of minors and stronger provisions regarding judicial remedy .
I look forward to your response , Mrs Malmström , and to the continuation of our excellent cooperation .
Mr President , the question is : so , what do we do , now that the European Court of Human Rights ( ECHR ) has said , ' You must not send any more asylum seekers back to Greece ' ?
The Minister for Justice in my country , the Netherlands , came up with a proposed solution .
He said : ' We will take very rapid action to help the Greeks monitor their borders more strictly , set up their asylum system , and then we can just send any Dublin claimants back to Greece ' .
Of course , that is not , ultimately , any solution , at all .
Because , in this House , all the parties , right across the political spectrum , have said that we need to introduce a solidarity clause into the Dublin system .
If that does not happen , southerly countries will always have a harder deal than my own country , on the North Sea , which does not see so very many refugee boats landing on its shores .
From the influx of immigrants into Lampedusa , Commissioner , we can see that , even if you are capable of working very hard to monitor your borders , you also have to be prepared for unexpected events .
Do you agree with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance that the Dublin system is now in tatters and when can we can see some momentum towards changing the Dublin system ?
Do you agree with us here that what goes around comes around and that the northerly countries are now being forced to show solidarity ?
I would also like to hear your opinion on last week 's ruling of the Court in Strasbourg , which states that the number of Rule 39 cases , that is , applications for the suspension of deportation , increased by 4 000 % last year , because people can see that Dublin is just not working .
The last thing I would say is that , in the case between Maritime Support Services ( MSS ) and the Belgian authorities , the final findings were that the Belgian authorities were at fault .
They had to pay the greatest financial claim .
They were negligent . When can we expect changes to the Dublin system , so that these people are no longer exposed to inhuman conditions ?
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( NL ) Mr President , Mrs Sargentini , why did I not hear you say that it is Turkey which is behaving badly , by allowing all those people to enter Turkey in the first place ?
Why did I not hear you say that the over-complex European asylum legislation is being abused by so many people , by people traffickers and fortune seekers , solely and utterly because it is too complicated .
Why are you not saying that ?
( NL ) Thank you , Mr President , for giving me the opportunity to answer this question .
I think that we should first look for the beam in our own eye .
Europe has made a mess of its own asylum system .
As long as we continue to do that and as long as we remain unwilling to help Greece get the asylum seekers off its back , once and for all , and to ensure that we all have a uniform procedure for assessing whether or not someone is a genuine political refugee , we will never be in a position to shift the blame onto others .
I agree with you , Mr Madlener , that human traffickers should be arrested and that Turkey really should set up a decent asylum system , a system that recognises political refugees who do not come from the European Union , but from elsewhere .
Having said that , I would first look for the beam in our own eye and put our own house in order .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would say to the Commissioner that it is clear we are dealing with a system which is broken .
What is clear is that the European courts and European legislation are in conflict .
We are no longer dealing with a situation where a law is being implemented , but rather it is being interpreted in a novel way .
I believe that the European Union is best equipped to deal with the challenges of immigration through a nuanced system which is not dictatorial , not through more harmonised European legislation or the moral rulings of the European courts , but instead through solidarity , cooperation and good communication among European neighbours .
We must be mindful that whatever burden is relieved in one place is not just moved to another .
Of course , we have a duty to other EU Member States and to people seeking a safer and a freer life , but the recent Court ruling points at larger problems , which are the relationship between the European courts , European legislators and the Member States and their control of their own borders .
Commissioner , I would be interested to know how the Commission is attempting to confront these issues in the long term .
Could you please reassure this House that we will not just turn to the creation of more EU legislation , which no doubt at some point in the future will itself be overturned by a European court , but instead tell us how we can effectively support Greece and other Member States that are currently operating under such burdens ?
Mr President , first of all , a word of thanks and support for Commissioner Malmström .
She rightly called on Member States last week to take action again on the whole asylum package .
Indeed , it is not an à la carte menu .
The sudden influx of Tunisian refugees is fresh evidence of this .
Italy is having the greatest of difficulties in ensuring that proper reception and asylum procedures are followed .
If the other Member States continue to just stand by and watch , it will only be a matter of time before the European Court of Human Rights concludes that the transfer of asylum applications to Italy should be suspended , as , in fact , it did in the case of Greece .
It is therefore in everybody 's interests that we develop an emergency procedure within the framework of the Dublin system , as indeed the Commission proposed , and that we quickly put in place ​ ​ binding agreements on reception and a high quality asylum procedure .
I would like to hear from the Commissioner whether she thinks that the relevant MEPs could be of further assistance to her , in terms of persuading the Member States to finally take this much-needed action .
In any case , she can count on my commitment .
( NL ) Mr President , the Netherlands is once again having to clean up Greece 's mess !
First , Dutch taxpayers had to pay billions of euro to bail out this nearly bankrupt country , and now we are saddled with two thousand asylum seekers from Greece whom we are not allowed to send back .
The Netherlands does not want those asylum seekers .
The Netherlands has suffered enough , and continues to suffer , from mass immigration and the failed multicultural experiment .
The Netherlands wants fewer immigrants who have no prospects and Europe has to start pursuing a much more stringent immigration policy .
Otherwise , Europe will end up becoming Eurabia .
However , Greece is also the victim of its bad neighbour , Turkey .
Greece should therefore build a wall to keep out Turkish emigrants and emigrants which Turkey is allowing to transit its territory .
We should punish Turkey , of course , for providing illegal immigrants with a passage to Greece .
Finally , the European asylum legislation should be a great deal more stringent .
Let us be honest : 99 % of asylum seekers are , in fact , not asylum seekers at all , but economic fortune seekers abusing our asylum laws .
( EL ) Mr President , I shall continue the debate with the following hypothesis : we have seen the unrest in the Mediterranean and Arab countries .
We know that many citizens of these countries hope to find a better fate in Europe .
This is already a fact of life and I fear that the hypothesis I am about to develop will soon become another fact of life .
Citizens leave these third countries for Europe .
They arrive in Lampedusa - we have seen the problems that have arisen there - or try to reach Greece via Turkey , exploiting the facility not to apply for a visa based on the agreements which many of these third countries have with Turkey .
Others go to Malta , some probably go to Portugal and Spain .
Then some of them apply for asylum .
It goes without saying that here again , Dublin II will be applied .
We know that , even though some asylum seekers then appeal on these issues , again there will be convictions , just as we have had to date , by national courts , before we even get to a European Court ruling .
So let us not pretend otherwise .
Then there is this : some are arrested and will not be entitled to asylum .
I am sure you know that , based on the agreement on which the Commission has just announced the end of negotiations , in order for those who enter via Turkey to be returned to Turkey under readmission , we will need to wait two years for the agreement to apply plus three years , which is the transitional period for third country nationals , giving a total of five years .
In other words , those arrested during that period , based on the crisis we are facing , will need to wait until 2016 or 2017 for Turkey to take them back .
Allow me to say that , with this sort of management , I fear that Europe is not up to the job at the moment .
( FR ) Mr President , I think that it is always useful to remind ourselves of a number of commitments , and particularly the one made in October 2008 , via the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which announced that it was time to take new initiatives to complete the introduction of a common European asylum system , and thus to offer a higher level of protection within the European Union .
More than two years after this promise , the Commission 's proposals are on the negotiating table .
One cannot help but notice , however , that this European asylum system and the harmonisation process are struggling somewhat to see the light of day .
The recent decision of the European Court of Human Rights is an important turning point , in my opinion .
Obviously , it highlights the failures of the Greek asylum system , but it also sends a strong message at a time when Greece is starting to reform its asylum system and , at the same time , to take other types of initiatives .
Aside from this particular situation , however , this decision more generally calls into question the European asylum system as a whole , particularly regarding one of its fundamental components - the Dublin regulation - and its main premise , the equivalence of national asylum systems within the Union .
This decision shows how , paradoxically , the common European asylum system has created a kind of injustice , both for asylum seekers and for the Member States .
Following this decision , clear measures are now needed immediately .
Pending an operational asylum system in Greece , the Member States must suspend returning asylum seekers to Greece and use the sovereignty clause of this regulation which allows them to take responsibility for examining an application .
The European Court of Human Rights ' ( ECHR ) decision also sends a signal to all parties concerned .
I think that this decision should serve as a catalyst in the process of harmonisation and redrafting , in particular , when it comes to the Dublin regulation .
First of all , this is , of course , about the mechanism for suspending transfers that I have just mentioned , which is being proposed by the Commission .
The ECHR 's decision sheds new light on this mechanism , on the one hand , and on intra-European solidarity , on the other .
The suspension should restart discussions on the need for a suspension mechanism , as I mentioned , under conditions which are clearly specified .
Secondly , aside from this mechanism , the suspension must also serve as a lever - or at least , I hope it will - to provide support , during the negotiations , for the other amendments to the regulation that are being proposed by the Commission , as well as those on the guarantees given in this instrument , among others .
Finally , the suspension by the ECHR should allow us to start thinking about the inherent vulnerability of the situation that asylum seekers find themselves in .
It should also make it necessary to bring in an appeal mechanism to suspend transfer of asylum seekers who are subject to a transfer decision resulting from the application of the Dublin regulation .
Today , many of the warning lights are red ; they are telling us that it is time to reform this regulation and to construct a true common asylum system founded on solidarity and responsibility .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström , we are talking today about the judgment passed by the European Court of Human Rights .
This is ultimately about Belgium , but it concerns every Member State of the European Union .
Germany has also decided no longer to send asylum seekers back to Greece .
As one of my fellow Members has mentioned , we must ask ourselves whether we want to build walls around Europe or whether we want to maintain and develop the right to asylum , something which I , as a Liberal , strongly support .
However , this also means that we must give every asylum seeker the chance of a properly organised process .
We must realise that it is unfair and shows a lack of solidarity if we allow the southern countries to bear the entire burden alone .
Because of their geographical position , these countries have been exposed to an increased influx of refugees .
In Lampedusa , this is because of current events in Tunisia .
However , this is also an ongoing situation which the local asylum authorities cannot cope with .
The recent liberalisation with regard to Kosovo also resulted in a huge influx of asylum seekers into Germany just a few weeks ago .
We also had the problem that we could not initially process all the applications properly .
Therefore , if we really want to retain this right to asylum , we must restructure the system to ensure that it offers greater solidarity in future .
Dublin II cannot continue in its current form .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Afghan citizen referred to in the judgment of the Court of Human Rights was not an immigrant , was not abusing the system and was not a victim of human trafficking .
Moreover , he was not covered by the Geneva Convention because he was not persecuted .
He was an asylum seeker , so he would have had subsidiary protection and international protection .
The judgment is therefore important due to the precedent that it sets .
How many people could be awaiting judgments having appealed against denied asylum applications ?
How many people could apply for compensation due to delays in proceedings ?
What would happen if there were more than a thousand judgments by the Court of Human Rights against Member States ?
What would happen to Europe 's reputation ?
Can we continue to consider ourselves to be champions of fundamental rights if we treat asylum seekers who are fleeing wars worse than if they were criminals ?
Commissioner , asylum seekers can be awaiting proceedings in detention centres - if they are refugees or receiving subsidiary protection - for up to seven months , with no procedural rights .
Is this humane ?
The asylum package has been stalled for too long , and the common asylum system does not exist , Mr Weber .
Nor do all the Member States have the same procedures .
There is a lack of solidarity , which is the cause of the situation that we are experiencing .
The Afghan citizen was compensated for non-material damage , not based on the Dublin regulation , but how much compensation can be applied for due to non-material damage by those fleeing wars who spend years going back and forth between camps ?
We are tired of talking about abuse and traffickers .
Will it not be the case that we want to look the other way and deny the existence of a situation that we seek to deny time and time again ?
Dublin can indeed be perfected , but a great deal more needs to be done .
This is urgent , Commissioner .
( MT ) Mr President , the European Court decision is not so much a condemnation against Belgium or Greece as it is as condemnation against the Dublin regulation , because it was that very Dublin regulation that allowed Belgium to transfer an Afghan person back to Greece .
This is not fair .
It is not fair that the border countries shoulder the burden single-handedly , because - let us be frank - the border countries are not there to act as police officers or border guards for the rest of the European Union countries .
Therefore , in the wake of the decision handed down by the European Court of Justice , it is now clear that when a European country transfers an asylum seeker back to another European country that is under enormous pressure , it goes against the European Convention on Human Rights .
Countries like Germany and the United Kingdom have already begun to recognise this and have suspended the transfers .
However , what we need is for the Dublin regulation to be amended without delay .
( EL ) Mr President , the reason I feel the need to speak at today 's sitting is because the question of Cyprus and the immigration problem we face has not been raised .
Cyprus , a small state with a population of half a million , has a daily influx of immigrants , who cross the Green line from the occupied areas in numbers of 30 to 50 a day , out of a population of half a million .
We have no detention centres for asylum seekers .
As a result , if their application is rejected , we cannot send them back at the end of the day to the country they came from .
They enter via the occupied areas , most destroy their papers and basically , these immigrants stay on the island .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström , we definitely do not need walls to resolve the asylum problem .
A proposal was made to erect a wall , which is why I have chosen to speak .
Anyone who says something of this kind has completely failed to understand European values .
For us , this is all about protecting fundamental rights and human rights .
We cannot say about people who have fled from their country and sought asylum in Europe , for whatever reason , and about people who have voluntarily climbed into an overcrowded boat and put their lives at risk : ' We want to send these people back before they have even arrived ' .
We need sensible asylum processes for these people which function properly .
We cannot leave the southern European countries , where these people arrive , to cope with the problem alone .
I agree completely with my colleague , Mrs Hirsch , on that point .
From another perspective , it is wrong to say that we want all these people to stay outside Europe and we do not want to take them in .
Demographic change is taking place in Europe and in future , we will need integration and also asylum seekers who want to stay here .
This is not just an issue of humanity , but also of common sense .
For this reason , we need to come up with solutions to this problem quickly .
( DE ) Mr President , according to the judgment passed by the European Court of Human Rights , the asylum system in Greece is inhumane .
This is because it can take up to five years to come to a final decision .
However , the procedures all over Europe take a long time , because lies are being told , papers are being burnt or forged , decisions are ignored and the asylum system is quite simply being exploited and abused .
This is particularly true where there is no real reason for asylum and , after a process lasting years , the applicant suddenly claims the right of residence on humanitarian grounds .
In the light of the failed EU asylum system , we must finally be honest and admit that the EU cannot accept economic migrants from all over the world , particularly when , at the same time , it is spending billions of euro on development aid and support for democracy in the countries where these people come from .
We finally need a clear definition of the right to asylum , which is closely linked to the Geneva Convention , in order to bring an end to economic migration .
It must also include an obligation on the part of the asylum seekers to cooperate in the procedure .
This will remove the legal basis for deception on humanitarian grounds .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the progressive waiving of visas , on the one hand , and the fresh upsurge in migratory flows , on the other , mean that the asylum package really needs to take priority in the Council .
If supported by the Commission , this initiative would have the positive effect of regulating a complex issue and laying down a unitary strategy that enforces the decision we are negotiating today , as well as providing the opportunity to avoid transfers like those we have discussed today .
Obviously , we are in favour of protecting human rights , though also marrying this requirement with a rigorous verification of requirements .
Commissioner , since the situation has become unsustainable , we now need to begin the search for a positive set of rules and a clear regulatory framework .
This is an important step which I am sure , with your help , can be sent for Council assessment within a reasonably short period of time .
( FR ) Mr President , my question will be very short , as the debate has been very dense and I have the feeling that , apart from certain extreme elements , we share the same concern .
I would like to ask the Commissioner how she intends to counter the iconoclastic idea of erecting a wall between Turkey and Greece , even if this can be explained by the very strong pressure faced by this country , and even if , as some fellow Members have said , the conditions are particularly difficult for those who end up in detention centres .
Even though the Member States are free to make their own construction plans - even if this means constructing a wall , even if it is an unrealistic solution - we Europeans are particularly implicated , both cyclically , with what is happening on the island of Lampedusa and the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights , and structurally , with the situation of the countries in the South .
The time has therefore come to revisit the Dublin regulation urgently , so that we can take joint responsibility for these situations throughout Europe , showing solidarity and a humanistic approach .
We will only be able to do this by constructing a genuine European asylum law , something which is becoming more urgent than ever .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the values on which the European Union is founded - human rights and fundamental rights - cannot be put up for debate .
A judgment of the European Court requires urgent consideration and fast , effective action .
This judgment requires the development , definition and implementation of a unitary strategy and common commitment .
Asylum procedures must be dealt with immediately and in the best possible way .
However , Europe cannot abandon those border countries that find themselves managing emergency migrations which do not only affect them but also , by extension , the whole of Europe .
The border countries alone cannot bear all the responsibilities of the costs and organisation required to deal with asylum applications that often require a great deal of time and long and careful evaluations .
These timeframes and careful evaluations must not affect the dignity of the migrants , which must always be protected in any case .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all those who have contributed .
This ruling is extremely interesting , but it does not completely undermine the Dublin system as it is today .
This more or less works and , independent of the ruling , already obliges Member States to ensure that fundamental rights are respected .
Nevertheless , it points out some important issues and that is why we do need to reform the Dublin Convention and we need to improve it .
That is why the Commission has proposed improvements , and I am very happy to know that you are working on these and that you are also seeing the need to have some sort of emergency mechanism in this .
We support you fully in that regard .
We also need to accelerate our work to establish a common asylum system .
Most people here are agreed with that , and I am very grateful for the work you are doing .
The best way to achieve that is to go on with the work , to publish the reports and to encourage the Council to start negotiating .
There are too many differences between the Member States today and that is not sustainable .
In a common Union , with common values and a common application of international standards and conventions , there cannot be such differences as there are today .
People need to be treated in a decent way .
We need to ensure protection for the most vulnerable .
We need to have efficient systems so that people are not kept in detention for months , and sometimes years .
That is very painful for the individual and it is also very costly for society .
We need to improve that . Again , I can only encourage you and the Council to keep on working on this .
On Greece , the Commission is doing a lot to help .
The Greek Government is working with its action plan .
It is a very ambitious plan , but it has been clear from the beginning that this is not going to be solved over a weekend .
There are long-standing problems .
We are there to support and the fact that all Member States are involved in the Frontex operation , but have also offered different kinds of assistance - economic assistance or technical expertise , interpreters , administrative assistance - shows that there is true European solidarity .
We need to help Greece because Greece is under extreme pressure , and that is a European challenge as well .
Of course , Greece has the main responsibility .
It has done a lot , but needs to do more .
I am not convinced that a fence or a wall is a solution because there are other reforms that are much more important .
We are also working with EASO , the new asylum support office in Valletta . And we are working with UNHCR .
Lately , Turkey has shown itself to be constructive and cooperative .
We have finalised the negotiations on a readmission agreement after eight years .
I hope that the Member States will accept that when we have the next Council next week .
On the figures that Mrs Wikström asked about , the figures I have for the period 2009 and 2010 show that there were 16 328 requests to take charge or take back migrants addressed by Member States to Greece .
Of that number , 12 638 ( 77 % ) were accepted .
Nevertheless , Member States executed only 2 251 of these transfers , that is a bit less than 14 % .
I would like to thank you again for the support you are giving to the work we are trying to do with the asylum package .
The legislative acts are on the table .
Let us keep on working together - the Commission , Parliament and the Council - to get this done as soon as possible so that , finally , we have a common European asylum system .
The debate is closed .
Immediate EU measures in support of Italy and other Member States affected by exceptional migratory flows ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the immediate EU measures in support of Italy and other Member States affected by exceptional migratory flows .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for this very timely debate on a situation that deserves all our attention .
The Commission is following the situation very closely and Frontex has sent two experts to the scene .
Approximately 5 500 Tunisian migrants are reported to have reached Italian shores in the last couple of days , but the numbers have dropped a little bit in the last 24 hours .
Those arriving are mostly men in their thirties , but there are also 34 women and 108 children ; 27 facilitators of trafficking were identified .
These people arriving on Italian shores are causing exceptional pressure on the reception facilities of Italy , particularly in Lampedusa .
Last Saturday , we already started to have contact with the Italian Ministry of the Interior and we have also received a formal request for EU assistance .
We are ready to assist both Italy and Tunisia .
This is a matter of importance for the whole EU , not just a bilateral issue .
Even before the last developments , the Commission , together with Frontex , started to identify what can be done in the short and medium term .
The EU common response should be based on the principle of EU solidarity between Member States ; and we are ready to assist Italy .
But our approach should also be based on solidarity with Tunisia and its democratic transition .
This was also expressed by Lady Ashton when she visited the Tunisian authorities in Tunis yesterday , offering them political and financial support .
To assist Italy in these circumstances , we have identified a comprehensive series of concrete measures as well as quick financial assistance .
Financially , we are ready to mobilise extraordinary assistance , under the European Refugee Fund for 2011 , in addition to the funding already earmarked for Italy .
This should cover payments for accommodation , infrastructure , material aid , medical care , social assistants , counselling with judicial administrative asylum procedures , legal aid , language assistance , etc .
We can also mobilise quite quickly resources from EU funds such as the External Borders Fund and , if necessary , Italy can ask the new European Office for Asylum in Valetta to deploy teams of support to the national authorities dealing with the asylum requests .
Concerning the surveillance of external borders , a joint Frontex operation could be set up and I am in contact with Frontex .
I know preparations at technical level are being made .
As usual , such a joint debate will depend on Member States ' voluntary contributions of equipment .
I invite all Member States to show their support .
But let me reassure you on one point , referring to the debate we had just a few minutes ago : due to the different nature of sea / land border operations and a request to Member States to participate in a new joint operation , this will not compete with their contribution to the operation that we now have at the Greek land border .
This is , of course , also a priority .
I would like to underline that we must pay specific attention to vulnerable categories of persons in need of international protection .
Their needs must be taken into account and they must be able to access the special protection that they are entitled to , as provided by national and EU law .
With these concrete actions I have now mentioned , we are ready to meet and to engage with representatives of the Italian authorities to agree on details of each of these actions and the next steps .
Of course , a medium-term strategy must also be further developed .
In the particular context of migration flows , we need a combination of effective border management and a strategy for supporting democratic and economic transition .
In the short term , the Tunisian authorities should efficiently patrol the frontiers of their own country , at sea and along the coasts , to prevent smugglers , human traffickers and criminals who have escaped from prison from taking advantage of the situation .
It is also important that Tunisia takes back those who have reached the territory of EU Member States and are not in need of international protection .
Looking at a more structured intervention , we should also explore the possibilities of better targeting EU assistance by promoting projects that are able to support income- and job-generating activities in the different regions of Tunisia , and I refer particularly to the southern parts of the country .
More broadly , a coherent approach supporting political and economic development in Tunisia needs to include possibilities for these people to come to the EU legally , as well as the exchange of goods , services and know-how .
There is a wind blowing over the Mediterranean as a result of these popular revolutions .
This wind can bring many positive developments to Tunisia , to other countries , and to the EU .
The current situation in Lampedusa should not undermine our intention to offer assistance and support to these emerging democracies and the young generation that so passionately and peacefully has been able to achieve fundamental political changes .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , the humanitarian emergency in Italy and , in particular , on the island of Lampedusa - because this is what it is , a humanitarian emergency - compels us to act urgently .
I propose five steps .
Firstly , a veritable Marshall Plan for Tunisia and Egypt which would provide tangible help across the board but , at the same time , expect in return the full cooperation of the Tunisian authorities in blocking their coasts so as not to allow further illegal emigration by sea .
Secondly , we need the urgent deployment of a Frontex RABIT mission - a rapid border intervention team .
So , Commissioner , we do not just need two Frontex experts but a Frontex mission that must be sent there now .
Thirdly , we need to give Italy tangible help with the reception of the thousands of people who have landed in Lampedusa .
Quite frankly , Commissioner , I do not see how you can say that EASO will send its experts when this EU office is still not yet operating , so we will have to do it in another manner .
Fourthly , we need to help with the process of repatriation : immediate repatriation of people who do not qualify for asylum protection .
They should be sent back to Tunisia where they came from .
Finally , we need to bear in mind that in the Treaty , we have Article 80 , which clearly states that our immigration policy should be based on the principle of solidarity and on the just sharing of responsibility .
I think that it is about time that the Commission implemented this article .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that there is a large majority of Members of this House that welcome the democratic movements in Mediterranean countries as a challenge to European external policy and to its commitment to values , but also that there are many of us who know that these movements are not harmless .
They have humanitarian effects and an impact in terms of migratory pressure on neighbouring countries .
This is therefore the time to be reminded that the Treaty of Lisbon is in force , and Articles 67 , 77 , 78 ( 3 ) and 80 , as has just been said , state that shared solidarity and responsibility make this challenge a European one .
It is not only a shared challenge but a joint one , and therefore one that affects the European institutions .
It is time to say that no country is alone .
It is time to say that this is not an issue for Italy in Lampedusa , or for Malta , Greece or Spain .
No !
It is an issue for the European institutions .
It is also the time , however , to say that we are not talking about the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders , which is an operational agency , or about the European Asylum Support Office , but about the level of political decision making .
This means pointing out that the necessary resources need to be invested in development cooperation and assisting with the needs of these countries in terms of establishing and consolidating democracy .
The necessary resources also need to be invested , however , in assisting EU Member States with the challenge of primary care in response to immigration and with the challenge of managing the joint borders .
This is therefore the time to say that the Treaty of Lisbon has a whole programme to implement and that Parliament will be there to support it in tackling the challenge that we have before us .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start my speech with a statement supposedly made by the Italian Foreign Minister yesterday in Damascus , during which he said - listen to this - that Syria ' is a stable country in which the population 's desire for modernisation has been satisfied ' .
Meanwhile , a few days ago , Italy 's Interior Minister made another statement in which he shifted his responsibilities to Europe , which has allegedly abandoned Italy ' as usual ' , he added with a hint of mischief .
As usual , however , we are witnessing the habit of blaming Europe when it suits , only to ignore it irritably when Brussels disapproves of the agreement on sea repatriations , which violates humanitarian law and lines the pockets of African dictators - some of whom are today being toppled - and continuing even today to lavish billions on the Libya of Mr Gaddafi , or refusing EUR 10 million of aid offered to the Italian Government by the European Fund for Refugees , which Italy decided not to use , possibly because it would have to be spent in keeping with Europe 's transparent rules and not the in-house criteria of the Italian Civil Protection Agency .

Therefore , I think that we will achieve nothing by acting like this and by making these declarations .
The lesson of recent weeks has really not been learnt .
Lampedusa reminds us that history is stronger than certain political games and recourse to declarations that create illusions .
It reminds us that not everything can be bought with money , that Europe is not something that can be called upon when it suits , but is a project that must be committed to each day , demanding rights and solidarity but also respecting the commitments undertaken .
In order to slow down migration in a sustainable and purposeful way , five things are needed : democracy , development , respect for international law , European solidarity and also , above all , no prejudicial rhetoric .
Mr President , by restricting the title of this debate to support for Italy and other Member States , we are once again making the mistake of focusing only on the problems of the countries bordering on the Mediterranean .
What we are lacking is concern for those people who are fleeing across the sea .
If we really take our principles concerning the protection of refugees seriously , we must first make sure and , if necessary , check in individual cases what situation these people are in and then guarantee that their human rights will be protected .
We must not allow people to be turned away and our borders to be fortified .
The help which the EU border agency Frontex can offer in this situation is constantly referred to .
It is true that it could be helpful if it would focus its activities on protecting and rescuing refugees .
We must not turn away boats full of refugees as we have done in the past .
Here in Parliament , we are currently drawing up a new mandate for Frontex and I hope that we will succeed in introducing improvements , including more transparency and specific requirements for the agency to act in accordance with human rights .
Of course , we also need to help Tunisia quickly to structure its economy in such a way that the people there become more confident of having a chance of earning a decent living in their own country .
We must make it possible for Tunisia to achieve rapid and positive economic development by means of trade with the EU and subsidies for projects there .
This is one of the main requirements of the democratic transformation of Tunisia .
It is completely incomprehensible that once again , many Member States of the EU are leaving the countries bordering on the Mediterranean to cope with an unforeseen influx of refugees .
The call for voluntary action to help islands such as Lampedusa and Malta has fallen on deaf ears .
We must find a binding solution which requires states in the centre and the north of the EU to take in refugees .
The infrastructure is in place .
All that is lacking is the political will and the sense of solidarity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot , in truth , discuss the problem of Lampedusa without keeping one thing in mind : in Tunisia , under President Ben Ali , there was a law , which has still not been repealed , which made emigration a crime .
This means that it is not just an issue for Frontex because , after all , it is necessary to guarantee that these people will not be returned only to end up in a Tunisian prison , and it is necessary to persuade the new government to repeal this law .
However , above all , I believe that this reveals a fundamental unreality in our immigration policy , which is dependent on one person .
This person is not Mrs Malmström , nor is it Mr Barroso ; it is Mr Gaddafi .
If Mr Gaddafi falls , as I sincerely hope he does , what will we do about our principal buffer for immigrants from North and sub-Saharan Africa ?
Furthermore , this shows us that we have , at the moment , from Morocco to Syria , a 5 000 kilometre line along which the humanitarian risk has increased at every kilometre of the way , and that we have to prepare ourselves in a way which is perhaps without parallel in European history since 1956 in Hungary , for a refugee crisis .
This implies an end to codecision with regard to resettlement because we could have refugee camps on Europe 's borders if one of these revolutions goes badly - something which we hope will not happen - and put an end once and for all to the edifice of the policies on asylum in Europe and on shared relocation of asylum seekers within the countries of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we need to provide an immediate political response to these emergencies .
The urgent interventions requested by Italy are : 1 ) the transformation of Frontex from a coordination agency to an operative structure with its own people and resources ; 2 ) the implementation of the principle of burden sharing ; 3 ) the use of Europol for investigations on possible terrorist infiltrations and criminal organisation of the traffic in human beings ; and 4 ) the allocation of resources to deal with the emergency .
In any case , none of this will resolve the structural causes of the revolutions in the Maghreb , which all arise from the lack of genuine political parties , trade unions , associations , a free press and , above all , lack of respect for human rights .
In essence , the institutional tools that characterise true democracy and give the people a voice are missing .
Without them , there cannot be economic development , jobs , stability and security for all .
This is the real political challenge that Europe must face up to .
( NL ) Mr President , we have a real emergency in Europe .
At the moment , Europe is being flooded by a tsunami of Islamic immigrants from Barbary , North Africa .
Tens of thousands of fortune seekers , some of whom are hardened criminals or even terrorists , have already arrived in Lampedusa and there are hundreds of thousands who are on the verge of following suit .
The European border appears to be as leaky as a sieve .
Italy is failing to protect our external border and Frontex is being overtaken by events .
I would therefore call on the Council and the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , to convene an emergency meeting , in accordance with Article 28 ( 2 ) , at which the Council should take tough measures to call a halt to this immigration wave .
I would also advise Prime Minister Berlusconi not to ask us for money to help tidy up his mess and his rubbish or help keep immigrants out of his country .
Instead , he should spend a bit less time skirt-chasing and get to work sending all these immigrants back to Africa .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her efforts and for the efforts she will continue to make in dealing with this humanitarian emergency .
However , Commissioner , you know as well as I do that the real emergency is not the humanitarian one - which is only an after-effect - but the fact that , during this historic uprising across the whole of the Maghreb , Europe has appeared inadequate , which is to say , it has been unable to redevelop a strategy for the Mediterranean , as it has tried to several times and always failed .
The Lisbon Process has failed and the Union for the Mediterranean has failed miserably .
We do not have a proper view of the real problems at issue here .
We need to confront them together , but today the Council is not here .
We asked the Council to look at the issue of having a European strategy to deal not so much with the problem of immigration and illegal immigration , but rather the question of democracy and freedom across the whole Mediterranean area .
When the Soviet Bloc collapsed , presenting a united front , we all gave practical answers and easily dealt with the problem of the thousands of Poles who arrived on our streets , because we looked at the problem of integrating the whole of the East into Europe .
Regarding the Mediterranean , today we have nothing to say .
Instead , we must equip ourselves with a strategy , without which we will not be able to provide any answers .
We shall appreciate your good intentions and stop there .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( PT ) Mr President , please note , I can argue with you why it is that Europe has not had a response to its immigration problems .
I would say , principally , that it is because it has been looking for a policing response to a problem which is social , economic and political .
However , the question I wish to ask you relates to the question that was asked by my colleague , Mr Tavares .
Is it acceptable , in your opinion , that Frontex or other operational methods can repatriate Tunisians when the laws of Tunisia still state that people who are repatriated will go to prison ?
Alternatively , in the first place , is it necessary to guarantee some kind of diplomatic action to ensure that this law becomes null and void , in order that we may subsequently talk about other types of instruments such as those which I have just mentioned ?
( IT ) Mr President , thank you for the question .
I would point out that , just a few days ago , when I was on a mission to Tunisia with Mr Panzeri , the Chair of the Delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries , we noted that the provisional government is introducing profound changes to the legal system and to the laws governing this subject as a whole .
Based on the relations of trust between Europe and the new panorama taking shape in Tunisia , I believe we can take the first steps towards solving the problems that you put forward .
( FR ) Yes , it was the last speaker but two .
I wanted to ask my fellow Member how he acquired the belief that the people in Lampedusa are Islamists and delinquents , and whether he possesses any personal information allowing him to confirm this or whether it is , in fact , the result of his own fantasies .
( NL ) Mr President , surely it is common knowledge that the people from Libya who are arriving there are , for the most part , Islamic people , and that there are quite a few criminals , and even terrorists , amongst them ?
I assume that everyone here is aware of that , and if you were not aware of that , then you must be incredibly naïve .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are pleased to have this debate with the Commission on the North African migration crisis .
We have seen these people arrive in Lampedusa only to find no facilities able to receive and identify them .
In fact , the Italian Government dismantled the existing reception centre and reduced the facilities there some time ago , under the banner of ' Zero immigration ' , thus preventing Italy from being able to tackle illegal immigration .
We know that this problem concerns Italy , but it also concerns Europe .
Considerable financial investment is needed to solve it within a coordinated policy framework , while complying with international treaties and ensuring that refugees are protected .
In your response , Commissioner , I would like to know precisely when the Italian Government asked the European Commission to intervene , because there have been certain controversies , of which you are well aware .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over 5 000 immigrants have arrived in Italy in the last few hours , while another 100 000 are setting out for Italy , France and Germany .
The Tunisian Minister for Justice has confirmed that some 11 000 prisoners , terrorists and criminals are hiding amongst the illegal immigrants .
I submitted an urgent question to the Commission in advance so as to obtain an answer from Baroness Ashton - who , inexplicably , is not here today - and the Commission only agreed to pass it on today , and only because it was forced into a corner yesterday by Parliament .
This deafening silence is the most obvious sign of the lack of fibre shown by this Europe and its government , which is even afraid of taking a stand when faced with a humanitarian crisis that is raising serious humanitarian and security problems .
Half an hour , ladies and gentlemen , is all the time allowed for this democratic institution to debate an historic upheaval and its consequences for the people of Europe .
What should I tell my constituents who are afraid ?
What will the European Union do tomorrow - and I mean tomorrow ! - to deal with this terrible situation ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a remote island lost in the middle of the Mediterranean by the name of Lampedusa .
Back in 2008 , this island made the headlines because 40 000 refugees landed there in that year .
The problem was later resolved by an agreement - the so-called ' friendship treaty ' - signed by the Italian and Libyan governments .
Now we are facing the same situation again , but it is far more complicated this time , Mrs Malmström .
Peace , stability and new governments in Tunisia as well as in Egypt are the driving forces behind a storm that is whipping up the Mediterranean .
I am Sicilian and , unlike many Members who have spoken , I visited the former identification and expulsion centre .
That centre was useful at the time but , once the friendship treaty was concluded , it no longer had any reason to exist .
What can the Commission do , and what can Frontex do ?
Of course , we would all like to see the rapid intervention mission deployed in practice .
We want Frontex to be a flexible , streamlined , well-structured agency with its own financial resources , and Mr Busuttil and I are reviewing its mandate in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
In addition , Mr Mauro has asked the Council to act immediately and include the issue on its agenda without further delay , since it is an absolute priority , given that immigrants have also started arriving from Egypt now .
There is a real risk that the dignity and decorum of many refugees may suffer with the inevitable delays , although we are certain that Mrs Malmström will once again make sure her words are well received .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the current flood of migrants is a serious problem , and it is a European one .
What is needed is not complaints , however , but effective cooperation to tackle the current crisis in a constructive and far-sighted manner .
We must take action at two levels , and we will need broad shoulders to bear our responsibilities .
The first level concerns the immediate situation .
Additional funds must be made available to deal with the crisis ; we need at last to prepare a European round table , putting on the agenda the possibility of sharing out the immigrants fairly among the various countries ; and , lastly , we have to meet with the provisional Tunisian Government to demand that resources and instruments be put in place to stem the current exodus .
The second level is more strictly political in nature .
It is absolutely vital to radically review our neighbourhood policies .
Action is needed based on a renewed policy of economic , financial and social cooperation , an intelligent immigration policy , and effective support for the economic reforms and the democratic transition process under way in Tunisia .
It is only by taking such action that we will be able to tackle and solve the problems now facing Italy and Europe .
Commissioner , I am sure you will agree with us all that it really is time now to stop talking and start acting .
( ES ) Mr President , while not wishing to take the comparison between terrorism and immigration too far , I have observed that unfortunately , EU action is driven by emergency situations , such as a serious attack or a mass landing of immigrants , as is currently happening in Lampedusa , where the exodus of Tunisians to the Italian coast could culminate in a chronicle of a death foretold .
The voyage of hope could end up becoming a cursed voyage , and it will be on the consciences of all of us who witness these continuous uncontrolled influxes and do not say ' enough is enough ' with sufficient authority .
When it happens , we will throw up our hands in horror , but the following day we will forget about it .
Europeans have a duty and a right to know the truth : that the Mediterranean strategy is not working , that the common immigration policy will continue to be a dream until European countries commit to equipping the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders ( Frontex ) with sufficient resources to be effective .
Talking does not cost anything , but we need to act .
Do you really believe that Frontex is currently able to guarantee the security of the European borders ?
I do not believe it is .
Let us hope that the people of Egypt , Tunisia and other countries of the Maghreb do not decide en masse to seek a better future in Europe , but rather that they do so in their own countries , because that is what they have fought for , and we must help them .
Solidarity and responsibility are therefore required , along with , above all , truth when talking about a common European immigration policy , which is now more necessary than ever .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has long been like the Sleeping Beauty on matters of immigration , and we are now paying the price for the time wasted .
The fact is that immigration is still not a priority for the European Union or for all 27 Member States , but the burden is often left for the border countries to bear alone .
Developing a suitable Euro-Mediterranean strategy should also be a common goal , but in this case too , we have to admit that the Barcelona Process has , in fact , never taken off .
The fact is , Commissioner , that these are uncomfortable subjects .
Some Member States , such as Italy , Greece , Malta and so on , quite rightly have to deal with them and have a duty of solidarity , whereas most Member States stand on the sidelines as passive onlookers and confine themselves to just lecturing the others .
There is a great deal to do , then , on the legislative front in terms of funds and strengthening of instruments - I am referring to Frontex - but what is needed most of all is political will .
To conclude , Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Malmström and the entire Commission for precisely that : for assuring the Italian Government of its commitment - repeated again today - to tackle the humanitarian crisis in Lampedusa .
Mr President , the rapid developments in North Africa and the Middle East have shaken , I hope , our dolce far niente type of confidence that Europe is so prosperous and secure that it does not have to fear any major security challenge .
Only this time , time has the bad habit of not stopping , and what appears impossible today suddenly becomes a reality tomorrow .
The problem we are discussing is both technical and political .
Let me refer to the letter , which says that now , with the increasing numbers of refugees from North Africa in the wake of the current revolutionary developments there , the EU is caught between its public support for them and the quiet necessity to keep its gates closed .
All I want to say is that if we want to remain credible , the solution to our technical problem , which goes beyond money and police , should be consistent with our public pronouncements .
Therefore , harsh measures of the type some Members have recently taken against people from other EU Member States , if adopted , will only discredit the EU - this time not only internally , but also externally .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Commissioner for being so immediately willing and far-sighted in offering Italy assistance , although the assistance was rejected in the first instance by the Italian Government itself .
Commissioner , you have rightly stressed the need to support Tunisia at this time of democratic transition .
However , I wonder , and I ask you all : what has happened to the money that Europe has been pouring into Tunisia all these years and which it is still pouring into Libya , which - as we know - are democratic regimes ?
Therefore , it is now wonderful and amazing to cheer this awakening of the Tunisian people , although I wonder how on earth all that money was ever granted .
If the Libyans woke up tomorrow , what conclusion would we draw from that ?
Would we have thought yet again that we had been funding democratic regimes , only to realise the next day that we had been implementing a disastrous policy instead ?
I ask myself , Commissioner , how on earth Europe has kept quiet about this democratic awakening , while only the United States has offered strong guidance in this respect .
I would like to pick up on what Mr Portas and Mr Tavares said .
They pointed out , extraordinarily , that in countries like Tunisia , emigration is viewed as a crime .
To begin with , regarding all the people who have landed on Lampedusa - and I would remind Mr Madlener that they are not Libyans but Tunisians , although that is hardly important because Libyans will soon be arriving as well - who will decide whether they are refugees or not , given that a situation of extreme confusion reigns in Tunisia at the moment ?
Above all , however , how will we feel if we repatriate these people , in the knowledge that they will be thrown into prison as soon as they arrive ?
These , then , are the points that I believe we should be thinking about , and , above all , we should realise that racist policies like those implemented by the Italian Government have unfortunately produced only highly negative results .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are grateful to the Commissioner for the commitments that have been made , although it should be said that with all the salaries the European Union pays around the world - with 136 diplomatic missions - it could perhaps have realised what was happening sooner .
In fact , the situation was not even foreseen by the representatives of the Socialist International , one of whose members was the nice Tunisian dictator , whose brilliant social and political management of that country led to all this .
We want to learn from the Commission why it does not talk to us clearly about sharing out these people among the various European countries .
It is not fair - as the coastal states have been saying for a long time - that this problem should only affect the countries that have a Mediterranean sea border with North African countries .
That is a fundamental point , and it is also fundamental to remember that Frontex has very limited resources : I have heard that two experts have been sent .
There is a massive crisis taking place in Lampedusa , not least in humanitarian terms , which needs to be tackled with a task force of appropriate size in order to remedy the mistakes and failures of the recent past .
The situation is extremely serious and it may also get worse from a public health point of view , since water has perhaps already begun to run out in Lampedusa .
I am going to be strict with the times , not least because Mrs Malmström has to leave Parliament at 18 : 00 .
We must therefore allow her to reply to your questions , which will otherwise remain unanswered .
( MT ) Mr President , indeed , we have been talking about this tragedy that has been taking place in the Mediterranean for years , and I am afraid to say , you have taken no heed .
You have ignored it because , as has been said by others before me , it is a false solidarity that is talked about when it comes to irregular immigration to Europe .
At the moment , this tragedy can be witnessed in Lampedusa ; and it is a grave tragedy .
Now , when Lampedusa becomes overcrowded - which it already is - everyone will be sent to Italy and at least the situation will be more bearable .
God forbid , Commissioner , had the same number entered Malta , because the tragedy would have been far greater .
Whoever comes to Malta will have no choice but to remain .
Yet , Malta cannot extend any further .
Nor can the funds be used to turn tiny Malta into a huge prison that will detain all these people on the island .
This is why we need true commitment from the Member States , and more solidarity , particularly from the Northern European countries , because , as the Vice-President of this Parliament mentioned , we are witnessing none of this solidarity on the part of other European Union Member States .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Commissioner for having devoted her attention to the issue of Tunisia .
To be sincere , I would have liked this debate to be given a different title , namely ' Debate in support of Tunisia and other countries fighting against dictatorships and for human rights ' .
Instead , we are making a humanitarian crisis out of the fact that one of the greatest world powers , Italy , is having to tackle the problem of taking in 5 000 people .
Of course , for Lampedusa , these refugees are a problem , even though a daily ferry links the island to Sicily and there is also an airport through which these people can be taken away .
We have to realise that what is being discussed at the moment is not the problem of Frontex or how to stop the boats , but the fact that we are dealing with peoples whom we have urged to fight for democracy and , now that they are doing so , we must be in a position to receive them .
Granting more visas is one policy that Italy can pursue to try to help those countries .
( DE ) Mr President , the last huge influx of refugees , similar to what we are now seeing as a result of the Tunisian revolution , was probably in 1989 following the collapse of communism .
The EU has learnt nothing from its past experience .
It was taken completely by surprise by the stream of refugees .
Now , with the arrival of all those people who do not want to roll up their sleeves and rebuild their own country , Italy is being called on not to send back the Tunisian economic migrants .
However , that is exactly the problem .
As long as these people are not returned to their home country immediately , without repatriation aid , we will constantly be overwhelmed by waves of economic migrants .
Tens of thousands of them are already waiting in the neighbouring countries .
Mass amnesties and generous offers to overlook the fact that the majority of them are merely economic migrants have simply led , in the past , to a new influx of asylum seekers .
If we introduce quotas for asylum procedures , instead of sending the migrants back immediately , we are just creating incentives for similar behaviour in the future .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to offer the Commissioner my heartfelt thanks for this debate , for what she has told us , for having honoured us with her presence , and for the commitments she has made , which show the extent to which mutual understanding between Europe and Italy can help my country deal with this crisis .
I would like to take up something she said : ' There is a wind blowing over the Mediterranean ' .
It is true , Mr President : it is a wind of freedom and democracy that is having immediate effects which Italy finds it is having to manage .
When the wind blows harder , some people put up walls and others build windmills .
Let me tell you , Commissioner , that the south of Italy , Puglia , where Mr Baldassarre , Mr Mauro and I come from , has been building windmills for decades ; that is to say , it has been developing forms of reception and working hard to guarantee immigrants their dignity and to provide them with a fair and decent reception .
We cannot do it all alone , however .
It would be wonderful , Commissioner , if these windmills that we have been building for years could also see the mark of an attentive and effective Europe that joins us in building them .
( NL ) Mr President , it seems rather ironic that , just as the first signs of freedom and democracy have begun to emerge in Tunisia , a wave of refugees has been unleashed .
It seems a little hard to believe that they would actually want to leave this country .
Major changes seem to be taking place throughout the Middle East and it may well be that this is just a precursor of things to come .
Therefore , I think that it is a positive thing that the Commission is taking all possible steps to prepare itself .
The Commission should now also prove that it can get the situation under control .
All community stops need to be pulled out , we will have to come to Tunisia 's aid , but it seems inevitable to me that , in these particular circumstances , just as we are seeing the first signs of freedom in Tunisia , many of these people will turn out not to be genuine refugees .
For that reason , it is just as inevitable that the Commission should aim to send a large number of people back to Tunisia , precisely in order to set an example for the future , given that it is possible that more refugees from Middle Eastern countries will follow .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the exceptional flow of immigrants besetting the Italian coast and , hence , the whole of Europe , must spur us on to developing a common approach at last for managing this phenomenon .
In this respect , the ongoing talks between the Italian authorities and the Commission are well on the way to providing a response to the humanitarian crisis that we have been discussing .
With all due respect to Mr Crocetta , I have to point out that the problem is not so much the 5 000 people who have arrived so far but the potentially momentous scale of the upheavals and the many thousand more refugees who could arrive on our shores if we send out clear political messages .
We need to address this with the utmost urgency .
The crisis must be overcome , but then a structural response will be needed .
We must enhance the role of Frontex to make it more operational and able to directly manage certain processes of identifying refugees , checking their country of origin and organising repatriations .
We must enhance the role of Europol in order to prevent potential terrorists and criminals from slipping in .
Above all , we must respond quickly .
I think the Commission has reacted well , and I hope the Council , too , will do its part .
( SL ) Madam President , we are witnessing a new humanitarian tragedy on the European Union 's doorstep .
It may be Lampedusa today , but we can expect an even greater influx of immigrants from North African countries elsewhere .
Even just from Egypt into Israel , there are some 600 immigrants said to be fleeing every month .
The authorities are no longer able to control the situation .
We need a rapid and joint response .
We must not respond by closing doors and by equating immigrants with criminals .
It would be a disgrace if anyone actually thought along those lines in Europe , where the freedom of movement is a fundamental right and a symbol of freedom and equality .
We Member States have to bear joint responsibility and share the burden which has fallen on Italy today .
We have to mobilise forces and financial resources because this is about human lives .
Our response to the recent events in Tunisia and Egypt has been patchy and slow .
Let us demonstrate our credibility now and let us not succumb to the anti-immigrant rhetoric of extreme right and xenophobic parties .
It is Italy that needs concrete help today ; tomorrow , it might be another country .
We need a rapid response now .
( NL ) Madam President , very well , democratic developments may be afoot in North Africa , but they are also bringing with them obligations for Europe .
The problems of North Africa cannot be resolved in southern Europe .
On this point , I stand shoulder to shoulder with my Italian fellow Members .
My question to the Commissioner is : is there any possibility of shortening the procedures , introducing fast-track examination of applications and sending anyone who is not a bona fide refugee back to Tunisia straightaway ?
Because we are now seeing large groups of young men setting off for southern Italy .
There are probably many economic refugees amongst them and we need to separate the genuine refugees from the economic refugees .
In addition , there is , of course , the public relations problem .
Many Europeans are under the impression that a horde of Tunisians are heading for southern Italy .
That is a public relations problem : not just for Italy , but for the European Union , too .
Hence , the key things are : faster procedures and better public relations .
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Malmström , we were all pleased , as were the citizens of Europe , about the revolution in Egypt and Tunisia and the fact that values such as freedom and democracy were suddenly on the agenda .
Images from these countries have dominated the news over the last few days .
However , for two or three days , we have also been seeing pictures of the streams of refugees and people in boats on our television screens and in our newspapers .
We must act quickly to ensure that we do not miss this historic moment and that it is not only the pictures of refugees which remain in our memories .
We must remember what these countries have really achieved .
We must explain to the public that although a lot of people are coming here , the majority of them will go back , because they have no right to asylum as we define it .
Of course , we have to ask ourselves the question which is frequently posed about economic migrants .
One thing is clear .
If these young people have no future prospects , they will come back .
Perhaps not the same people , but constant streams of new migrants .
This is why we need to deal with this problem now .
( EL ) Madam President , the Mediterranean is going up in flames .
Obviously , immigration will increase .
As civilised people , we need to treat all these people like human beings .
However , we must not overlook the fact that most immigrants come from Muslim countries .
According to the official report , Muslim populations are set to rise by 35 % , from 1.6 billion to 2.2 billion , over the next twenty years .
Europe today has just 2.7 % of the Muslim population .
With these influxes and this birth rate , this is expected to rise to 6 % in twenty years .
So , as you can see , an economic and social reversal in the functioning of Europe , in European culture , is on its way .
We therefore need to look at the issue as Europe and not leave the Member States to address it on their own .

Madam President , as the Commissioner said , the winds of change are blowing across North Africa ; somewhat reminiscent of what happened in Eastern Europe twenty years ago .
If the outcome is the same - the establishment of democratic regimes - then I think we should be very pleased .
The downside , of course , is that in the short term at least , we have a refugee and asylum problem , particularly in Italy .
As Italy is in the European Union it is a problem for Italy , it is a problem for Europe ; the solution has to be Italian , the solution has to be European .
We cannot close the door to refugees , but , at the same time , the door cannot be opened to all the refugees and asylum seekers in the world .
So the solution really is , I think , in the multi-point plan suggested by my colleague , Mr Busuttil , particularly to ensure that repatriation takes place when it is proper and safe to do so and , of course , also to send back asylum seekers who are not deserving of that status within the European Union .
We have to act in solidarity with Italy and we can do so .
( SK ) Madam President , I believe we are discussing a pan-European issue here .
We have to understand that Europe must act in a spirit of solidarity and unity .
Today , we have an issue with Italy and with refugees from Tunisia , but tomorrow it may be from Algeria , Egypt or possibly Libya , from whence thousands have already come to us in the past .
The fact that we do not have the Council here is a problem , of course .
The Council is not interested in this issue .
I am disappointed that the Council is not sitting here today , listening to Parliament 's debate with us .
In my opinion , we must work with the Commission to find a solution that will be , on the one hand , legally proper , while , on the other , as my colleague , Mr Kelly , said , we cannot simply accept all refugees coming to Europe from North Africa .
This is surely not our objective , and those who do not deserve political asylum must be returned to their country of origin .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , welcome to this sitting and thank you for coming .
Today , the problem is in Lampedusa .
Tomorrow , it will be in Malta and Crete .
The day after , let us not kid ourselves , it will be in Milan and , shortly after that , it will be in Brussels or Paris .
This problem is not a problem of our partner countries in the South ; it is a European problem .
We need solidarity .
We also need to strengthen the means and measures at our disposal , including Frontex , Europol and maritime reconnaissance .
However , it is also vital , eight years on , that we take a serious look at and , where necessary , revise Dublin II .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , if Mr Busuttil had listened to what I said in my introduction , he would have heard that I said almost everything that was in his speech , but I am happy to repeat it .
We are ready to use the funds that we have at our disposal to assist the Italian authorities immediately .
We are in dialogue with them to identify what kind of help they need .
Italy has a lot of experience in dealing with different kinds of disasters but they perhaps need help with humanitarian aid for shelter , food and medicines , and they might also need help with screening , assistance and identification .
We will put that help at their disposal and we are talking to them about this at the moment .
This is a European responsibility and that is why we have to come up with European solutions .
We have Frontex staff in place , but we are also examining the possibility - and we are ready - of setting up a Frontex operation within a very short time , but , of course , we need to discuss the modalities with Italy and also with the other countries that might possibly contribute .
I am happy that Mr Busuttil is the rapporteur for Frontex so that in the future , we will have an even better functioning Frontex with amendments .
If we had a Frontex operation in Tunisian waters , we would , of course , need to do this in cooperation with the Tunisian authorities .
We are not there yet .
We are also encouraging the Tunisian authorities to take back their nationals who are not in need of international protection .
We are looking at the law in this respect , as raised by Mr Tavares and others .
We hope that the new democratic government will not have such a law , but , of course , it has to be examined on a case by case basis and looked at carefully .
We are also willing to support the Tunisian authorities with advice , support for border and police management , and also with training , equipment and funds .
EASO is still not operational in Malta , but there is a board functioning and they have said that they can send national teams to Italy to help should they wish .
We will also discuss it this next week at the Foreign Affairs Council and at the JHA Council that will meet next week .
We are working with UNHCR in order to ask them to help in the identification of those in need of international protection and to help us to make analysis for the future .
Frontex is also involved in doing analysis for the whole region .
In Tunisia , there is , of course , as most of you have said , a very hopeful situation and we all support the democratic development there .
Lady Ashton was there yesterday for discussions with the authorities .
We are ready to offer election support to them in carrying out elections .
We are discussing different ways to strengthen other kinds of support and to develop and strengthen their democratic development .
Economic assistance can be provided .
We are discussing different mobility programmes and we also need to increase the possibilities for people to come legally to Europe .
There is also discussion about a donor conference .
I agree with Mr Mauro and others who said that of course , we need to look at the whole region .
I think many were quite surprised when the Berlin Wall fell .
We did not have an action plan immediately up our sleeve .
This situation is a little different but , of course , people asking for freedom and democracy is something that we in the European Union should support .
We are reviewing the neighbourhood policy plan because events have made it necessary and we are looking at the whole region - in particular Egypt , but also the other countries - in order to maximise the different tools , funds and policies that we have at our disposal and to tailor them much more adequately to the recent developments in the region .
I am sure we will come back to this debate because the issue is on the agenda and is likely to stay there , but I want to assure you once again that the Commission is following this very closely .
We are ready to assist Italy , Tunisia and other countries affected by this .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Italian Government 's appeal to the European Union is one of the prerogatives of membership .
As many fellow Members have pointed out , the principles of solidarity and the fair sharing of responsibilities , as laid down in the Treaties , must be applied in practice .
The difficult situation that Italy is currently facing comes within Europe 's jurisdiction , as Mrs Malmström suggested .
The European institutions ' slowness to react is not in step with the extremely rapid course of events in the countries of North Africa .
Italy , and particularly the south of the country , is the first border point of Europe in the Mediterranean and it finds itself dealing with numbers of arrivals that can be imagined but not planned for .
What we are experiencing shows how serious it is that we have abandoned the Barcelona Process .
The European Union needs to rethink its strategy for the Mediterranean and to make that one of its main priorities again .
The short-term response of financial aid and extraordinary intervention measures will help , but it will not be enough .
The democratic transition processes spreading through the countries on the opposite shores of the Mediterranean need to be matched with medium- and long-term initiatives to deal with social and economic issues .
The debate we are dealing with today is particularly important .
In fact , over 4 000 refugees from nearby Tunisia have been recorded landing on the island of Lampedusa in the last four days alone .
Thus , a public health crisis is developing on a scale never before recorded .
It should also be borne in mind that the local council is tackling this crisis without the appropriate resources and facilities that the situation requires .
Italy immediately turned to the European Union to request prompt action .
However , while I vehemently support this request for help , I would stress that the commitment by Frontex - the European agency charged with tackling landings in the Mediterranean - is valuable but insufficient to deal with the landings of Tunisian illegal immigrants .
During the February mini-session , I expressed my concerns about the deteriorating situations in the countries of North Africa and their resulting repercussions in Europe .
I will emphasise it again here in this Chamber that the European Union needs to make a greater commitment to an effective common immigration policy that will enable the EU to manage illegal immigration and , above all , to come to the aid of those countries , such as Italy , that are more directly exposed to the flow of immigrants .
The sudden arrival of thousands of migrants on the small Italian island of Lampedusa is an exceptional event .
However , this event brings us face to face with a problem which concerns all Europeans .
Right now , it is important that European solidarity should function properly .
I agree with you , Commissioner , in your appeal to the Member States to deliver urgent aid to Italy , both in terms of goods and in terms of finance .
Very often , in these situations , the countries in which migrants arrive are not their final destinations .
Reception centres are frequently outdated , and serious tensions sometimes arise in areas where migrants are received .
We have already passed some significant milestones in the fight against illegal immigration and in regulating flows .
However , in a Union where internal borders have practically disappeared , Europe must equip itself in the long term with the means to achieve its ambitions .
It must create a genuine immigration policy , open a constructive dialogue with countries of origin and strengthen the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders ( Frontex ) in its missions .
Adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on ' Towards adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems ' .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , allow me to start this debate by thanking my colleagues for their extremely pleasant and fruitful cooperation .
I would also like to extend those thanks to the advisors of the parliamentary secretariats and , of course , our own staff .
It was not easy to manage such a large number of amendments .
I still think that we have been successful , however , because we have now come up with something concrete in response to the Green Paper .
A secure , sustainable and adequate pension , which is the guarantee that European citizens want .
It is not as simple as that , however , as pensions are , and will remain , the responsibility of Member States .
However , that does not mean that we are not allowed to express our opinions or table any proposals through the open coordination method , which may entail revision .
The sustainability of pension systems is under threat , with an inverted population pyramid being the trend : we now have more older people , senior citizens are living longer and therefore , fewer people are left to finance the pensions .
The pay-as-you-go systems of the first pillar are the perfect expression of the solidarity between the generations , and they will continue to remain the most important in the future , too .
However , on top of the burden on the younger generation , there is undeniably also a pressure on collective budgets and that , in turn , is having repercussions on the Stability Pact , whether we like it or not .
Member States are raising their retirement ages .
I am rejecting the proposals for European indexation of pensions to increased life expectancy .
I am doing that because of significant variations in life expectancy between Member States and because , even if we could index the two , this would not be socially responsible , in my opinion .
What we have found , though , is that we must all move towards a higher retirement age , and that process must take place at Member State level , in conjunction with our social partners .
There is also another side to this coin - and I see , Elisabeth , that I have your attention - and that is that we must ensure that older people remain in work .
That , therefore , means that we should focus more efforts on flexible career schemes and flexible retirement schemes and that we must improve and adapt conditions , if older people are to be able to continue working .
The Member States that have based their pension systems on the second pillar have been saving , often through joint employer-employee schemes , and , in some cases , in the new Member States , through mixed schemes .
The funds have been put into savings funds , pension funds or they appear on companies ' balance sheets .
The saving and accrual systems are under less pressure than public finances , but there too , increased life expectancy is posing a problem .
On top of that has come the financial crisis , poor results on bond and equity markets and the low interest rates that are putting guarantees on expected pensions under pressure .
The answer which is being prepared by the Commission is as follows : the application of more stringent solvency requirements is - and I will say it here once again - not the right answer .
Good supervision : yes !
What we need first , though , before adopting any laws , is an in-depth impact assessment of the effects of solvency .
In this connection , I also wish to point to the debate on derivatives .
You cannot link derivatives and pension funds , just like that .
In a pension fund , derivatives are used to hedge risks .
Hence , not for speculation .
So even there , Commission , you must look before you leap .
Turning now to the third pillar .
It seems to me that we should not harbour unrealistic expectations .
You can only use individual saving opportunities if you also have the money .
However , what we do want to do is create greater awareness , and you get greater awareness when people are informed about their pensions , so we also need a tracking system .
Madam President , the European internal market is absent from the third pillar , so we have to do something about that , too .
Finally , I would like to make two concluding comments .
On adequacy : we cannot achieve that at European level , Member States must do that .
On transferability : in my opinion , an open labour market can only function with more free commuter traffic which does not put employees who exercise that right at a disadvantage .
Though there , too , we need transferability : yes , but with an adaptation period , so we need new contracts and then an impact study .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Green Paper on pensions which we published last summer started a much needed debate on the future of pensions in Europe .
It resulted in more than 100 meetings and conferences with stakeholders and we received almost 1 700 responses .
The Green Paper outlines the key challenges facing the Union in this area , and asked fourteen questions about how work at EU level could help the Member States in ensuring that pensions are adequate , sustainable and safe , while fully respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
The Green Paper takes a holistic approach , because my fellow Commissioners , Rehn and Barnier , and I are convinced that adequate , sustainable and safe pensions call for coordinated , joined-up policies spanning our three areas of responsibility .
Let me briefly restate the Commission 's reasoning for publishing the Green Paper last year .
First , we need to overcome the imbalances resulting from the increasing divergence between life expectancy and retirement ages .
Second , we need to adjust the European framework to reflect the changes that have come about in national pension systems after a decade of pension reforms .
Third , we must draw lessons from the financial and economic crisis .
The crisis has highlighted the need to review financial market exposure and the design of our pension systems in order to improve risk mitigation and enhance the funded pension 's capacity for shock absorption .
Fourth , we need to fully prepare our pension systems for the acceleration of population ageing .
The Member States have already engaged in long-standing cooperation to learn from each other 's experiences and exchange good practice in pension reform .
There is a consensus on the need for coordination at EU level and for establishing EU rules on cross-border issues .
For the last 10 years , coordination at EU level has underpinned Member States ' efforts to modernise the pension systems , and many Member States have already made good progress in adapting the pension systems to reflect demographic ageing , changes in the labour markets and evolving gender roles .
However , most Member States have a long way to go and a few others have not even begun with pension reforms .
I was pleased to read the report , on which I congratulate the rapporteur , which is highly supportive of the holistic approach we have chosen .
In several places , it highlights the links between adequacy , sustainability and safety .
It also clearly identifies policy areas where the EU can add value .
The Commission is currently in the final stages of analysing the results of the consultation , including the final opinion of the European Parliament .
Given the urgency of the situation , the Commission has already started the preparations for the White Paper to be presented in the third quarter of 2011 .
Let me conclude by saying that one of the great successes of Europe 's social model is to ensure that old age is not synonymous with poverty .
This is a promise on which we have to continue to deliver and help Member States to take the right decisions to ensure that pension systems are fit for purpose .
The last 12 months have seen a lively debate in the field of pension reforms and this year promises to be equally intense .
I very much count on Parliament 's support to bring about a real change to create both adequate and sustainable pensions for the future .
Madam President , the fact that we are discussing pensions today in the European Parliament plenary will confirm how important they are to Europe .
An ageing population , the impact of the economic and financial crisis and the late entry of young people into the labour market require common solutions .
However , pensions remain a national responsibility and the purpose of the subsidiarity principle is to establish the limits of European intervention .
Nevertheless , if Member States implement existing EU-level legislation better , we will benefit from a single market which operates more efficiently , thereby encouraging greater worker mobility .
In addition , so that public pension systems are sustainable , we must ensure that people have the opportunity to continue working up until retirement age .
The rise in unemployment among Member States is a matter for concern , jeopardising the principle of intergenerational solidarity .
Indeed , steps to reform the pension system must go hand in hand with promoting employment policies .
Similarly , pension reform must not be synonymous with depriving groups which are already vulnerable of a safe , decent income .
States must not shirk their obligation to provide adequate pensions for all citizens .
To avoid such exploitation at national level , we have put forward the idea of defining an adequate pension at European Union level .
It is my view that it is not enough to ask Member States to guarantee a level of pensions from the first pillar above the poverty threshold .
I certainly understand the argument about the diversity of national conditions and the reluctance of states to allow the European Union to be involved in a matter at the very core of national sovereignty .
However , I think that EU bodies must show greater concern for European citizens ' living conditions .
Social discontent can trigger unexpected effects .
Two recent examples , outside the European Union , illustrate the level of tolerance of a population which has constantly been forced to make sacrifices in the interests of national governments which pay too little attention to their citizens ' needs .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( NL ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to extend my sincere thanks to my fellow Member , Mrs Ria Oomen-Ruijten , for the good cooperation on her part .
I am grateful to her for reproducing much of the opinion , if not , in fact , the entire opinion that I wrote for the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection ( IMCO ) .
In particular , I am pleased with the recommendation that a European system be developed which will make it possible for everybody to know how much pension they have built up , regardless of which Member State ( s ) it was accrued in .
Nevertheless , I do still have some questions , especially about the discrepancy between Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's statement just now and the recommendation that pension policy come under the aegis of European economic governance .
We do not know exactly what kind of form that will take , but there is a real chance that it will not be optional .
I do not want to give the impression , by voting in favour , that I , for example , will be contributing to the transfer of national powers on this issue to the EU .
In addition , I am concerned about the recommendation , which is , indeed , in there , that the retirement age should be raised in the light of life expectancy .
I believe that that is definitely not necessary for the Netherlands , and that is why I cannot endorse the recommendation .
I would like the rapporteur to comment on this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
The lack of any significant attention to gender issues in the Commission Green Paper on the future of pension systems in Europe gives cause for concern : women are discriminated against in pension calculations because they interrupt their careers more often in order to look after their children , sick relatives and the elderly .
To fulfil their family commitments , women are therefore more liable than men to have to accept precarious or part-time work , resulting in an average gender pay gap of 18 % in the European Union .
That leads to evident discrimination against women , who receive pensions that are clearly lower than men 's .
This increases the risk of poverty for older women , especially when the fact that they tend to live longer than men is taken into account .
The time women devote to caring for their children or other dependent family members needs to be recognised in the calculation systems as being equivalent to all other kinds of contract when pensions are calculated .
The Green Paper offered a consultation ...
To conclude , I hope the new White Paper will devote greater attention to the sensitive and worrying issue of the gender gap in the calculation of pension rights in the EU .
Madam President , first of all , the large number of motions for amendment - there have been nearly 500 of them - is a good indication of the tremendous interest surrounding this topic , and the rapporteur , Ria Oomen-Ruijten deserves nothing but our thanks for turning this immense haystack of motions for amendment into a report which reflects the current opinion of Parliament .
I am saying its current opinion , since we are standing at the beginning of the debate , and this is about the Green Paper , which will be followed by a White Paper , and then by additional reports , meaning that we are obviously in a stage of a larger process .
In general , I must say that I agree with the Commission 's approach , which welcomes diversification , that is , pension systems resting on multiple pillars , but , at the same time , I would like to point out that the wording could be a little more precise here .
Obviously , when we are speaking of second pillars , we mean second pillars that supplement the first pillars in the light of their weaknesses .
This is not the same as a second pillar where something is taken away from the first for the sole reason of operating a system in different ways .
The former restores stability , while the latter endangers it .
However , we must also realise - and this has perhaps been said already , but I would just like to reinforce it - that the problems of the pension system cannot necessarily be solved by themselves , from the inside ; what is more , it is likely that they cannot .
More jobs are needed , stronger economic cooperation is needed , and our goal should definitely be that once the Commission has prepared the White Paper , this common thought process should somehow be linked to the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy and economic governance .
It is obvious that , if this will be the case , we will be able to continue this debate more fruitfully .
Madam President , I would first of all like to emphasise the important consensus work that the rapporteur has carried out .
Congratulations , Ria !
During the negotiation of the compromises , she has showed open-mindedness about the arguments put forward by my group , which led to a large majority vote in favour of the draft report in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
If we see this large a majority in favour tomorrow , it would send a strong signal to the other institutions .
This report on the future of pensions in Europe is , up to now , the only European institutional document which goes against the tide of the Commission 's thinking - as represented in particular by its Annual Growth Survey - and the thinking of the Merkel-Sarkozy duo in their document on the competitiveness pact .
These documents call very directly for the first pillar to be reconsidered , and also call for an automatic increase in the legal retirement age based on life expectancy .
Parliament , in its amended and adopted draft report , is in favour of the following : a fundamental role for the first pillar in relation to pensions , which provides a better guarantee of solidarity , with a complementary role for the other pillars , including bringing a second pillar into general use ; giving more attention to increasing the actual age of retirement as well as employment levels , in particular , those of older people , rather than an automatic and fatalistic increase in the legal age ; a definition of the criteria for enabling a guaranteed minimal adequate pension to be introduced in the Member States ; a strengthened role for social partners in defining and implementing all pension reforms in Europe ; and the abolition of disparities between men and women in relation to pensions , which is linked to the discrimination of which Mrs Matera reminded us .
With these components , with these advances , as well as others that I could have mentioned , I am satisfied that Parliament can send our Commissioner a clear message , a social and progressive message , and I hope that she will take this into account for the next stage of the White Paper .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , first of all , I want to thank the rapporteur for her good work ; she certainly made my life easier .
I also want to thank the Commission for starting this discussion , which is certainly very timely .
Some people speak of the pensions time bomb and , given some of the figures that I have seen estimating the gap between what we currently put aside for both public and private pension provision and the resources we will need to ensure adequate pension provision for the next forty years , that gap is huge .
So , in that context , the phrase ' pensions time bomb ' is certainly accurate .
Well , we all know what we need to do with a time bomb : we need to defuse it .
I think this is the start of that process .
But the core question is : who is responsible ?
I think in the report , we are clear that Member States are themselves responsible for making sure that there is adequate pension provision for their citizens .
But , we also state that the economies of Member States are interdependent and therefore , a coordination of pension policies using the OMC is certainly useful .
However , we do not believe it is possible for the EU to set adequate pension levels or , indeed , to harmonise retirement ages .
Nonetheless , we do consider that Member States should define adequacy as the condition required for older people to live a decent life .
I am pleased we have highlighted the gender issue and asked Member States to deal with the issue of men and women who take time off to care and that we have paid attention to the issue of mobility and the role of the EU 2020 strategy .
Finally , I support the inclusion of pension liabilities within the SGP .
We know that a fiscal black hole is opening up in the area of pension provision and we just cannot ignore it .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I , too , would like to add my voice to that of others who thanked our rapporteur for the very good work that has been done on this report .
We are all aware there are national differences , as well as differences within our own political groups , and to come up with anything that gains a significant level of support is quite something .
My group is especially pleased that the report before us recognises the importance of first-pillar pensions , the commitment to an adequate level , the issue of being able to provide a decent life .
After all , we spent all of last year , 2010 , dealing with questions of poverty .
And , of course , this is also , for many people , a fixed income , an essential guarantee .
Like others , we also welcome the recognition that we need to tackle decent pension provision here for women .
We also recognise the importance of tackling discrimination against older workers and using other measures to help people stay in work .
For us , too , the portability of pension rights is a crucial issue .
More and more people are not working for one company throughout their working life .
Indeed , they are working for several , and not always in the same country .
And we need to avoid this fragmentation of pension provision , so there is an essential role for the European Union there .
We are also pleased to see that this report contains a commitment for second-pillar provision , that it should be available without discrimination on grounds of age , gender and work contract .
We would agree as well - and are pleased to see it there - that we need to be adopting more of a life course approach that deals with the different rhythms and patterns of modern working lives , both positive and negative .
And again we recognise the importance of solidarity in that first pillar , not least for those whose working lives are involved with more casual labour , short-term contracts and so on .
We are concerned at any effort to push third-pillar private pension provision and we agree that it is crucial that people have adequate and clear information .
We would also welcome the fact that this report contains - if there is going to be a change in pension provision - adequate time for adaptation for people to reconsider their financial futures .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , my group supports the publication of this Green Paper .
It is very timely and comes at a time when we are , in all Member States , debating the issues which have already been mentioned and which I will not labour - changing demographics , the gender challenge , to name just two .
The report recognises the importance of Member States sharing best practice and exchanging information , but also emphasises that pensions remain a Member State competence .
It acknowledges that the EU should not legislate on the adequacy of pension levels and retirement ages , but asks - and asks very clearly and very strongly - that Member States regulate in accordance with their own circumstances , taking account of those issues .
I do believe that further work on portability is essential to strengthen the single market .
EU citizens working around Europe - and I have met many - should not be left disadvantaged by having their pension pots frozen in different Member States .
Demographics change and so do working practices .
Our expectations change , but it is vital that we keep up with these changes in our thinking and our policy making .
Madam President , in this debate , we cannot forget that there is a proposal for a so-called competitiveness pact by means of which the directorate , led by Germany , wishes to launch new attacks on the universal and mutual public social security system , to increase pension age and devalue salaries , attempting to put an end to their indexation to inflation , merely to benefit the financial sector , which is trying to find in these pensions new types of greater speculative gains .
We would like to state our clear opposition to this path towards European integration , built upon a foundation of antisocial policies which , lamentably , this report endorses , by supporting the European Commission Green Paper , by allowing a link to be made between the legal retirement age and life expectancy , by encouraging people to stay in the job market longer , and by not excluding support for private pension systems even when it is already known that their speculative use by funds and private banks can have severe consequences which leave the elderly , and particularly elderly women , in poverty .
We have therefore tabled an alternative resolution , which demonstrates that it is possible to improve benefits and pensions without increasing the legal age for retirement , provided that there is more employment with rights , particularly for young people , better salaries , and greater supervision of the financial sector and financial transactions .
We are against the increase in retirement age and we defend the pensions system integrated in the universal and mutual public social security system , which increases the value of smaller benefits and pensions , respects elderly people and allows them to live with dignity , thereby contributing to the eradication of poverty .
This is what our citizens expect , through the struggles that we have had in Portugal , France , Greece , and so many other places .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on 22 November last year , the rapporteur said that pensions were exclusively a competence of the Member State .
Now this has become something more like : although Member States have the lead , there are aspects where coordination at European level is important .
In paragraph 9 , the resolution stresses Member States ' competence but calls on them to coordinate their different pension policies .
There is double speak here , with EU control overturning principle .
The UK National Association of Pension Funds says that this report will make pensions more expensive - by 90 % according to actuarial consultants Punter Southall .
If that is exaggerated , it is certainly true that huge extra sums will be needed to prevent pensions collapsing , so premiums will rise massively .
Pension firms and Member States do not need this report ; they need help to keep premiums down .
Otherwise , this misguided report has the potential to destroy that which it seeks to protect .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the Europe of the Stability Pact - and tomorrow the competitiveness pact - pension reforms are in the firing line .
How can we save pensions when the European Union requires the Member States , which are now in deficit , to have balanced their budgets by 2013 ?
Your solution is to push the retirement age up to 67 and to carry out profound reforms of pay-as-you-go pension systems to reduce benefits for insured people .
Furthermore , the report is not wrong there , since it calls for a guaranteed minimum level for pensions , which you are forcing us to guarantee to foreigners arriving on our shores who have never contributed .
Moreover , counting direct public pension liabilities , as advocated in this report , will further increase the pressure on the Member States and will force them to develop pension funds based on capital formation , and we are obviously well aware of the major risks these pose .
Pension systems fall within the competence of the Member States .
Yet , against the wishes of the people , you are introducing an unprecedented budgetary stringency .
Employed people , civil servants and retired people in Europe will be the adjustment variable in order to save the euro and to save your ultra-liberal Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , it is good that just for once , an own-initiative report is not being hidden away on a Monday and dealt with in just a few minutes .
This is a result of the 463 amendments from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the 211 amendments from the associated Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I would have liked to have seen a commitment to continuing the successful occupational pension systems in Germany , Luxembourg , Finland and Austria .
Unfortunately , there was a majority decision to recommend new minimum standards and the application of Solvency II to occupational pensions .
This will bring the risk of significantly higher costs , which , in Germany alone , could amount to an increase of 40 % on the voluntary occupational pension .
We must not destroy what has been achieved on the basis of a consensus between unions and management .
I was able to contribute to the compromises by proposing that in future , all the effects of the minimum standards and of Solvency II must be evaluated in detail in an in-depth impact assessment .
That represents progress towards the continuation of occupational pensions , although it is by no means a guarantee .
One positive point is that we do not have a standardised definition of adequate pension levels .
In addition , the proposal of a harmonised retirement age for the EU has been rejected .
Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy are rightly in favour of the gradual convergence of the pension systems and the retirement age .
As birth rates and life expectancy vary in different countries , each national pension system must be adapted to meet demographic changes .
The compromises were achieved under serious time pressure .
I hope that we will all be able to hold a more detailed debate on the White Paper , which will include the practical experience of businesses .
The amounts involved in voluntary occupational pensions alone are greater than those in the current EU rescue package .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President. look , I do not want there to be any misunderstanding about this .
I therefore ask you , Mr Mann , to specify where in this report it says that solvency will compulsorily apply to second-pillar pensions ?
I , personally , am against that , but where does it say that ?
( DE ) Madam President , we have had two reports from two committees which recommend applying Solvency II to occupational pension systems .
In my opinion , this simply will not work .
In countries such as France , they have experience of this , but not in other Member States of the European Union .
We should investigate this issue in detail .
We will have the chance , when we consider the White Paper and discuss it in depth , to convince everyone of this , because many people do not have the relevant experience and have not yet come across this in their own countries .
This is a good opportunity for us to do the groundwork .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , we are here in an orientation debate and the European Parliament wanted to make you pass on a message .
However , in the meantime , the world is moving and the question of pensions is being mentioned in addition .
I obviously want to mention here the reference to a standardised retirement system , at European level , at 67 years of age , which has been created in what was a draft competitiveness pact .
We can clearly see that if we start from there in constructing a social Europe , well , we will be constructing it against the people , and that is not what we want .
In Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report , we mention other orientations on many points , and I would ask you , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , to take account of that when you develop the Commission 's position around a White Paper , concerning taking account of the issue of gender , which you have not taken into account sufficiently .
We also mention the idea that the best means of deciding the question of retirement is to encourage employment and that rather than fixating on the legal retirement age , we must take account of real age .
However , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report contains , in the view of the French Socialists , an indication which poses us a problem , and with which we will not be able to agree .
You understand that , for us , the idea that increased life expectancy must automatically be indexed with legal age of retirement constitutes a regressive step in terms of social rights , and one which we cannot support .
Finally , allow me a final word to say to you that , without social dialogue , without the involvement of social partners in the whole of these negotiations , we will go to the wall .
( NL ) Madam President , it seems to me that , with the help of the rapporteur , we have come up with a number of very balanced answers to the question put by the Commission .
There are two points where , in my opinion , the European Union does indeed bring added value .
If we recognise the importance of the first pillar , which makes sense , then we must also admit , at the same time , that the health of our public finances is equally important , since it is sound public finances that underpin the first pillar .
Next , you have to recognise the long-term strain that pensions are putting on the government and make that very clear .
I think that the Commission and the European Union have a responsibility to make that clear to each Member State , so that everyone can see where the risks and the difficulties lie .
My second point is that the European Union plays a particular role in the second pillar , as well .
There , you have pointed to the importance of Solvency II .
What we are asking for here is that the Commission examine the risks in the longer term and that it makes clear in its rules how those risks should be hedged .
I think that there , you have to specifically consider the long-term risk of pension systems in general : not just of one type , but of all pensions systems under the second pillar .
So , there is a job that needs doing .
When I look at the figures , as Mrs Harkin has done , I am afraid that we have not hedged all the risks in all the Member States of the European Union .
( PL ) Madam President , the motion for a resolution of the European Parliament , as discussed during the consultations held by the European Commission , deserves our support .
The resolution recommends stepping up mutual intra-state coordination and exchange of best practices without , at the same time , interfering in Member States ' competences as regards pension systems , which is an extremely important and very sensitive area .
During the debate held in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I stressed the importance of demographic developments for the security and future form of pension systems .
It is therefore extremely important for us to take all possible measures aimed at overcoming the demographic crisis in Europe .
When assessing pension systems and formulating proposals , I also believe that we should take into account the significant differences between the individual Member States , both with regard to their financial capabilities and in terms of the public and occupational capital-based pension systems which currently already exist .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the prosperity of a country is created through the work of its people .
In future , jobs in the social sector must be better paid .
People want proper , secure pensions in their old age .
One clear message from the crisis is that only public and state pensions are reliable and stable .
In contrast , occupational and private pension funds have lost millions of euro on the stock exchange .
It is ridiculous to increase the focus on private , capital-based pension systems when providing for people 's retirement .
The public has financed the rescue packages for the major banks .
The people are paying for a tough austerity policy which is under the control of the European Union .
Now , they are supposed to turn around national budgets by taking cuts in their pensions and accepting a higher retirement age .
Previous pension reforms are already leading to increasing poverty in old age .
The only solution is to strengthen the reliable public pension systems .
( DE ) Madam President , the population pyramid in the EU will soon be turned upside down and the over 55 age group will represent the largest proportion of the population .
Life expectancy will continue to increase and the birth rate will remain low .
Young people will be starting work later and later .
We are all aware of the consequences of this : an ageing population and an increasing number of bottlenecks when it comes to the financing of pensions .
What we need is a family-friendly policy in Europe , such as the introduction of family tax splitting for income tax or equivalent social measures , which take into account the contribution that the family makes to the intergenerational contract by reducing the burden of taxes on families .
In addition , we need to create incentives to keep older people in work for as long as possible .
I would like to give Mr Andor a clear message .
The very popular policy of mass immigration is the wrong way to go about safeguarding our pensions and it also ultimately puts social peace in Europe at risk .
( PL ) Madam President , demographic changes , longer lifespans and a falling birth rate , various privileges granted under pension systems and the economic crisis have placed enormous pressure on the public finances of the Member States .
We are being forced to ask questions on an increasingly frequent basis regarding the stability and security of current pension systems , and regarding the extent to which they guarantee fair incomes during retirement .
We are coming to the conclusion that reforms of Europe 's pension systems , which fall under the competences of the Member States , are essential .
This will be a very long-winded and expensive process , and in order for governments to decide to take such a step , the Council and the European Commission need to guarantee that the costs of these reforms will always be taken into account when applying the excessive deficit procedure .
Any other solution may result in a situation where countries abandon reforms for fear of the financial burden .
I should like to refer to two key aspects of these essential reforms .
Firstly , in order to guarantee the security of pension systems , we must diversify income sources and create systems based , inter alia , on public funding from capital markets and employee pension schemes .
Secondly , we should ensure higher rates of employment in order to guarantee the stability of pension systems .
The Member States should endeavour to ensure that the actual age of retirement is the same as the statutory age , and , wherever necessary , consider extending the statutory age of retirement , as a natural consequence of the fact that Europeans are living longer and longer .
Extended working lives should , however , be associated with corresponding labour market reforms , including the provision of appropriate training and healthcare for employees .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and to thank her for her help and her excellent cooperation while working on the report .
( ES ) Madam President , it has already been said that the backbone of pension systems in Europe is , and must continue to be , the public system , because it is the only system that guarantees cohesion and , moreover , reduces the risk of poverty in our society .
It is nevertheless striking that , in the countries of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development , the greatest levels of equality in terms of income are found in pensions , or that , due to the crisis , private pensions lost 20 % of their value in 2008 alone and are currently still far from meeting the required levels of solvency .
All of this shows that , at a time of unavoidable reforms , measures to ensure the sustainability of our pension systems must be cross-cutting , taking into account , among other factors , ambitious policies concerning birth rates and balancing work and family life , along with ambitious policies for ensuring that people can enter and remain in employment , or even immigration policies based on integration , which also guarantee the sustainability of our pensions from a demographic point of view .
Finally , I find it regrettable that the text does not place limits on the abuse of the concept of grants in businesses , because , as a general rule , they are exempt from any social contributions .
In my view , this is essential for a whole new generation of workers , as if more is being required of them in order to have a decent pension , they should also not have to suffer so much in order to access decent employment .
Madam President , I would like to thank Ria Oomen-Ruijten for all her hard work on this .
I think she has done a very good job .
This makes it very clear that pensions are , first and foremost , the responsibility of Member States .
Thankfully , we have rejected any call for a minimum pension at EU level , as well as for a Solvency II-type regulation to be applied to pensions .
The Lisbon Treaty makes it very clear that it is Member States , not the EU , who are responsible for pension provision .
But what we can do is share best practice and experience .
I am pleased that my amendment calling for the implementation of the Employment Directive 2000 to outlaw discrimination on the grounds of age is also included .
With regard to the retirement age , I have always made it clear that we must keep a pensionable age - an age when you are entitled to claim your pension - set at Member State level but , at the same time , scrap the compulsory retirement age , which forces people to stop working even if they want to carry on .
I am sorry that this was not in the report .
( CS ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , who has made an excellent job of tackling the many hundreds of amendments submitted .
Although the report is not legislative , it is of great importance for the future of the social systems in EU Member States .
The main conclusions which we support are that :
decisions on pension systems are political decisions and are fully and exclusively the responsibility of the individual Member States ;
it is essential to raise the retirement age ;
the only source of growth in the EU in the coming years will be growth in the productivity of labour ;
it is a key task to support the employment of older workers , particularly through greater flexibility in employment law relationships and the correct adjustment of pension systems ;
it is not appropriate to coordinate pension systems and their reform at EU level ;
we do not support a standardisation of the retirement age across the EU , nor do we support linking it to average life expectancy ;
we do not support any efforts to unify definitions , for example , the definition of an adequate pension , at Community level .
( NL ) Madam President , subsidiarity , a matter for individual Member States , and solidarity , those were the two things that the rapporteur kept emphasising about pension policy .
I therefore thought that she would immediately relegate the pro-spending cuts Green Paper to the wastepaper basket .
I nearly fell off my chair when the rapporteur actually referred to the Green Paper as a positive thing .
While , on the one hand , the rapporteur keeps going on about subsidiarity , on the other , she has made countless proposals for increasing the EU 's influence .
The EU should provide the criteria for the minimum pension .
The EU should persuade Member States to raise the retirement age .
The EU should encourage competition between European pension funds and further privatisation .
Subsidiarity ?
What subsidiarity ?
If all of this were going to lead to more socially responsible pension systems , then , perhaps , you could justify the EU 's influence here .
Unfortunately , the Commission and the rapporteur are giving primacy to the internal market and they will only increase the divide between the rich and the poor .
( MT ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating my colleague , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , for the extraordinary work she has carried out in this report .
The report recognises that in a time in which European Union citizens are particularly vulnerable , it is essential that the Member States ensure that social protection measures , and pensions in particular , are higher and more reliable , thus guaranteeing peace of mind to an ever ageing population , and ensuring that they remain economically independent .
Here , I would like to underline how important it is that the Member States define the necessary criteria in order to safeguard a decent standard of living for senior citizens .
This has to be determined by the specific circumstances pertaining to each country and therefore , the principle of subsidiarity has to be respected .
I welcome , however , the invitation to the Commission to introduce guidelines and to encourage the exchange of best practice .
In this way , the decisions taken will be in the interest of those who are going to be directly affected .
In many Member States , pension reform is vital if we are to fulfil the objectives mentioned in the Green Paper ; that is , having sound , adequate and sustainable pension systems .
The reform can be a difficult one to implement , especially in these difficult times , and therefore , the reform expenditure also needs to be taken into consideration within the context of economic governance .
( HU ) Madam President , along with several Members who spoke before me , I believe it is important that there should be as much European level coordination on the pensions issue as possible .
One reason for this is that the crisis has raised the question of macro-economic stability , and it has also raised the question of how we can ensure security and dignity in old age .
It is apparent that different kinds of change are taking place in the Member States .
Some countries are embarking on the path of reform , and are reinforcing or creating the pillar of private pension funds , while others are attempting to turn back time instead .
Whatever the nature of the change may be , however , it is very important to make the sustainability of pensions , stability , and a dignified old age the top priorities .
All changes must be consulted upon with the social partners , and sufficient time must be provided for transitions .
The people , the citizens , must be informed about what changes will be implemented and how these will affect them , in order to enable them to make informed decisions in all cases , and all changes must be made in a citizen-friendly manner .
Madam President , when Bismarck introduced a state pension in 1889 , the average life expectancy was just 45 .
Today we live longer , but face the challenge of how to achieve reasonable incomes in retirement .
Economic , demographic and labour market traditions vary .
Individual countries should be responsible for their own policies and reforms .
Sustainable state pensions need sustainable public finances , but this Parliament 's report is clear : there cannot be a harmonised EU retirement age or minimum income level .
Company schemes and individual savings should be portable from one employer to another , and across countries .
Savers deserve transparent information , which is easy to understand and available .
Yes , we need safe saving schemes , but rules on capital must be intelligent .
Risks for pensions are not the same as insurance companies or banks .
The cost of regulation falls on the consumer and , in this case , the old-age pensioner .
( FR ) Madam President , first , I would like to say that the crisis and demographics are combining to confront us with this problem regarding pensions in all the Member States of the European Union .
In the work that is being done , I would first like to welcome the step forward that is the consultation work that the Commissioner told us that she presided over in the development of this Green Paper , but also the work , based on consultation , open-mindedness and compromise , that was carried out by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten in order to draft this report .
I would like to emphasise three points that we absolutely must take into account in order to resolve the problem of the solvency of pensions .
The first point is the inequality faced by women of retirement age , because inequality in employment leads to poverty at retirement age .
The second point , Commissioner , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , is that I want to make sure that widows ' pensions are saved .
We still have a generation of poor women who have not worked during their potential working life and for whom widows ' pensions are the only way of getting a minimum pension .
The third point is the entry of the younger generations on to the labour market .
They not only have to face the crisis , but they also have to carry the burden of several generations : their children , their parents and their grandparents .
Finally , that poses the problem of senior citizens , a problem which we must deal with more quickly in our work .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , pensions throughout Europe must provide enough money for people to live on .
One important requirement is that people have decent jobs , because low paid jobs result in poverty in old age and inadequate pension provision .
When I hear other Members of this House saying that people simply need to take out an additional private pension for their old age , I want to reply that many people can barely survive on what they earn , never mind paying for an additional private pension .
This is why the first pillar of the pension system is of particular importance .
The pay-as-you-go system based on the solidarity principle must form the foundation of European pensions and it must provide enough for people to live on .
We cannot simply say that this is a matter for the Member States .
We must send out a clear signal that we need pensions which give people enough money to have a reasonable quality of life .
Mr Mann gave a detailed description of the German occupational pension system .
I would like to mention it too , without going into the same level of detail .
In my assessment of the Green Paper , I have come to the same conclusion , which is why we worked on the amendments together in committee .
Therefore , I am calling on the Commission to ensure that , in everything which we do in future , the distinctive features of each country - the things that really work well and are essential for the survival of the pension systems in the Member States - are not disregarded .
( RO ) Madam President , I believe that we need to be realistic and acknowledge that the current public pension systems , based on the transfer of resources between generations , known as the ' pay as you go ' principle , are no longer economically viable and , as such , they require public budget subsidies to survive .
The ageing population trend and increasing labour mobility only serve to exacerbate the imbalances in these pension systems , while the measures being proposed , whether raising the retirement age or increasing contributions , are limited and will be increasingly restricted as well by social resistance to measures of this kind .
Ultimately , we will have to acknowledge that the solution is to switch to those pension systems where people build up their own pension fund over the course of their working life .
( HU ) Madam President , the European Union has addressed a great many issues related to people with disabilities .
Unfortunately , it is this very social group that Member States ' pension systems do not really seem to cover , which is unacceptable .
In addition to people who were forced to enter the disability pension system through no fault of their own , there are a great many who entered the system by abusing loopholes .
This problem primarily affects the pension systems of Central and Eastern Europe , where there is a very large number of such abusers .
Their numbers are so high that they are shaking the foundations of the pension system itself .
This situation goes against the EU 2020 strategy .
These people are receiving non-personalised services instead of real assistance , while they could hold their own in the labour market and would be capable of working .
Current forecasts indicate that the number of dependants in Europe will soon double .
Meanwhile , the number of working age people is dropping by one million per year .
In summary , this means that there is currently no sustainable pension system , especially not without active people with disabilities .
I wholly support the idea of the rapporteur that in the EU , which is home to 50 million people with disabilities , only forty-odd percent of these people are working .
Where is the other sixty-odd percent ?
The bottom line is that they , too , should be working .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her efforts to strike the necessary balance between the economic viability and the social adequacy of pension systems , given that , in times of high unemployment , deregulation of the labour market , wage cuts and serious demographic challenges , the creation and consolidation of adequate , socially fair and economically viable pension systems is a major challenge for every Member State .
However , systems must be based on the first pillar , the public , redistributive pillar , as the only basic guarantee of adequate benefits .
This pillar should be supplemented , not supported by the second pillar , which should function in tandem , once care has been taken to safeguard not only universal access to it , but also its security , by establishing the relevant governance framework .
In addition , linking a later retirement age to life expectancy does not , by any means , result in automatic adjustments .
Of course , other parameters have to be factored in , such as location , nature of work , very unhealthy occupations , quality of life and health .
Finally , any incentives to remain in work should , as a precondition , include safety valves to overcome any barriers which might prevent young people from accessing the labour market , especially at a time when unemployment has , unfortunately , soared to invisible heights .
( Applause )
( PL ) Madam President , the debates being held in certain EU Member States regarding pension systems , and the public emotions accompanying these debates , show how important and , at the same time , how difficult this subject is .
It will not be possible to adopt a single pensions model which would apply in all EU Member States .
However , at a time of economic crisis and demographic change , reforms of national pension systems are becoming unavoidable .
It is already the case today that many countries are experiencing problems due to the growing cost of pensions , and such problems may undermine the principle of intergenerational solidarity .
However , we must remember that pensions must be secure and safe , and that they must take into account what we are paid .
In this context , I would like greater attention to be paid to the pay difference between women and men , since women 's lower earnings result in reduced pension benefits .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to mention that , even at the start of this debate , the Commissioner was talking about the successes of the European social model .
One of these is also the achievement of equal opportunities for women and men .
I hope that this report will send a clear message about integrating gender equality as part of achieving a fair pension system .
This is why I want , if I may , to emphasise three points .
Firstly , the assessment of the impact on society and female employment of measures to recognise work done in the home , including the use of a costed calculation of this work for pension purposes .
I call on the Commission to initiate the procedure aimed at removing Article 5 ( 2 ) of Directive 2004 / 113 / EC which allows for discrimination against women in the case of pension products .
( ES ) Madam President , the pensions system is a basic element of the European social model that must be preserved .
It is the responsibility of the Member States , but in order to guarantee its survival , we need to take measures , with the highest possible level of agreement with social partners and civil society .
These measures need to be focused on setting a European standard that guarantees the solvency of all systems by making them subject to supervision criteria in order to limit the deficit in public finances across the Member States , and by extending the guarantees that are going to be demanded of insurance companies from 2013 to the mutual societies that manage these systems in some Member States .
This standard needs to be set in order to rationalise the debate , because solving this problem means more than setting the retirement age in law .
We need to take into account a person 's length of employment and contribution levels , and incorporate factors associated with the desires of retired people .
Extending one 's working life must result in an improved pension .
This standard also needs to look to the future .
The mobility of workers is going to require that transferring passive rights from one country to another will not be a problem .
When they move countries , Europeans need to be able to access their employment history in all the Member States where they have made contributions .
I also think that we need to pay particular attention to gender and disability .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Andor , I would like to ask whether it makes sense to respond to this debate and this report with a White Paper .
Should we not instead be attempting to resolve the really urgent problems ?
In my view , there are two issues : one is the fact that there is a huge gap between the actual retirement age and the state retirement age .
This means that the anti-discrimination measures really need to be put into effect , in the form of action or monitoring by the Commission to improve the situation , because that will make pensions sustainable .
The other is that the report clearly calls for action to be taken now on the portability of occupational pensions , which means considering a new directive .
This is much more urgent , because workers who move from one company to another lose a lot of money on their pensions , which would give them security in their old age .
This is why we need to take steps in this area .
With the White Paper , we are just wasting time .
( LV ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as a result of the economic crisis and the ageing of the population , contributions to social security budgets are falling .
That is a generally recognised fact .
The number of pensioners is increasing .
This poses a threat to the sustainability of the pensions system .
It is essential to adapt the social security and pensions system to today 's challenges .
I agree with the Commissioner when he said it would take a great deal of hard work to produce this document .
Nevertheless , I believe that we must establish a social fund on an EU-wide scale , equivalent to the Cohesion Fund , with the aim of assisting pensioners in those countries with relatively low revenues .
National budgets cannot secure a decent old age .
We already have experience of this .
Last year , we fought against poverty , and the result is that we have more poor people than before .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like again to congratulate all the committees that have been involved in the discussion and also in producing the reports .
I realise that it is hard to bring the positions from so many different political and national backgrounds into line , but the votes in committees involved show that the reports have been met with wide support .
This sends a clear signal to the Commission on the follow-up to the Green Paper .
I expect to publish a summary early next month with Parliament 's opinion included .
We will follow this up in the second half of 2011 with the White Paper , which I mentioned in my earlier intervention , accompanied by a suitable impact assessment .
This will give all stakeholders the opportunity once again to continue playing a part in the debate .
The Commissioners ' Group on pensions already discussed last week possible policy options on how to update and improve the European framework on pensions .
There was agreement that we should continue with the holistic approach to the pension reforms .
As part of this , we need to continue a dialogue with the key stakeholders , both on possible new regulatory initiatives in such fields as portability , occupational pension schemes and insolvency protection , and other softer forms of regulation , such as codes of good practice .
We also decided to deal with the gender dimension in depth and also address it more extensively in the White Paper than in the Green Paper .
In the meantime , I would like to make sure that the Green Paper and the White Paper do not get mixed up with other flying objects in the European sky .
The Commission has absolutely nothing in common with approaches that assume that there could be a uniform retirement age in the European Union .
Diversity is key in the EU and it also applies to diversity of the demographic reality , and we have to study that more deeply now than before .
We should also recognise that ongoing reforms carry new risks as they make future pensions far more dependent on long-term developments in the labour market and financial markets .
This means that we need to create employment opportunities also for people with disabilities and increase the stability of financial systems .
I look forward to continued work with Parliament and its committees on this very important subject .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to credit my fellow Members who have worked with me on this report : George Cutaş , Barbara Matera and Cornelis de Jong .
I do not know where Mr de Jong is .
There he is , at the back .
He has made a few comments which I do not understand , for example , when he says that we want to find a European solution for everything .
That is not true .
Subsidiarity is the guiding principle here .
If I could clarify the point where Mr de Jong had an issue with economic governance : we want the kind of economic governance that will ensure that everybody who is trying their level best will come out a winner .
That is what we want , and not for a number of Member States - the ten which have written us a letter - to be penalised for having made good provisions for the future , for their pensions .
I hope that satisfies you , Mr de Jong .
Kartika Liotard is not here , but I am struck that she does not appear to have read the report and , yet , she comments as if she had .

Madam President , I have already thanked my fellow Members Cutaş , Matera and De Jong , but I would also like to thank Frédéric Daerden , Marianne Harkin , Julie Girling and Jean Lambert , who have spoken on behalf of their respective groups , as well as Danuta Jazłowiecka , the shadow rapporteur from my own party , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , for having made this report what it is .
I think that we have produced a sound analysis of what needs to be done .
I also know that there are still some very sensitive issues in the report which concern individual Member States .
Nevertheless , I hope that we , the Committee , and you , Commissioner Andor , have helped put things on the right track , that we will be able to rally round the White Paper , as well , in this Parliament , and that everyone will also vote in favour of it .
It was a tough dossier , but I hope that tomorrow we will be able to say : ' all 's well that ends well ' .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday tomorrow ( Wednesday , 16 February 2011 ) .
I would remind those of you who have not had the opportunity to speak that , if you wish , you can submit a written statement not exceeding 200 words which will be annexed to the verbatim report of proceedings , should you wish to keep a record of what you wanted to say if you had been able to do so .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The most vulnerable pension system in the EU is the public system , based on intergenerational solidarity .
However , a pension is an inherited right and governments cannot violate it , whether there is a crisis or not , even if some governments , such as the Romanian Government , feel free to do anything they want regarding the pension amount and the method for calculating it .
The demographic situation is not in our favour either .
Therefore , the system 's sustainability is an urgent problem .
However , public pension systems are not financed by governments , but by those who contribute to them : social partners , employees and employers , regardless of their type .
These systems are severely affected by two factors : illegal work and the inability of Europe 's economies to create new jobs offering decent pay and of a reasonable duration .
Poorly paid , precarious jobs , on the pretext of making the labour market more flexible , mean that public systems will be permanently in crisis .
I find it encouraging that the European Parliament resolution on pension systems emphasises the discrimination against women with regard to the pension amount , even though the age and period of time for making contributions will be virtually the same as those for men .
This is a first step towards righting an injustice , which must be followed by subsequent measures .
The European Commission 's Green Paper presents convincing arguments as to why we need to improve current pension systems .
However , we must not forget that most of the solutions proposed are socially sensitive .
We must therefore evaluate carefully not only the benefits of these solutions , but also the potential risks , particularly when we are talking about increasing the retirement age or Member States losing influence in pension policy .
Although the Commission considers raising the retirement age to be one of the less painful ways of adapting to increasing life expectancy , it does not provide specific proposals on the employment of elderly people in the labour market .
With the possibility of delaying retirement , many unemployed people under the pensionable age may land in the poverty trap .
Insufficient consideration has also been given to how much people 's health will allow them to work longer .
Furthermore , we must take into account the fact that women take lower paid or part-time work more often than men and that due to childbirth and motherhood , and caring for children and disabled family members , they lose insurance guarantees and ultimately receive smaller pensions .
I feel that we must also focus more on other means of improving pension systems , such as timing the start of working life , better reconciliation of work and family life , a ' flexible ' assessment of retirement age , the introduction of minimum standards for pensions , etc .
In any case , I would view the Green Paper as a serious step towards ensuring normal living conditions for current and future pensioners .
Changing demographic indicators and longer life expectancies urge us to develop a new strategy with regard to our pension systems .
We must redefine issues concerning the future in relation to the young and the old , in order to be able to ensure the sustainable , secure and appropriate disbursement of pensions .
There are major differences between European Member States in terms of their pension systems .
While Western European countries are struggling with the problems of increasing current and future costs , new Member States are attempting to set up diversified systems .
While , in 2008 , there were four employees to support every pensioner , in 2020 , there will be five .
The reasons for this include the fact that , due to their longer , more comprehensive training , European youths enter the labour market at a later age , and that the employment relationships of employees do not last until the statutory retirement age .
We need to establish a system which is sustainable and guarantees pensions by taking into account the situation of the Member States .
We must also consider the possibility of free movement within the EU .
We must start with the assumption that the effective and successful labour market of the new generation will also require mobility .
For the future reform of pension systems , it will be essential to link the first and second pillars , which are already partially overlapping in the various Member States , and these must also be closely linked to the third pillar .
We must also endeavour to eliminate illegal employment , which has a similarly crucial role in the preservation of our pension systems .
The ageing population trend facing Europe in recent years is bringing about major changes in the field of medicine and consumption habits , as well as to the population structure and social security system .
In these circumstances , ensuring pension systems ' viability in the future is closely linked to how long EU citizens are effectively active on the labour market .
I feel it is beneficial that the EU 2020 strategy supports an active , focused labour market policy , which will help increase the employment rate of older workers , women , members of minority groups and the long-term unemployed .
By achieving this objective , I believe that Europe will see an increase in the number of people in work and , by extension , economic growth , which will have a positive impact on the viability of pension systems at EU level .
We all know that there is no such thing as an ideal model for pension systems .
Every country has developed its own solutions and has plans for future reforms which are adapted accordingly .
In spite of the significant differences between the individual systems , I believe that the European Union should indicate the direction to be followed by all Member States when making changes .
It was emphasised many times in committee that the financial and economic crisis of recent years has highlighted the urgent need to carry out reforms of the pension systems .
The principles of solidarity and subsidiarity oblige us to strengthen cooperation between the Member States in this area .
Sharing our experiences will enable us to avoid wasting time on duplication , which has already led to disaster in one country , and exchanging information on best practices will make it possible to develop the best strategies effectively .
Let us not forget that the reforms must not be limited merely to raising contributions and extending the period during which contributions are made .
Budgetary stability , the cross-border coordination of pensions , the development of minimum guarantees and equal rights for women and men are only some of the issues which should be the subject of deliberations in every Member State .
A sustainable system based on mutually dependent and complementary pillars should be developed throughout Europe , incorporating public , employee and private pensions , as well as capital and non-capital pensions .
I believe that this solution will guarantee the creation of stable and fair pension systems which will , at the same time , remain flexible enough to adapt to the social and economic changes we are experiencing .
Due to their ageing populations , nearly all countries in the world are facing the question of how to finance pension systems based mainly on flexible funding in the future .
I welcome Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's excellent report , which opens up the possibility of a solution , while respecting subsidiarity .
I would like to mention a solution which has been promoted for many years by the Christian and Democratic Union - Czechoslovak People 's Party ( KDU-ČSL ) in the Czech Republic .
Children who are in gainful employment should have the option to redirect part of their mandatory contributions to the flexible system to their parents ' pension account , and partially offset the costs expended on their care in childhood through this contribution to a higher pension for their parents .
This individualised inter-generational solidarity would , on the one hand , be fairer for today 's pensioners , who have done a decent job of raising the new generation , while , on the other , it would surely help towards rehabilitating social attitudes to large families .
It should pay to have children , rather than just being a cost .
This is the key to a permanent solution both to the consequences and to the main cause of our pension problem .
Ten years of work on a Green Paper erroneously entitled ' Towards adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems ' has resulted in nothing more than a random collection of nonsensical assertions .
I do not know how it is in other countries , but in the Czech Republic , for example , the projected birth rates drawn up by experts 10 years ago differ so dramatically from the current state of affairs that the assertions of the Green Paper for the 2040-2060 period are , in my opinion , nonsensical .
If the experts are unable to predict the development of the birth rate even over five to seven years , how can their forecast for a period of more than 30 years have any value ?
The entire Green Paper is based on the erroneous assumption that , as long as I impose a legal obligation on the taxpayer to invest a portion of the resources assigned to the pension system into a fund not guaranteed by the state , he will get a higher pension that he would from the first pillar alone .
A responsible constitutional court would necessarily describe such a law as unconstitutional .
Even in countries where the second pillar has been introduced in the past , it apparently failed to produce the expected results .
For example , in Chile in the 1970s , after the overthrow of Pinochet , private funds not guaranteed by the state became mandatory for citizens outside the army and the police .
Why was this ?
Why is the current conservative government in Hungary also dismantling the ineffective second pillar of pension provision ?
These are the main reasons why the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left cannot vote for Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report .
We cannot support the planned crime of the century !
in writing . - The EU and Member States face one of their biggest challenges with regard to ensuring adequate and sustainable pension systems in Europe .
Given that a large percentage of citizens are highly dependent on their pension schemes for their livelihood , I would like to emphasise the importance of the state-financed pension schemes based on the principle of solidarity .
In multifaceted situations with various traditions and types of pension scheme , and given that the main responsibility for pension reform rests within the remit of Member States , it is impossible to apply the principle of one-size-fits-all .
The EU can , however , add value by providing coordination between the various pension schemes and sharing best practice .
Any review of pension systems should be carried out in a transparent way , protecting consumers ' needs and informing citizens of their rights with regard to the various pension schemes and the risks involved , especially those related to cross-border mobility .
Pension systems should be able to withstand any potential budgetary and demographic pressures on Member States without putting undue pressure on ordinary citizens .
All this needs to be addressed through the prism of the demographic and socio-economic challenges of the future , such as the development of atypical employment , a growing female labour force , changes in family structures , and youth unemployment .
Some of the subjects in the Commission 's initiative on this Green Paper seem to me to be particularly important .
I see it as our duty to prevent older citizens in particular , who have helped to build up our current levels of prosperity during their working lives , from ending up in a vulnerable situation in their old age .
At the same time , the report takes proper account of the subsidiarity principle .
The Commission should make a clearer call for equality between men and women .
Women more often have atypical employment contracts than men .
Their pensions are often smaller and , therefore , they are at greater risk of suffering poverty in old age .
Appropriate and secure pension systems represent long-term intergenerational contracts .
Therefore , I would like to encourage the Commission to use the Green Paper to launch initiatives which generate greater public awareness of the solidarity between the generations on the subject of pension provision .
I think that the EU needs to create an open unitary pension system which will take into account demographic trends and the issue of mobility .
Let me give the example of my own country .
In Romania , the annual expenditure on pensions is the largest category of budgetary expenditure .
The state social insurance budget has recorded an annual deficit ever since 2006 , reaching EUR 1.5 billion in 2009 .
According to the World Bank 's estimates , in 2050 , the deficit produced by pensions expenditure would have reached approximately 12 % of GDP under the old system .
This is why , by adopting Act no 263 / 2010 , Romania has introduced a series of major reforms which will ensure the sustainability of the public pension system in the medium and long term .
These reforms include : - discouraging early retirement and retirement through disability on unjustified medical grounds ; - increasing the number of people contributing to the public unitary pension system ; - gradually raising the normal retirement age for men and women , to 65 for men by 2015 , and to 63 for women by 2030 .
All pensions at present are the responsibility of each Member State , but the EU also has a strong role to play in pension policy .
For us to be able to achieve our objective , which is that the free movement of people and labour is genuinely free , pension systems must be adequately harmonised .
A minimum level for pensions must also be guaranteed , so that families can actually move around completely freely .
Accordingly , we need to move towards a harmonised system , and the sooner the better .
Otherwise , a nonuniversal system of pensions will actually create a barrier to free movement within the EU .
I was glad to learn that the report on the Commission 's Green Paper on adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems would be added to today 's agenda .
The issue of future pensions , how safe they are , and what income they will provide is currently one of the most important problems facing society .
Although the Member States are responsible for deciding on the shape to be taken by pension systems , and , in principle , the European Union is not authorised to take action in this area , certain legislative solutions relating to pension systems should be worked out at EU level .
Parliament 's demand that the Commission develop guidelines for the governments of the Member States is of great significance for the economic security of pensioners , since the guidelines would set minimum levels for pensions and criteria for calculating pension benefits , which would mean that women 's pension benefits would no longer fall short of men 's .
Women are condemned to lower pensions than men through no fault of their own , due to being paid different amounts for the same work or to the need to interrupt their career to care for children , which results in lower contributions over their entire working life .
In the face of threats to the stability of pension systems , the Commission should therefore not forget to ensure that legal solutions are introduced which guarantee the equal treatment of women and men throughout the EU as a whole as far as the level of future pensions is concerned .
On reaching the horrific figure of 23 million unemployed , Europe in 2011 has beaten every negative record of the decade in the field of employment policies , thus officially branding them a failure .
The crisis is more than sufficient grounds for adopting a text in which the appeal to apply the principle of subsidiarity to the area of pensions shows that the Eurocrats have become more reasonable again in revising a European social model that has certainly failed .
After a decade of being sidelined , the governments are stepping in and becoming the main players in the rebuilding of social Europe .
That is not enough , however : only a brave decision in favour of grassroots democracy , based on employment reforms that make work more attractive and on payslip federalism that takes account of the different costs of living in each region of Europe , against which both wages and pensions would be readjusted , would constitute a real change of direction towards renewal .
Lowering the cost of labour by reducing taxes , and giving our small enterprises the chance to carry on working and investing in the region , are essential moves to ensure equalisation of contributions for the older generations and a future of certainty and quality of life for the new ones .
Falsified medicinal products ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Matias , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2001 / 83 / EC as regards the prevention of the entry into the legal supply chain of medicinal products which are falsified in relation to their identity , history or source - C6-0513 / 2008 - 2008 / 0261 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , now that we have arrived at this point , at this time and at the end of this long process , I think that we know what it is that unites us , every man and woman in this room : it is the protection of patients ' health .
It is our duty to protect the 500 million citizens who live in Europe and who do not know if the medicines they are using are real or falsified .
We have to give them the guarantee that the medicines they are using are going to help save their lives , and not contribute to their early death .
I think that this problem is far too serious for us to allow it to continue unresolved any longer .
That is why I have referred several times to these falsified medicines as ' silent killers ' because that is effectively what they are , because if people who have problems ...
We know how falsification networks have changed : a few years ago everybody would be talking about Viagra , but today it is impossible not to talk about drugs that combat , or attempt to combat , diseases such as cancer , diabetes , heart disease and cholesterol .
Therefore , as I said , these are ' silent killers ' because , if they are not combating these diseases , they are not helping people .
This commitment that we are discussing here today is one which brings together some of the changes obtained throughout this process .
To begin with , we started in the market and ended up in health ( and I heartily welcome this move to health ) ; to begin with , we started with physical space , and included the Internet , as we could not leave out the main gateway for falsified medicines in Europe ; to begin with , we had merely a monitoring system , and we went on to add sanctions and penalties to this .
If we consider that falsification is a crime , we had to add sanctions and penalties .
There is also another important element : this is not confined merely to Europe .
We also ensure that third countries , where the situation of falsification is even more serious , are considered within our proposal presented here today .
We know that , in spite of only having random monitoring , since 2005 , there has been a 400 % increase in the seizure of falsified medicines .
We know that this trade represents profits of EUR 45 billion per year for certain criminal networks , but a total disaster for citizens ' health .
That is why I wish to make it very clear that the counterfeiting of medicines is not just any counterfeiting , because it is a form of counterfeiting which completely undermines confidence in our health systems .
As falsification is an organised crime , as I have already mentioned , I believe that we have to combat it with this legislation , with our commitment , and with our concerted efforts .
Therefore , we present a monitoring system which extends all the way from the manufacturer to the patient .
This has been a battle for Parliament , and something which I am very pleased is now assured .
This procedure has passed through two Commissioners and four presidencies .
We began with the Commissioner for Industry , as I mentioned , and we end now with the Commissioner for Health .
It has been a long process and therefore , I would like to end with some words of very special thanks for the rapporteurs from other groups who have followed this procedure with great commitment and dedication , from the beginning to the end : Mrs Grossetête , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mr Krahmer , Mr Tremopoulos , Mrs Yannakoudakis and Mrs Rosbach .
Without them , this would not have been such an interesting and , at the same time , productive , debate .
I know that at times , we have adopted differing stances , but I also know that we have had a common objective , that of protecting patients ' health .
As I cannot thank all those who have been involved , I would like to offer my symbolic gratitude to all those who worked on this directive by naming Mrs Pantazidou , who gave me immense support throughout the whole procedure .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very pleased to have this opportunity to address Parliament on this important issue of falsified medicines .
The proposal before us today for an amending directive on falsified medicines will , subject to Parliament 's approval , take us into new territory .
A successful conclusion of this file will mark the first time that the European Union has tackled , with legislation , the specific threat of falsified pharmaceuticals .
This text is going to make our regulatory system fit for the future ; making a major contribution to protecting patients from the many dangers of fake medicines .
As Members will know , falsified medicines are different from counterfeit products .
Falsified medicines are about public health .
I was very pleased that an early agreement on the substance of the proposal was reached between the colegislators just before Christmas .
Let me thank all those who worked so hard to make this agreement possible , especially the rapporteur of the lead committee , Ms Matias , as well as the rapporteurs of the committees giving opinions , Ms Sartori and Ms Bastos .
I would also like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs .
The Commission stands fully behind the substance of this well-balanced agreement , which introduces rigid and effective measures whilst being risk proportionate and flexible .
This is crucial , as not all medicines are the same : the likeliness of falsification varies , as does the risk of public health .
Turning to some of the specific issues , I would like to highlight the following .
On safety features : we saw the risk that Member States might , in future , take divergent approaches on the packaging .
This would have led to different levels of protection in the European Union .
It would have led to a fragmentation of the European Union market for medicines .
I am sure Members will share my satisfaction that we have paved the way towards a European safety feature to identify and thus authenticate a medicine .
The Commission has always supported a European approach in this regard .
On active pharmaceutical ingredients : the agreed text strengthens inspections and international cooperation in this field .
The Commission and the network of European agencies will work more closely with international partners .
Only through such cooperation can we achieve a truly effective system of inspection and enforcement .
The legislation , once adopted , will increase the transparency of actors involved in the distribution of medicines .
Finally , Parliament insisted on rules concerning online sales of medicines .
I consider that Parliament found a strong , pragmatic solution by focusing on issues of transparency .
The argument acknowledges that the rules for pharmacies in the EU vary but , in future , it will be easier for patients throughout the EU to distinguish legal operators from illegal online pharmacies .
President , Members , I trust I can count on your full support as regards the next step in the legislative process towards finalising this worthy and much needed initiative .
Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Matias , and thanking everyone who collaborated with her .
Sadly , over the last few years , we have witnessed an increase in the falsification of medicines here in Europe .
According to European Union data , currently 1.5 million boxes of falsified medicines are sold every year via the legal supply chain .
This is a criminal activity which represents a serious threat to European patients and industry .
The purpose of this directive is to block the introduction of falsified medicines into the supply chain , and thereby protect public health .
I would like to highlight the following key points in the opinion that I drafted : the introduction of a definition of falsified medicine , which clearly places the emphasis on consumer protection , the application of safety provisions to those medicines which are subject to medical prescription , the accountability of all participants in the supply chain and , finally , the application by Member States of effective sanctions to deter this criminal activity .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Grossetête , on the good work she has accomplished .
Falsified medicinal products are dangerous because of their huge public health impact , not to mention their economic impact .
Although the compromise text is a decided improvement over the provisions of the 2001 directive , it does not touch on certain issues that I think are fundamental , which I would like to mention here .
Manufacturers of active substances based in third countries should be subject to inspections by the Member State to which those substances are destined , to be mediated by the competent authorities of the third country in question .
Medicinal products should be clearly traceable as regards the manufacturer and the country of origin of the various active substances whenever this information is not specified in the new formulation .
The issue of Internet sales remains unresolved .
Nonetheless , I would stress that the report is positive overall and makes improvements , and I support Mrs Grossetête in favour of the compromise .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Matias , on her work .
I would also like to congratulate the Council and the Commission , since we have finally reached agreement on this extremely important directive on combating organised crime linked to falsified medicines .
The numbers are too high : 34 million falsified medicinal products seized in the European Union in 2008 , a massive increase of 380 % .
Over 50 % of medicines sold over the Internet are falsified , representing a real menace to all our fellow citizens .
The directive represents a step forward .
I see it as just a step , because unfortunately , we have not gone far enough .
We should have moved faster .
However , it is a step forward , with stricter inspections for the manufacturers of active ingredients constituting a particularly valuable feature .
We are seeking to improve safety and that means we need to identify the responsibilities of each player in the supply chain : manufacturers , wholesalers , parallel importers , brokers and distributors .
In the interests of safety , we also need to ensure that every box of prescription medicine is traceable .
I would have liked the proposal to go further on this front .
In addition to guaranteeing authenticity by having a unique code for each package , the safety requirements also include rules on tamper-proof packaging for boxes that are handled by parallel importers .
We have had lengthy discussions on this matter . It is an important point because we are currently dealing with a real scourge that has ramifications for public health .
Pharmacists also need access to trustworthy supplies of quality products .
I agree with you , Commissioner , when you say that we need to remain vigilant as we put all of these safety requirements into practice .
Yet I do not think our work ends there .
We will need to monitor carefully how this directive is implemented .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we can all imagine the nightmare .
Someone we know is ill and in a desperate situation .
They are given medicines , but the medicines have no effect , because they have been falsified .
We are grateful to the Commission for producing this proposal .
It is true that we have been discussing it for some time .
We began our debates in the previous parliamentary term and I would like to thank Mr Adamou , who is no longer a Member of this Parliament , for the preliminary work that he did on behalf of Mrs Matias .
I believe that we have reached a good compromise , as Mrs Grossetête has said .
Yes , we could have gone further .
We are all impatient and we all want greater safety , but this is a good compromise .
What have we achieved ?
We have made patient safety the central feature of the legislation .
The safety measures that we have put in place will ensure that products are traceable throughout the entire distribution chain .
Medicines can be traced from the manufacturer to the pharmacist .
They will have an identifier which makes it immediately obvious if they are falsified or duplicated or if there are any irregularities , which can then be followed up .
We have deliberately done this in such a way that the costs of the system remain at a reasonable level for everyone involved and that the system is not excessive .
However , we are also not compromising on patient safety .
This traceability is accompanied by the fact that the packaging must be undamaged , so that a patient who is given a pack can see that it has not been opened because it has an intact seal .
In addition , there will be no more packs of medicines which are divided in two , as frequently used to be the case .
All of this will improve safety levels and increase patients ' confidence .
What else have we achieved ?
We have implemented an early warning system .
This is excellent because it is the same system which has been in place for decades for foods and which we take for granted .
There is an early warning system throughout the European Union for contaminated food .
It is hard to believe that we have not had the same thing for medicines .
If a falsified medicine is discovered , it is now possible to send out an early warning .
The Member States must identify the patients who are affected , inform everyone involved and make sure that the risk involved in a medicine which is in circulation is made public .
We take this for granted in the case of cars and food , but it has not been available so far for something as essential as medicines .
As far as the Internet is concerned , anyone who accesses an illegal website must be able to recognise that it is illegal .
This is why we must certify legal websites which , in future , will have a link to the website of the national approval body .
They will be able to display a logo which will be developed by the European Commission .
Everyone who buys medicines on the Internet can do so independently .
They can tell whether they are dealing with a safe , legal website or an illegal one .
All of this is a milestone , a quantum leap forward in patient safety .
If we adopt this legislation tomorrow , we can be proud of what we have done and we should also make our achievements clear to the general public .
Madam President , Europe is rightly regarded as having the safest medicines in the world .
With this legislation , which we have been discussing for a long time , for two years I believe , we will further improve levels of safety .
I would like to thank Mrs Matias very much for taking on such a complex report as a new Member of Parliament .
This was a huge task and she has done very well .
It also involved a great deal of teamwork and I would like to thank everyone involved for this .
We have produced some very good results .
However , we must not lose sight of the fact that we can never achieve complete safety by means of regulations .
This is true in every area , not just in the case of medicines .
We have rightly concentrated on the essential issues , on the distinctions between different types of packaging and on traceability in the distribution chain .
By differentiating between prescription and over-the-counter medicines , we are taking the right approach , because we must remember that every piece of legislation and every attempt to make products safer costs money .
Therefore , it is reasonable not to include every pack of aspirins or every over-the-counter medicine automatically right from the start .
Instead , the Commission or the agency must be given the task of monitoring the market and investigating developments .
I believe that we can be proud of what we have achieved .
We have produced a piece of legislation that brings real benefits .
Most patients will probably not be aware that they are the result of EU law and , therefore , we must make this very clear .
Madam President , tomorrow , we shall be voting on this revised directive to combat the risk of millions of falsified medicinal products entering the legal supply chain , precisely because we want to protect public health from this silent killer .
The basic issue is that we need to establish a mandatory safety feature for prescription medicinal products , under certain circumstances , and for non-prescription medicinal products at risk of falsification , based on certain risk-assessment criteria , together with strict controls of online sales via authorised Internet pharmacies which display the EU logo .
Following exhaustive dialogue with the Council and the Commission , we have agreed on numerous points in the compromise text .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are in favour of extending the scope to all medicinal products at risk of falsification and of stricter regulation of online sales .
I am delighted that these issues have been satisfactorily resolved in the final agreement with the Council .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I , too , would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
When we look at medicine in today 's global markets , we see that there are no borders .
Therefore , we have no option but to deal with the issue of counterfeit medicine in a global manner .
Only by a united EU approach can we tackle the increasing counterfeit products available to the public - available not only through the shop floor , but via distribution services such as the Internet .
The directive presses all the right buttons and goes some way towards addressing the problem .
Could we have gone further ?
The answer is yes .
Should we have gone further ?
Here I must say no . We have laid down tighter controls on prescription medicine as a first step .
We have addressed the Internet pharmacy issue .
We have looked at the safety features .
Yes , we could have gone further on the traceability , taking it up to the patient , but this is a battle that we would have lost and it would have delayed the directive .
As they say , Rome was not built in a day .
I look forward to building on the foundations of this directive .
Madam President , unfortunately , we are seeing more and more falsified medicinal products on the market in our Member States .
That is why this proposal is so important .
Patients in the EU need to know how they can avoid falsified medicinal products .
They are also entitled to see that we , as legislators , are fighting to combat these products .
It is important that we adopt clear definitions .
All too often , we adopt legislation that is imprecise and unclear .
This must not happen in such an important case as this .
Medicinal products must be checked before they come onto the market and not only after patients have , in fact , been acting as guinea pigs for several years .
We must satisfy ourselves that medicinal products are only imported if safety and the possibility of verification are given top priority .
Falsification of medicinal products harms both the patients and the pharmaceutical companies in the Member States .
I therefore hope that we can agree on a more stringent line than that proposed by the Commission , and I would like to thank Mrs Matias for her sterling work .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Dalli , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Matias .
My thanks go also to Mrs Grossetête , the shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , and Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
The two of them have done excellent groundwork on this directive during the last parliamentary term .
The falsification of medicines is a growing problem .
The number of cases identified amounted to 7.5 million in 2009 , which is many more than in previous years .
These are only those cases that have come to light .
There is a large number of unreported incidents , which is why we can only assume that the problem is a major one .
It is very irritating if lifestyle medicines are found to contain no active ingredients .
However , if essential medicines used to treat cancer , for example , contain no active ingredients , the wrong ingredients or the wrong dosage , this can put patients ' lives at risk .
This is why action was urgently needed .
We have taken a reasonable approach .
The subject of data protection is a highly sensitive one and we have found the right balance .
We are acting on the basis of the risks involved and focusing initially on prescription medicines .
There is an opt-out procedure available , if there is reason to assume that there is no risk .
There is also an opt-in process for over-the-counter medicines , if there is reason to assume that they have been falsified .
Overall , this is a very good compromise and I would like to express my sincere thanks to everyone involved .
( NL ) Madam President , thank you , Mrs Matias , for an excellent piece of work and for the good cooperation .
I believe that this is a very important scheme for the health of consumers , although up until now , they have probably not even been aware that their health has been at risk .
Fortunately , at least we have finally got round to tackling all the risks now .
People 's health should not be trifled with .
Indeed , I believe that , with this scheme , we are taking an important step towards making packaging safe and towards clarifying the situation .
I am also very pleased that , at Parliament 's insistence , the sale of medicines via the Internet has been included in the directive , because that was a thorn in everybody 's side .
If you view this situation as gambling with the health of consumers , then Internet sales are tantamount to Russian roulette .
You have a 50 to 90 % chance of encountering a counterfeit medicine , and then - bang !
I am very pleased that this scheme has addressed that issue .
I do think , however , that some further modifications are needed , because we do not yet have cast-iron guarantees of safety .
I suppose that is up to each individual Member State .
Moreover , there is also the issue of the logo , of whether it will be entirely tamper-proof on the Internet , so we really have to keep an eye on this aspect .
Transparency and reliability for consumers ; I hope that consumers can take a punt on medicines without gambling with their health .
Madam President , let me first congratulate Marisa and my colleagues for reaching an agreement with the Council on such a complex dossier .
The text now on the table reinforces the security of our legal chain of supply for medicinal products , but let me emphasise that only 1 % of falsified medicines reach our patients via this legal chain .
The other 99 % comes from illegal channels and the black market .
In this regard , I very much welcome the additional provisions focusing on the Internet put forward by the European Parliament .
But in order to address this major risk for patients ' safety , we must also reinforce EU actions in the field of justice , police and customs cooperation .
The Commission should go further in this field and we insist on this to combat falsified medicines properly .
Regarding the specific provisions of the agreement to be voted on tomorrow , and most particularly the new safety features to be implemented , I would like to ask the Commission to clearly monitor the impact of this directive .
In its initial report , the Committee on the Environment stated that the measures put in place should respond to three guiding principles : proportionality , cost-effectiveness and independence .
( CS ) Madam President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for an excellent piece of work .
We all know that the pharmaceutical industry is very big business .
It is said to be the third largest in the world , after drugs and weapons .
It therefore offers rich pickings , and some people will always try to grab these by illegal means .
We will never be able to prevent the production of fake medicines .
Our task is to minimise the risk that they will get on to the European market and that they will reach our citizens .
We know that when someone sells a counterfeit watch , that is an infringement of intellectual property protection , but when a counterfeit medicine is sold , it is a direct health risk .
It is this fact which has led us and is leading us to support this report .
We know we cannot solve everything , and we know there is a problem , for example , over the fact that packaging is often produced separately from medicines , and that counterfeit medicines in genuine packaging are in circulation around the world .
However , this is a step in the right direction and an attempt at the maximum possible protection .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , although the Commission 's proposed changes to the directive on medicinal products for human use are designed to help prevent the entry of falsified medicinal products , we would have expected more concrete results , particularly through the introduction of compulsory inspections of production sites in which active substances are manufactured in third countries .
That option was rejected on the grounds that such checks would be too costly .
The fact is that European companies have to meet extremely high quality standards , whereas companies manufacturing in other parts of the world do not .
We are voting in favour , however , since measures are being introduced to make sure that imported pharmaceutical products are safer , including traceability , a ban on repackaging , compliance with EU safety standards , the partial regulation of Internet sales , and the possibility of extending similar measures to over-the-counter medicinal products as well .
( PL ) Madam President , according to the World Health Organisation , around 10 % of the global pharmaceutical market is accounted for by counterfeit medicinal products .
It is hard to estimate the exact scale of the problem in the individual Member States of the European Union , but in Poland in 2009 alone , for example , customs officers confiscated over 100 000 falsified products .
Apart from falsified medicines , the problems which patients face include a lack of reliable information on the contents of packaging , and also the issue of repackaging , during which the contents may change .
It is also very important for patients to be able to obtain reliable information on the Internet .
Unfortunately , as well as much information which is genuine , there is a lot of information on the Internet which is false .
Against this background , it is important to introduce a system for monitoring and checking medicines , which will provide patients with reliable information .
We are aware , however , that even the best regulations will not bring about the anticipated effect if they include no provisions for appropriate penalties for entities which put counterfeit medicines into circulation .
Today 's debate is therefore extremely important , as is the introduction of regulations which not only prevent the distribution of counterfeit medicines and put in place a monitoring system , but which , above all , impose penalties on the manufacturers of fakes .
Numbers of counterfeit medicinal products will only be reduced and their use made safer if measures of this kind are taken .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Matias , on a good report .
I am aware that it will not solve every problem , but it is a major step towards increasing patient safety .
Colleagues , just to say that you are all doing well in keeping to your speaking time , but you are stretching our interpreters ' capacities by speaking very fast .
Could we try and find a happy medium , please .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , in the light of this text , allow me to express my satisfaction and to emphasise one requirement and one point on which we will need to be vigilant .
I am pleased that we have succeeded in extending the legal basis for this directive from the original single market remit to cover public health too .
We have a requirement : we have fought to ensure that online sales form an integral part of this directive so as to be able to create checks and controls that reflect our findings .
There is also one point on which we will need to be vigilant .
We know that falsified medicinal products make up 1 % to 3 % of the market in developed countries , between 10 % and 30 % in Asia and Latin America , and up to 70 % in some African countries .
Some studies suggest that trafficking falsified medicines can be 25 times more profitable than drug trafficking .
To summarise : we have successfully established one requirement and one point on which we need to remain vigilant if we are to continue to develop greater international cooperation , which , in turn , will allow the European Union to take the lead in the fight against the blight of falsified medicinal products .
I would like to thank Mrs Matias for her work and also our group 's rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , who always provides valuable input in this field .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Dalli , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and also the shadow rapporteurs who have done an excellent job .
Initially , we had a very heated discussion on this subject .
However , the MEDI-FAKE action in December 2008 may have had an impact in this area .
During the course of two months , 34 million falsified tablets were seized on the European Union 's external borders .
This was a warning which prompted us to speed up our work .
We have now produced results that we can be really satisfied with .
We have guaranteed the traceability of medicines .
Every pharmacist can identify using a scanner whether a product is falsified or genuine .
However , I would like to make one request .
It is true that websites are now being monitored and that they have a logo , although this can also be forged , but in the case of sales over the Internet , we need to do some public relations work to explain the risks of Internet purchases to the citizens of Europe .
I am very pleased that parallel trade has been retained .
It has a worse reputation than it actually deserves and its position has been guaranteed .
I would like to make one final point .
We should perhaps consider , for the safety of citizens and to improve understanding , whether it would be a good idea to deal with the problem of widely differing pack sizes in different countries in order to introduce a standardised solution .
( CS ) Madam President , for two years , we have been discussing the alarming growth in counterfeit medicines on our market , including lifesaving medicines .
The result is a good directive which tightens up controls both on distributors and retailers , introducing mandatory protective measures and checks against infringement .
Producers will also assess risks in respect of processing aids , all of which has been happening for years in the Czech Republic , for example .
It is therefore excellent that this will apply throughout the EU .
There is also a need for the system not to be restricted just to prescription medicines .
If we wish to avoid losing our fight against counterfeits , Member States must achieve a greater level of integration in the area of health , unite in banning websites offering counterfeits and introduce inspections at third country producers , as is the case already with imported foods .
After all , in China alone , there are 500 factories for counterfeit medicines .
We simply have to step on the gas if we want to enhance safety on the European market .
( SV ) Madam President , I would like to thank Commissioner Dalli , the rapporteur , Mrs Matias , and the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent work on an important matter , because falsified medicinal products clearly represent a serious threat to patients ' health .
What is particularly serious is the fact that the number of falsifications of life-saving medicines is increasing .
These are medicines for the treatment of cancer , heart disease and infections , in other words , situations where someone really is in need of an effective medicine .
We are now taking a major step forward with regard to medicinal products within the EU , but the problem extends beyond the EU 's borders .
According to the WHO 's expert group , many countries in Africa , parts of Asia and Latin America have areas where more than 30 % of the medicines on sale may be falsified .
It is therefore extremely important for cooperation with third countries to be strengthened , and hopefully the changes that we are now implementing within the EU will also have an impact on the countries outside our Union .
Madam President , fake medicines , as we have heard , are an increasing problem .
Customs officials stopped 32 million counterfeit medicinal products from entering the EU in 2008 .
The WHO estimates that 50 % of drugs supplied over the Internet are falsified and there are even cases when the legitimate supply chain has been infiltrated .
For example , between 2005 and 2007 in the UK , there were a number of cases reported by the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency of fake lifesaving products , such as AstraZeneca 's prostrate cancer drug , Casodex , and the antiplatelet drug , Plavix , which protects against heart attack and stroke , actually reaching wholesalers and even pharmacy shelves .
That is why we urgently need to tighten the rules on import , export and trade in fake medicines .
I very much support this regulation .
( PT ) Madam President , the problem of falsified medicines obviously poses a serious threat to public health , whether these are prescribed drugs or over-the-counter products .
Without prejudice to the adoption of some important measures proposed in this report , I wish here to draw attention to an essential element of this problem .
As with other illicit activities , medicines are falsified because there are economic factors which stimulate that activity .
Therefore , we have to attack the root causes which make medicines big business : one of the biggest businesses on a world scale .

We have to promote the strengthening of public policies in this area ; we have to reinforce public capacity in the field of research and development of new drugs , attacking the monopoly of the pharmaceutical industry and its disastrous consequences in terms of access to medication ; and we also have to strengthen public capacity in the areas of production , supervision and monitoring of medicines .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to support the submitted bill , which amends and adds to the directive from 2001 on preventing counterfeit medicines from entering the legal supply chain .
The dramatically worsening situation on the market , where the quantity of fake medicines in legal circulation has recently risen sharply , requires a thorough tightening up of rules on monitoring , as well as sanctions .
The situation is all the more serious for the fact that counterfeiters , in a scramble to maximise profits , are progressing from fake dietary supplements to fake lifesaving medicines used for treating infections , heart disorders and cancer .
Such counterfeits can have fatal consequences for patients , who may be quite unaware that they have become victims of fraud , and that the tablets they are using are only imitation medicines and will not cure them at all .
It is therefore our duty , ladies and gentlemen , to stand up to this dirty business affecting the lives and health of our citizens .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very pleased to be part of this positive movement and this very interesting discussion .
This , in fact , is the second pillar of the Pharma package that we are delivering and the third pillar , that of information to patients , has already had a very good report here in Parliament .
I hope that we will be pushing this quite aggressively during the coming months .
As you have said , and I agree , the emphasis is on protection of consumers .
This is what the division should be in actions like the one we are taking today .
A lot of work has been done .
A lot of work still needs to be done to develop the details to make this directive operational .
But even after that , we cannot rest on our laurels , happy that we have a nice piece of legislation that has a lot of technical details that are very avant-garde .
We have to inform our citizens of what it means , and how they can utilise the tools that we are giving them with this directive so that they do not succumb to the pitfall of being drawn into purchasing falsified medicines .
We will do everything in our power to ensure proper traceability .
Inspections in third countries are important .
We have to realise , however , that , for example , 80 % of the ingredients that we use in what we produce in the European pharma industry come from third countries .
Therefore , we have to be pragmatic .
We also have to be selective in the type of inspections that we do .
There are third countries that have very high levels of inspection and standards and we naturally have to cooperate with these countries to ensure that these standards are being kept to .
In other countries that are not as proficient as these , we have to go and see with our own eyes and touch with our own hands .
This is the policy we have to push forward .
I am looking forward to working with Parliament in the next phases to make this work .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , obviously , I would like to thank my fellow Members for all the comments they have made .
I am not going to mention them one by one , as this is not my intention .
I think that if any doubts existed as to the meaning of the word commitment , it has become very clear here what it means .
We do not all have perfect proposals , but more important than knowing whether a proposal is perfect is knowing that we have an instrument in our hands which will allow us not to have to put off the protection of our patients ' health any longer .
We are also bound not to delay its adaptation ; we are bound not to delay putting it into action ; and we can only do this if we work together .
I must also say personally - and the Commissioner mentioned the issue of inspections - that in my initial proposal , I presented a change to mandatory inspections in third countries .
This is our commitment and yet we win in some areas and we lose in others .
The Commission explained to us that this would be impossible to achieve .
I would like to mention something else with regard to this commitment .
I think that we all see ourselves as being committed , but I also think and am aware that we must all demand that it is honoured because , otherwise , it will not be effective .
This commitment contains guaranteed safeguards to ensure that we can follow the procedure , assess it and have systematic access to information which will allow us to verify whether or not it is being put into practice as it should be , and whether it is necessary to make some changes .
I would therefore like to end by thanking the European Commission for its collaboration and , in particular , the Spanish and Belgian Presidencies with whom we have been working over the last six months .
There is no such thing as a perfect proposal , no such thing as a perfect action ; there will always be flaws , but I think we have a strong and robust commitment which will allow us to fight for and defend patients ' health .
As my own speech is also full of flaws , I failed to thank my fellow Members , Mrs Bastos and Mrs Sartori , for the opinions of the other committees .
Thank you also for your support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday tomorrow ( Wednesday , 16 February 2011 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Falsified medicinal products and the illegal trade in medicines are worldwide problems , both for highly developed countries and developing countries , and the problem is becoming increasingly widespread , posing a threat to patients ' safety and lives .
One of the reasons for this is that falsified medicinal products and drugs sold in places not authorised to sell them do not meet the quality requirements set for medicinal products , and contain prohibited substances whose use may have unknown consequences .
I agree that the problem requires effective and strengthened international coordination and cooperation in order to guarantee an effective strategy for combating falsified medicines .
I fully support the proposal that measures should be taken with the aim of minimising the problem of trade in falsified medicinal products , and also of trade in medicines sold in places not authorised to sell them and other falsified products fulfilling the criteria for medicinal products .
Attention should be paid to the need to regulate mail-order and Internet sales of medicinal products .
According to information from the World Health Organisation , falsified medicines account for around 50 % of products offered on the Internet .
I believe that it is essential to plan and implement measures aimed at making information available on falsified medicinal products and medicines from illegal sources , and to run public education campaigns regarding the threats associated with purchasing medicinal products in places not authorised to sell them .
I also believe that it would be a reasonable idea to put in place safeguards making it possible to identify medicinal products and to verify their authenticity and traceability .
Falsified medicinal products are a global problem , and should be examined in a global context .
The reasons behind the problem include the high price of medicines and a lack of awareness among patients , but to a large extent , they are also of a legal nature .
This situation is exploited by criminal groups throughout the world .
I would therefore like to acknowledge the joint measures taken by the EU institutions and the almost unanimous position adopted by all the political groups on the drafting of a compromise legislative act on this matter .
I wish to quote a statement by the former Secretary-General of Interpol , Ronald Noble , comparing the number of victims of terrorism and counterfeit medicines : over a period of 45 years , terrorists killed 65 000 people , whereas counterfeit medicines claimed 200 000 victims in China alone .
I believe that monitoring , control measures , tightening up standards and establishing a mutual recognition system , all of which are emphasised , are good solutions from which to begin .
As Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I would also like to highlight the role played by information campaigns aimed at patients , and also the imposition of obligations on pharmaceutical companies in this area .
Patients should have access to high quality , objective information regarding the way in which medicines are prescribed and their properties .
Falsified medicinal products make up 50 % of medicines sold over the Internet and 1 % to 3 % of medicines sold by dispensing pharmacists .
These falsified products are evolving : they now include life-saving medicines as well as lifestyle medicines .
We have a duty to protect the health of our fellow citizens who choose to order medicines online in order to save time or money , unaware of the risks that they are running .
What is more , these falsified medicines are entering the formal supply chain and finding their way into dispensing chemists ' stocks , where they could prove deadly to any one of us .
Every year , 200 000 people lose their lives after ingesting falsified medicinal products .
This is more than just a worrying trend : we need to fight this scourge with all the means at our disposal .
For this reason , I welcome the forthcoming adoption of the directive , which will introduce a unique track and trace code to prove that medicinal products are authentic , together with a standard logo to identify trustworthy websites selling pharmaceutical products .
However , I would like to stress that providing this safety , to which patients are entitled , must not be used as a justification for price increases .
The pharmaceutical industry is one of the three most lucrative industries .
It is certainly one of the main reasons why counterfeit pharmaceuticals are spreading on to the market .
Last year , customs confiscated 384 % more counterfeit pharmaceuticals than were confiscated five years ago .
In combating this phenomenon , it is very important to accept unified security measures within the European Union , including repackaging .
Patients need to have complete confidence that any medication they are taking is indeed what they think it is and that the active ingredient in the prescription corresponds to what is in the medication .
From the perspective of national health , it is of the utmost importance that the medication should be effective , high quality and safe .
False information campaigns by third-party pharmaceutical companies that have procured a licence to sell from competent institutions must be prohibited .
This prohibition should also be extended to information and advertising distributed to medical staff .
It is essential to protect the pharmaceutical supply chain against the entry of falsified medicinal products for the sake of the general public and companies that operate correctly and responsibly .
The directive being examined by Parliament must therefore be supported wholeheartedly , since it introduces procedures and obligations that I hope can lead to concrete and effective results .
In particular , I would like to underline the importance of certain obligations placed on a range of actors involved in the supply chain , from distributors to wholesalers , and , above all , the introduction of ' safety features ' on prescription medicinal products with the aim of assuring consumers of the integrity of the manufacturing and supply chain .
Stricter rules on inspections , on the traceability of the substances contained in medicinal products , as well as on online sales , are further measures that I think will curb the trade in falsified medicinal products .
It should be noted , however , that the compromise text establishes that there will be regular inspections at production sites in third countries , but that they will be carried out by the authorities of the third country in question .
It would have been better if they were to be performed by the authorities of the countries to which the medicinal products are destined , because the main threat of falsification comes precisely from third countries .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0009 / 2011 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Subject : Marketing ban on the drug ' Médiator '
Can the Commission explain why a decision was not taken in 1998 to ban the marketing of pharmaceuticals containing benfluorex ?
Should the Commission not have been alerted , and not for the first time , by the bans imposed by the authorities in Spain and Italy ?
Why , ultimately , did the Commission not act until as late as June 2010 , when it finally took a clear decision on the marketing of that molecule ?
Will the Commission ask the European Medicines Agency to conduct a full retrospective investigation into the ways in which this drug was used over twenty years ?
Member of the Commission . - Allow me to address each of the four component questions in turn .
The first question was : can the Commission explain why a decision was not taken in 1998 to ban the marketing of pharmaceuticals containing benfluorex ?
The answer : benfluorex was discussed in 1998 in the Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products , now called the Committee for Medical Products for Human Use , of the European Medicines Agency , and subsequently in the Pharmacovigilance Working Party .
The committee considered that benfluorex should not be included in the scope of an ongoing evaluation procedure at European level , concerning certain anorectic agents due to a different mode of action .
However , it was agreed that the committee 's pharmacovigilance working party would investigate if there was a safety issue with this compound .
In March 1999 , the pharmacovigilance working party concluded that there were no major benefit-risk concerns for medicinal products containing benfluorex .
Further discussion in the working party did not lead to changes in this conclusion .
The second question : should the Commission not have been alerted and not first by the bans imposed by the authorities in Spain and Italy ?
The answer : Italy and Spain did not revoke the marketing authorisation for benfluorex .
In fact , the first time that a Member State effectively took measures to revoke the national marketing authorisation for Mediator was in 2009 , when France suspended its national marketing authorisation .
In Spain , it was the marketing authorisation holder , Servier , that withdrew the marketing authorisation in 2003 .
Similarly , it was Servier itself that did not request the renewal of the marketing authorisation in 2003 in Italy .
The product remained authorised in France , Portugal , Luxembourg and Greece .
Benfluorex was discussed within the pharmacovigilance working party , acting in its role as a forum for Member States to exchange pharmacovigilance data among themselves .
I would like to clarify that monitoring of pharmacovigilance data and the subsequent decision making on national authorisations for medicinal products is the primary responsibility of Member States .
Commission intervention in these cases is exceptional and limited to concrete situations foreseen in the legislation .
The Commission can launch a Europe-wide evaluation by the European Medicines Agency in two cases : firstly , when Member States adopt divergent national decisions concerning a marketing authorisation and , secondly , before any decision is reached on the granting , variation , suspension or revocation of a marketing authorisation that appears necessary , in particular , when taking account of pharmacovigilance information in cases where it considers that the interests of the Community are involved .
In this case , no action was triggered at EU level in the light of the conclusions of the pharmacovigilance working party and the fact that no divergent decisions were taken at the time by the Member States in response to the discussions in the working party .
The third question was : why did the Commission not act until as late as June 2010 when it finally took a clear decision on the marketing of that molecule ?
The answer : it was only in 2009 that a Member State , namely France , suspended the marketing authorisation of Mediator .
Under the new provisions in place since 2004 , this automatically triggered a review of the product 's benefit-risk balance , which led to the adoption of a Commission decision requiring all Member States to revoke any national authorisations for benfluorex containing medicinal products .
In this context , it is important to stress that the new pharmacovigilance legislation adopted on 15 December 2010 introduced additional provisions to ensure signal detection by the European Medicines Agency of safety issues for nationally-authorised products and creates new procedures at EU level to assess safety signals for such products , leading to harmonised actions by the Member States .
The fourth and last question was : will the Commission ask the European Medicines Agency to conduct a full retrospective investigation into the ways in which this drug was used over 20 years ?
The answer : to date , the Commission has not asked the European Medicines Agency to conduct a full retrospective investigation into the ways in which this medicinal product was used over 20 years .
The figures and the documentation referred to in the French report clearly indicate that by far the highest use of this medicinal product was in France .
I would just like to make it clear how I will deal with the supplementary questions this evening .
I will take all the supplementaries together - remember that you have 30 seconds for the supplementary - and then I will ask the Commissioners to answer all the supplementaries en masse .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to raise one more point in the light of the comments made and the responses given by Commissioner Dalli , whom I would like to thank for the clarifications provided .
As you pointed out , Commissioner , in 2003 and 2005 , it was Servier which asked for the product to be withdrawn from sale in these two countries .
You also said that in 1998 and 1999 , the working party chose neither to authorise nor propose the withdrawal of this product .
Yet we know that the medicinal product was withdrawn in the United States in 1997 .
Therefore , surely it is clear - and here is the nub of the matter - that in a market as large as the European Union , which encompasses 500 million European citizens , we need more vigilance ?
In particular , we need additional alerts that will trigger Europe-wide action , with clear competences for the European Commission and the European Medicines Agency .
In this way , we will be able to avoid a repeat of the situations that have occurred in some Member States , such as the French case that was cited .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , let us extend the terms of this debate , because the Mediator product is simply the visible tip of the iceberg and raises a range of other questions .
For example , how is it that a medicinal product that is considered to be potentially harmful , even fatal , and that has been withdrawn from the market in some Member States , can continue to circulate freely within the European Union ?
Should we not give serious thought to the role and the effectiveness of the European Medicines Agency , if its findings are not binding for Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - In effect , the procedures that were in force at the time of the historic events that I recounted in my answer were as I stated : there was a clear separation between Member States and the European authority - a separation that is still , in fact , in force and jealously guarded by Member States .
In effect , that is why , over time , we feel that we should be strengthening our pharmacovigilance processes and procedures .
I must say that , in 2004 , a step forward was taken on revising the pharmacovigilance procedures and processes that we already have , and also in the last pharmacovigilance agreement .
We now have a lot of ' stoppers ' and it is now also possible for other action to be taken at European level , too , to ensure that anything that is withdrawn from any market is notified and action can be taken upon it .
This was not the case before .
So this is the situation today .
I have instructed my services to conduct a stress test now , including on the new pharmacovigilance processes and procedures put in place after our last agreement .
They are taking Médiator as a case study to see whether something like Médiator could still happen with the latest pharmacovigilance processes .
We will make sure that if we do find any vacuums , bottlenecks or spaces where action will not be taken in these cases , we will come back to you and try to correct the situation .
Subject : Sale of iPad subscriptions by Apple
iPad producer Apple is demanding that newspaper and magazine publishers offer their readers their products ( casual sales as well as subscriptions ) exclusively via Apple 's iTunes online store , so that it retains control of the sale conditions .
This means that iPad users can no longer order any newspaper or magazine for iPad via the website of the publishers concerned .
Does the Commission regard this action as compatible with EU law and such principles as interoperability and an open Internet ?
Could this be a case of abuse of a dominant position and therefore infringement of Articles 101 and 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ?
What action will the Commission be taking in this connection ?
Member of the Commission . - Apple announced today that it will offer digital subscriptions to newspapers and magazines on iPad devices exclusively through applications ( Apps ) sold via its online store .
Publishers will still be able to offer online subscriptions through their websites , or by other means , but they will no longer be able to process the subscription via an App on an iPhone using Apple as an intermediary .
Whether Apple 's behaviour constitutes a violation of the EU competition rules depends on a range of factual , legal and economic elements .
It requires , inter alia , that Apple holds a dominant position in the relevant market .
The boundaries of such relevant markets are not clear , as the sector is still relatively new and evolving and as there are also several comparable platforms and devices that provide similar functionalities , some of which are supported by online application stores as the consumer demand for electronic and / or print magazines is unclear and evolving .
Once the market has been properly identified , the question of dominance would have to be assessed .
Dominance has been defined by the European Court of Justice as a position of economic strength enjoyed by an undertaking which enables it to hinder the maintenance of effective competition on the relevant market by allowing it to behave to an appreciable extent independently of its competitors and customers and ultimately , of consumers .
The Commission notes , in particular , that alternative application platforms exist and several companies have recently launched , or are expecting to launch in the near future , a number of devices similar in terms of functionality to the iPad .
The Commission is following the developments regarding Apple 's commercial policies and is in close contact with the national competition authorities .
( NL ) Madam President , this afternoon , Apple indeed announced that it wants to offer a new model to its subscribers , but it is clear that it wants to take advantage of its market position , no matter whether it is in the dominant market position or not , in order to get its hands on customer information which is at the disposal of publishers .
In the long term , this could be particularly detrimental to publishers in Europe , as well as to media pluralism .
I would therefore like to ask you whether you are prepared to act , regardless of whether or not this is a case of dominant position , and when you are going to take the initiative , if at all .
In other words , could you explain what timescale you have in mind for this ?
Is the Commission taking the initiative going to be a question of weeks or a question of months ?
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your answer but , in my opinion , you failed to mention an issue of fundamental importance , namely , whether we are capable of imagining at all what portion of the European market could be dominated by Apple 's new product .
You responded in a rather general fashion , by stating that the matter was only being examined at present .
However , I think that we should know whether there is , in fact , a real threat that Apple will become dominant on the European market .
Member of the Commission . - It remains to be seen whether Apple will become dominant in the market , because the market is evolving .
We need to assess what the market is and what a dominant position means in this market .
As far as market scale goes , at this stage , this is small , and it is premature to speak about any action by the Commission .
If there are lots of competitive proposals and an Apple approach does not constitute a dominant position , then there is no need for the Commission to take action .
As I said , the Commission is monitoring the situation according to the rules of EU competition law , and if there is a need for steps to be taken , they will be taken independently when the moment is right , when we conclude that action needs to be taken .
So rest assured that action will be taken , if necessary .
Subject : Protection of investments in the context of EU-Russia negotiations on the new partnership and cooperation agreement
Does the Commission raise issues relating to investment protection , especially in the energy sector , in its negotiations with the Russian Federation on the new partnership and cooperation agreement ?
Drawing on a number of cases when European energy companies were forced out of the Russian market without the possibility to seek impartial and fair local judicial protection , does the Commission intend to include an investor-to-state dispute settlement mechanism in the new partnership agreement or additional economic agreements with the Russian Federation ?
What is the position of the Commission with regard to the Energy Charter Treaty ( ECT ) ?
Is the Commission still hopeful that the Russian Government might again sign the ECT and eventually ratify it ?
Or will similar provisions relating to the protection of investments in the energy sector be included in the new partnership agreement ?

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , with a total stock of EUR 92 billion of foreign investment at the end of 2008 , the European Union is by far the largest foreign investor in the Russian Federation .
With regard to the energy sector , it is the EU 's firm intention to ensure that the key principles enshrined in the Energy Charter Treaty will also be part of the ongoing negotiations between the European Union and the Russian Federation on the new treaty .
The relevant provisions should include investment protection for the energy sector and , in particular , a strong dispute settlement mechanism .
This approach would be without prejudice to the EU general assessment that the Energy Charter Treaty continues to be a valuable multilateral instrument to govern international energy relations .
Its unique feature is that it sets legally binding rules on investment protection transit and that it contains provisions on dispute resolution in the energy sector .
The European Union considers that Russia 's renewed engagement in the Energy Charter process , as expressed in the last EU-Russia Summit , is very important and it will follow a constructive and open approach in that regard .
In this context , the EU welcomes the Russian interest in a legally binding energy framework , following its recent proposal for a draft convention on ensuring international energy security .
The modernisation of the Energy Charter process would be the appropriate context for multilateral negotiations on this proposal .
I have an additional question .
In the European Parliament , we are currently working on the future European investment policy .
When it comes to Russia , we often hear about the expansion of Russian companies in the European market , especially in the energy sector , but , at the same time , European investors face enormous difficulties when they want to invest in Russia , especially in sectors that Russia deems as strategic , such as the energy sector .
So how is the Commission going to ensure that the principle of reciprocity in the investment relationship is upheld in the new partnership agreement ?
Member of the Commission . - In a week 's time , we have a meeting with the Russian Government , and investment policy issues will certainly be discussed , because there are arguments on both sides .
Russia also argues that some of its investments are not much appreciated in the European Union , so there are ongoing negotiations .
At the same time , I can clearly say that in the last year , relations on quite difficult issues have started to improve : there has been more openness on the Russian side to discuss issues in depth and in detail .
I believe , nevertheless , that relations should build on the agreement , and that the new agreements I have mentioned that will follow the PCA should have very strong investment protection clauses .
That is the only way we can really avoid having situations where one side accuses the other side of not playing by the rules .
The current political dynamic is giving rise to much hope that we can conclude this agreement , and include relatively strong provisions in it .
It is very clear that in the last year , there have been some fundamental positive shifts in our relations .
Subject : EU support for the Global Fund to fight Aids , Tuberculosis and Malaria
In the 2011 budget , considerable amounts have been allocated to the Global Fund to fight Aids , Tuberculosis and Malaria ( GFATM ) ( EUR 65 000 000 in commitment appropriations and EUR 47 608 950 in payment appropriations ) .
Recent reports have shown significant failings within the fund ; and because of corruption and bribery problems involving the fund , some Member States have halted payments to it .
How will the Commission ensure that the funds allocated to the GFATM are not used for bribery and corruption ?
What has the Commission done to ensure that the GFATM still complies with the rules on eligibility for EU funds ?
Has the Commission considered halting funding to the GFATM ?
Member of the Commission . - This is a very pertinent question on an issue which the Commission takes very seriously and is therefore following closely and with great concern .
The Commission is a very strong supporter of the Global Fund to fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria .
The Fund has been very successful and it is my full intention to work with the Fund to solve the issues as soon as possible in order for the Commission to continue to be one of the biggest contributors to the Fund .
It is important to underline that the problems identified did not arise from the Fund itself , but in individual countries from the people contracted to implement the programmes .
These are countries where very careful attention always has to be paid to avoid such problems .
It is public knowledge that the Office of the Inspector General of the Global Fund has been conducting enquiries in respect of the use of USD 4.8 billion in 33 countries .
These enquiries have taken place either on a systematic basis or in response to information received on the potential misappropriation of funds .
Its inquiry is now complete ; in line with common practice , the OIG has issued a report and published it on the website of the Global Fund .
This practice has proven effective and transparent in implementing the Global Fund 's stated policy of zero tolerance of corruption .
For our part , the Commission has commissioned an independent five-pillar audit of the Global Fund , as required under European Union financial regulations for all organisations benefiting from EU financial support .
The audit report delivered in November 2010 expressed the auditors ' overall conclusion that the Global Fund 's internal control environment respects the principles of division of responsibilities and of management control of country and regional financial reporting .
So standard mechanisms and controls are in place to ensure that funds received from donors are properly handled .
However , the auditors made several suggestions to improve the management of funds in addition to existing risk management strategy .
Following this report , my services are currently discussing the needed modifications designed to improve and speed up the Global Fund reform agenda approved on 4 January .
We are also undertaking a second audit mission , including country visits , to follow up on the institutional assessment .
Through a letter dated 27 January 2011 and a teleconference on 2 February , I have already contacted the Executive Director of the Global Fund , Mr Kazatchkine , to express the urgent need for additional reforms to further strengthen the Fund 's ground management processes and operations .
In the meantime , during the Board meeting called on 2 February , the Secretariat of the Global Fund proposed an external review to be carried out by the Global Fund oversight mechanism .
This was welcomed by Board members .
So in reply to your question as to whether the Commission has considered halting EU funding to the Global Fund , I would inform you that the Commission has notified the Global Fund Executive Director and the Board members that the EU contributions are being put on hold .
In parallel , I consider that the European Union , and the Commission in particular , must maintain its overall commitment to the Global Fund objectives , reform process and strategy of alignment to country and health systems .
In this respect , the Commission is identifying clear criteria to apply before further contributions to the Global Fund can be resumed .
These measures for ensuring prevention and detection of fraud have no implication in the delivery of vital treatment to the patient but , at the same time , understand that we need to have in place new , strengthened control mechanisms very fast , because as time passes , indefinitely holding on to payments is not the best option .
We need additional strengthened control mechanisms at country level which will decrease the risk of misappropriation of the funds and can then resume payment .
The Commission will , as I said , remain a keen supporter of the Fund because the Fund has achieved fantastic results , but there has been fraud and we need to deal with that fraud appropriately .
( DA ) Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his support for the Fund , but also for taking decisive action to deal with what has happened and for taking the matter very seriously .
My question to the Commissioner , in specific terms , is what sort of timetable does he envisage with regard to the freezing of contributions to the Fund ?
How quickly does he expect to be able to find a solution to the problems ?
According to the Fund , some of those responsible for the misappropriation have been arrested .
Action has been taken .
I would like to know how long he expects it to be before the money can start to flow again .
Commissioner , do you agree that the Global Fund to fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria is vital and that it would be criminal to halt funding now because it would bring to an end these lifesaving projects ?
Furthermore , do you agree that we must , as you said , reinforce control mechanisms as well as our commitment to ensuring that the Global Fund delivers for those most in need - people at threat from AIDS / HIV , malaria and tuberculosis ?
This evil of corruption must not be paid for by the innocent who are living with AIDS / HIV and who are at threat from malaria and tuberculosis .
( EL ) Madam President , I , too , thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
According to published statistics , the European Union earmarked funds of EUR 972.5 million for the Global Fund to fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria between 2002 and 2010 .
This accounted for approximately 50 % of the Fund 's total resources .
My question is this : apart from what you have told us about the problems you have identified , has the Commission drafted an evaluation report or carried out an investigation into whether all this money was channelled to its intended target ?
Member of the Commission . - There are two sides to this issue .
On the one hand , I recognise that the Fund is doing fantastic work , reaching those most in need .
There is no question about that .
But , on the other hand , they are public funds .
Public funds are taxpayers ' money and one misappropriation or one fraud case could destroy the work of hundreds of thousands of people .
So we need to find a solution very rapidly .
My objective is to have the additional measures in place by the summer so that we can resume payments in the autumn .
I believe that is doable .
We have identified the areas where we need this : at national level .
The Central Office is being well audited , and when we transfer money , everything is in order , but when it comes down to implementation in a given country , there are too many risk elements .
If you saw which countries were involved and the size of the specific budgetary envelopes for them , you would realise that the sums involved would be too huge to suspend payments , and we need the reforms to work very rapidly .
If it is discovered next year that there are misappropriations , you would be the first to tell me that I knew about the cases and asking why I did not take action .
Then I would say that I was thinking only of sick people .
That would not be a sufficient answer .
If we sort this issue out in half a year , by the summer , then we will not have made any substantial impact on the functioning of the Fund , but we will have lent greater credibility both to the fund and to the way EU taxpayers ' money is spent .
Subject : The CE mark
Could the Commission outline what progress has been made on strengthening the CE mark in order to promote European exports in markets like South America and Asia , as this was one of the commitments that Commissioner Tajani made upon being appointed to office ?

Madam President , Mr Higgins , the CE mark is the visible part of a mechanism that is crucially important for the smooth operation of the internal market .
The adoption of the new legislative framework in 2008 strengthened the mark 's reliability in three ways in particular .
Firstly , it strengthened control of the CE product certification system ; secondly , it introduced market surveillance by national authorities , which must check the manufacturers ' declarations of conformity and the certificates issued by independent organisations that authorise the use of CE marks on products ; and , thirdly , it requires the Member States to strengthen customs checks so that only products conforming to the legislation are allowed to circulate in European and world markets .
By providing instruments designed to protect the CE mark , which were lacking until recently , the effective implementation of the new legislative framework strengthens the mark 's credibility and therefore enhances the reputation of products bearing the mark in the European and , consequently , the international markets .
Moreover , enhanced controls on imported products will ensure that there is less abuse of the CE mark in the world market .
In addition , following the explicit request made by Parliament , the Commission has successfully launched an information campaign about the mark , aimed both at economic operators , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , and at consumers .
The aim of the campaign is to give interested parties , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , a better understanding of what the mark means and how the mechanism underlying it works , so that they can implement the rules on marking properly and defend themselves better in court in cases of counterfeiting or dangerous products .
That will make European products more competitive .
Our agreements and talks with third countries , including Mercosur and Latin America , particularly Argentina , are designed to promote the regulatory and technical model underlying the CE mark .
During my contacts with that part of the world , I intend to clarify these points and , of course , to push for the solutions that we have agreed to implement .
I will be in Latin America in the spring , and this subject will also be on the agenda of the meetings I will have with government representatives in the countries I am to visit : Brazil , Argentina and Chile .
Of course , I reaffirm my commitment to work closely with you to ensure that the mechanism underlying the CE mark operates properly and that the Member States comply with the obligations aimed at making our products more competitive .
I will , of course , keep you regularly informed about developments in this field , and let me remind you that the Commission will re-examine the situation and submit a report to Parliament in 2013 , as required by Regulation ( EC ) No 765 / 2008 .
I want to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I think the concept is very good .
It is consumer-focused , it is about reputation , and the reliability of goods produced within the EU .
But I cannot find any information from Eurostat , for example , as to how much this symbol is worth to European business , or what percentage of Europeans actually know what the CE does .
Secondly , I believe that we should be exploiting it more .
In April 2010 at the Hanover Fair , there was a major campaign to promote the CE mark , but we are not exploiting it enough .
It needs a far more concerted effort , as the potential is absolutely huge .

( RO ) Madam President , since you mentioned the European Union 's competitiveness and because I welcome the efforts you are making to develop a European Union industrial policy , I would like to ask you the following : what percentage of products available in the European market carry the CE mark and what percentage of products available in the European internal market are manufactured in China ?
Madam President , I am grateful that a number of problems have been highlighted which are also the focus of our attention , because the honest truth is that products imported legally or illegally from outside the European Union are often counterfeit .
Unfortunately , however , neither the Commission nor the Union 's institutions have customs agencies or police forces to check imports , so we have to trust the checks carried out by the various Member States when products bearing this mark enter the EU and are placed on the market .
Later , I will explain the details in order to answer Mr Higgins 's supplementary question , but I must make it clear that we have launched an information campaign designed not only to promote the CE mark , but also to ensure that the products are more guaranteed , by checking for counterfeit goods .
The suggestion of visiting the port of Rotterdam , which is where most toys arrive , is an idea that I have been nursing .
I will probably go there myself in order to signal the fact that the Commission is focusing on checking products from outside the European Union that are coming in through one of its major ports .
I agree with the point that use of the CE mark needs to be encouraged .
We are in the early stages , and I believe we should continue down this path .
That is the purpose of the information campaign , which is also the result of a request made by Parliament .
We achieved a lot when I was still a Member of the European Parliament by insisting on the need for the EU to have a mark that would primarily guarantee compliance with EU regulations .
In fact , we should not forget that the CE mark is not a European quality mark , but it just means that certain EU rules have been complied with - a kind of self-certification , therefore , or third-party certification .
Some Members of this House hope that the CE mark will be followed by a quality mark and , in fact , Parliament pressed me on this at the hearing a year ago , when I put forward my candidacy for the Commission .
I am certainly not against the idea , but I think we first need to encourage and increase the use of the CE mark by means of the information campaign within the EU .
Even more needs to be done , and in the next stage , we need to think about further new initiatives .
First of all , however , we must ensure that the CE mark becomes common practice for all EU companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , which probably require more information .
I assure you that I am committed to ever better information .
I am delighted that there are debates and questions like these - and I thank Mr Higgins for them - because they spur on the debate through the work of the European Parliament and of its individual Members and the work of both the Commissioner and the representative offices of the Commission and Parliament in the European Union .
It is vital to inform the individual Member States and business organisations of the importance of using this instrument , just as it is crucial - and I have already emphasised this in my speech - to put pressure on the Member States to maintain strict vigilance , both at the borders and within the market , in order to stamp out , or at least to try to curtail , the problem of counterfeiting and the unlawful use of the CE mark , for the sake of protecting our products and ensuring compliance with EU laws , which , above all , defend the interests of consumers .
Subject : Uneven environment for growth and development in Member States
One of the key priorities of the ' Europe 2020 ' strategy is to support entrepreneurship through policies aimed at promoting growth and improving the business climate , in particular , for SMEs .
Nevertheless , among Member States there is a very uneven business environment since , in many of them , setting up a new business involves a lot of red tape and high costs : this discourages entrepreneurship .
Moreover , the economic crisis has exacerbated the problem and is creating a map of the EU characterised by disparities as regards entrepreneurship and thus growth .
Does the Commission consider that the objective of business growth set out in the ' Europe 2020 ' strategy is realistic and can be achieved within the next decade in all Member States , given the existence of these disparities ?
Will it recommend that Member States adopt specific policies and a common framework for addressing the problems which deter entrepreneurship ?
Subject : Small to medium-sized enterprises
Can the Commission outline what measures are in place to help small to medium-sized companies based in Europe who wish to export and invest in developing economies such as China ?
Subject : Entrepreneurship in countries implementing austerity measures
Are there any measures proposed to support entrepreneurship , particularly in those countries that are implementing severe austerity measures ?
Madam President , I will try to be succinct , as I was when I was a Member of the European Parliament .
We are dealing with issues of great interest , above all , the Commission 's willingness to support entrepreneurship and to improve the context in which businesses , especially small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , operate , while supporting them in gaining access to third-country markets .
I regard these three topics as a priority .
That is why the Small Business Act for Europe , adopted by the Commission in 2008 , is to be revised in the coming days .
The principles and provisions of the Small Business Act are perfectly consistent with the priorities of the Europe 2020 strategy , and they are sure to be implemented at national level because all interested parties support them .
In other words , everyone - Member States and business organisations alike - will be involved in monitoring the results obtained .
We intend to ensure that the principles warmly supported in the Small Business Act , which are designed to promote entrepreneurship and eradicate the practice of always ' thinking small ' when drawing up policies , will be implemented at both Union and national levels .
We have already introduced a test for SMEs which is designed to take into greater account the procedure used in assessing the impact of the various policies and obligations that constrain SMEs .
The revised Small Business Act will include measures to harmonise the use of this test and improve the quality of the assessments .
In addition , all Member States will be encouraged to take the same approach in the procedures making up the national decision-making process .
As we are aware of the need to cut red tape and eliminate disparities between countries , we will indicate specific measures - such as setting up one-stop shops and the use of e-government - to try to speed up processes in this area .
The Commission is also organising the exchange of best practices among national civil servants on specific topics .
In order to stimulate entrepreneurship among young people and encourage cross-border commercial cooperation in Europe , again at Parliament 's instigation , we have set up an Erasmus programme for young entrepreneurs , the results of which have been positive .
It is our intention , therefore , to try to give the project a legal basis , transforming it from a pilot action into a permanent programme .
We have also planned actions specifically targeting women entrepreneurs : we have a network now comprising 250 female ambassadors from 22 European countries .
I hope this network can grow even stronger .
Lastly , we are working to create mentoring programmes for women entrepreneurs in at least 12 EU countries .
As regards assistance to SMEs for exports and investments outside the Union , we launched a huge public consultation exercise at the beginning of last year on our intention to strengthen support measures .
The results of the exercise will enable us to adjust the proposed guidelines aimed at strengthening SME support services while , at the same time , ensuring efficient use of public funds .
We have already gained plenty of experience in terms of helping SMEs become international .
I am referring to projects that have enjoyed considerable success , such as the China Intellectual Property Rights SME Helpdesk , the EU-Japan Centre for Industrial Cooperation , the Enterprise Europe network , and training programmes .
In addition , based on the results of a study funded by Parliament , we are preparing a communication on strengthening support for SMEs in third-country markets .
With regard to emerging economies such as China , I can confirm that in the framework of the Small Business Act , the Commission has used the funds allocated by Parliament for the preparatory work , which has enabled us to set up SME assistance and support centres in China and India .
I myself was in Beijing last November at the opening of the Centre for European Union SMEs in China .
I can also tell you that tomorrow , the Commission is appointing a new Special Envoy for SMEs , Daniel Calleja Crespo , Deputy Director General for Enterprise and Industry , who will be responsible for closely monitoring the implementation of the Small Business Act and acting as a contact point for SMEs .
The Commission document currently being adopted invites all the Member States and local authorities to appoint an Envoy for SMEs to supervise the implementation of the Small Business Act within the regions of the European Union .
I am pleased to tell you that I have already received positive replies from a number of Member States and several EU regions .
( EL ) Madam President , thank you very much for what you said , Commissioner ; this is all very ambitious .
However , to go back a bit , the Competitiveness Council called on the Member States in December 2008 to reduce company start-up times to a maximum of three days and , of course , the Commission promised to monitor that development .
Three years later , and in the midst of an economic crisis , we see that it takes 15 days to incorporate a company in Greece , 11 days in Austria , 8 days in Finland and , in Belgium , just a day and a half .
In other words , there are huge discrepancies .
My question is this : as we all agree that entrepreneurship is a prerequisite to growth , how can the Commission move from simply urging to putting serious pressure on governments , so that we can harmonise the procedures ?
I would like to make three points .
First of all , with regard to the China helpdesk .
Whilst a wonderful idea , SMEs find it very difficult to get access for the sectors that they are specifically involved in .
It seems to be more suited to larger-scale enterprises .
Secondly , the one-stop shop idea , which is already in use internally within the EU , could be put to better use in the BRIC countries - that is Brazil , Russia , India and China - to increase the amount of exports and outward investment that European companies can make .
Thirdly and finally , the model that has worked best so far has been the EU-Japan relationship .
That has worked best for trade and investment in both areas .
Perhaps that should be the standard to be followed .
I suppose my question is a slightly difficult one , in that it relates to countries that are implementing severe austerity measures like my own , Ireland .
This is the bottom line : SMEs need access to credit and they are not getting that for a number of reasons , perhaps because banks are looking for more collateral than they can provide , or sometimes , SMEs just do not want to risk borrowing in the current climate when there is no growth .
My question is , in that context , could the Commission endorse other measures such as loan-guarantee schemes or , indeed , an extension of the EU microfinance facility ?
Madam President , honourable Members , I am really delighted that the issue of small and medium-sized enterprises is at the heart of parliamentary debate for the second day in a row .
Yesterday evening , we looked at the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme ( CIP ) as well as how to help small and medium-sized enterprises and micro-enterprises to access EU financing in the context of the forthcoming Eighth Framework Programme .
We also noted what we have already done and what we are currently doing for this category of enterprises .
As I said in my speech - and as I also stated yesterday evening - I think that supporting small and medium-sized enterprises is a priority for a number of reasons .
First of all , we cannot but consider small and medium-sized enterprises as an essential tool for recovering from the current crisis .
Through the Europe 2020 document , we put the real economy back at the heart of economic policy .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are the lifeblood of our real economy and , above all , moving forward , I think that SMEs can also play a crucial social role because they are the ones that will create new jobs in the European Union , even while big industrial corporations are undergoing restructuring .
We therefore need to create the conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises to be competitive .
Competitiveness is another word for innovation , and to be innovative , we need to help SMEs to access credit .
Thanks to the support of the European Parliament , we have adopted the directive on late payments by public authorities and in business-to-business transactions , which falls under the Small Business Act .
This is a fantastic result and I hope that the Member States implement this directive , which is now binding for the whole European Union , within 24 months from last October and perhaps even before the final deadline .
This will inject around EUR 180 billion of liquidity into the market , to the benefit of small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is not all .
I have also created the SME Finance Forum , as noted in Parliament 's report on policies for SMEs and the CIP .
This is a new creation of the Commission , where we will examine the difficulties involved in accessing credit and formulate solutions to these problems .
It is not by chance that we have convinced the London Stock Exchange to take part in this initiative for the first time .
This is a strong signal from Great Britain too , which is tantamount to powerful support for small and medium-sized enterprises from the world of finance .
Therefore , the financial economy is working to support and serve the real economy , which I think is an important sign .
I will take steps to continue supporting the work of the SME Finance Forum in terms of access to credit and will also identify all available initiatives , including cross-border venture capital and the attempt to ease the ' bottlenecks ' between the European Investment Bank and domestic credit institutions , which are the ones that grant the financing in the end .
What should we do to make it easier to access EU financing ?
We are currently working on the forthcoming Eighth Framework Programme and a number of victories have been won for SMEs .
I will repeat what I said yesterday evening because I do not know if the honourable Members here this evening were also here yesterday : regarding the Regulation on the Registration , Evaluation , Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals ( REACH ) , I have cut back registration taxes to 60 % for SMEs and 90 % for micro-enterprises .
I also made sure that the rules for the implementation of the REACH Regulation were translated into all the languages of the European Union .
SMEs are therefore seeing signs of real support from this direction as well .
It is our intention to do the same for micro-enterprises in the construction sector , too .
I have held quite a number of meetings on microcredit as well .
I also examined the issue carefully during a meeting held two weeks ago in Brussels with the representative of the Italian Government 's new microcredit organisation , which looks like a well-run example .
I hope to be able to spread knowledge of the best practices of the various Member States in this sector , so that they can be implemented .
In terms of the disparities in the time needed for authorisation , this is a real problem .
There is no doubt that we must exert pressure on the Member States to cut red tape .
Much is made of European bureaucracy - which certainly has its own burdens - but sometimes bureaucracy in the Member States runs it pretty close .
In any case , I think that it is in the interest of citizens to streamline procedures .
When we say that we should ' think small ' , we need to make sure that the Member States also apply this test , just as the Commission has begun to .
The presentation of the review of the Small Business Act in the various European capital cities will also provide a chance to urge the Member States to reduce the time required to issue authorisations for the creation of SMEs .
Subject : Commission 's equal opportunities strategy
On 17 December 2010 , the Commission launched a new equal opportunities strategy for the period to 2014 , in which it set new targets for the number of women in senior and middle management positions and for the recruitment of women to administrator ( AD ) posts in the Commission 's directorates-general , departments and services .
The new equal opportunities strategy will thus seek to guarantee equal opportunities for men and women working at the Commission , but does not extend to the EU 's other institutions and agencies .
Will the Commission 's equal opportunities strategy affect women working in other EU institutions ?
Does the Commission see a need to draw up a common strategy on equal opportunities , in order to guarantee equal opportunities for men and women working in other European agencies and institutions as well ?
Gender equality and equal opportunities are fundamental EU principles and should therefore apply universally , without exception , to all EU workers .
Member of the Commission . - I am very happy to have received this question , because I have good news to report .
Since 1 January , there have , for the first time , actually been more women than men working for the Commission .
We are very proud of this result , but we know that this is not the end of it .
We still need to continue with our policy of also improving the figures for our female colleagues in managerial positions and non-managerial posts ( AD ) in the Commission .
We therefore adopted this strategy from 2010 to 2014 , until the end of this Commission 's mandate .
We really would like to achieve a result where women would represent 25 % of senior management positions , 30 % of middle management and 43 % of AD non-management posts .
We have already achieved quite a lot over the last 15 years with the tremendous increase of women in managerial positions .
We would , of course , like to continue with this same effort .
The method we are going to use would be that retirements would be replaced with women , who would represent 30 % of recruitment among senior management and 50 % among middle managers and ADs .
So that means that when these managers retire , 30 % or 50 % of them should be replaced by women .
In answer to your question , I checked the situation in other institutions and I must say that you are doing quite well in Parliament .
The figures are very impressive .
It is not quite the same in the case of the Council , though to be honest , we have slightly different results .
But I think that the best method to progress further would be if we continued with our policy of exchanging best practice , and in exchanging experience about the implementation of our policies .
I know that our heads of administration , our secretaries-general , are discussing this issue on a regular basis also , and I believe that this exchange of good practice will lead to the appropriate results in all EU institutions .
( LT ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for the good news .
I welcome the fact that there are more women than men in the Commission .
However , here is an additional question I would like to ask you .
How much time do you think the European Commission would need for the percentage of women in management positions to reach not 25 % , not 42 % , but 50 % ?
How long do you think that would take ?
You said that you will only have achieved this by the end of your mandate .
Nevertheless , you did not answer my question very clearly .
As a Commissioner , what is your view of the European Union institutions ' equal opportunities strategy ?
That of all of the European Union institutions ?
This would be a very good example to the Member States , both to people working in the public and in the private sectors .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to expand a little on the question from my colleague and ask the Commissioner whether there is also an equal opportunities strategy .
I am referring here to the appointment of persons from the new Member States to middle and senior management positions in EU institutions .
Member of the Commission . - Thank you very much for your supplementary questions .
I agree with you that the figures you mentioned might not seem as ambitious as you would like them to be in the future , but the truth is that since we started with equal opportunity policies within the Commission in 1995 , we have managed to increase the presence of women in top positions fivefold .
This means that now there are five times as many women in these positions than before .
Of course , we have to look at the baseline .
I agree with you that it was very low .
We also have to compare in what kind of environment in Europe we are operating .
This is also part of the response to the second question , namely , that policies for creating these conditions for women , not only in the EU institutions but also in the Member States , must still be improved .
First , we need to create suitable conditions for women so that they can actually work in these high positions , which means adequate childcare , adequate working facilities , flexitime and other conditions which actually allow women to be in these high positions .
Of course , these conditions are being created gradually .
I think we have achieved quite high standards in the European institutions and you can see the various levels at which these conditions have been secured among the Member States .
Therefore , my colleague , Vice-President Reding , is now proposing a strategy which will be called gender balance in business leadership .
So far , this is a staff working document , which will be discussed with business leaders in two months ' time , and then the public consultations will start .
What are the lessons to be learned in this process ?
Should we go through an obligatory quota system ?
Should we go for the system we have in the Commission , where we are trying to create a conducive environment and managerial incentives for those DGs which can actually fulfil the goals established for women ?
I think that after that , we will see appropriate results .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
Madam President , on a point of order , I just want to make an observation and I know many Members would agree with me .
It is nothing to do with you personally , but concerns the way Question Time is organised .
From night to night , no Member knows how many questions are going to be taken , how many supplementaries are going to be taken , how long the answers will take , and whether or not we will have a Question Time to the Commission or Council at all .
That is unsatisfactory .
I met Baroness Ludford .
She was an hour late for a dinner because she expected her question to be taken .
I calculated that my question would be taken and I refused an invitation to dinner .
At the very least , Members should be told in advance how many questions are going to be taken , and then they can plan accordingly .
I know I will get a written answer , but if I and other Members want a written answer , we could send an email from the comfort of our own homes and we would get a reply to our email .
That is all I want to say .
I think it should be taken on board .
Madam President , it is nothing to do with you : you handle it very well .
I mean no disrespect whatsoever to you .
Mr Kelly , thank you for your intervention .
I should say as one of the Vice-Presidents responsible for Question Time that I am concerned that we have not moved , as an institution , with the Commission , to implement what we agreed in our interinstitutional agreement , which was to improve Question Time .
I am glad that Commissioner Šefčovič is here tonight and has seen the problems that we are experiencing at first hand .
I hope therefore there may be a new dynamic to try to move to the situation that we had envisaged when negotiating the interinstitutional agreement .
( The sitting was suspended at 20 : 50 and resumed at 21 : 00 )

Situation in Albania ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the situation in Albania .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for inviting me to speak on Albania this evening .
Although on the European mainland , Albania was isolated for a large part of the 20th century .
However , Albania is now open and accessible .
It has become a country with a European perspective .
Today , Albania is in political crisis .
The developments in Tirana on Friday , 21 January 2011 , were tragic .
The increasingly bitter political stalemate has resulted in four needless deaths .
The tone in Tirana needs to change .
The dangerous downward spiral must end .
The political crisis must be resolved .
This is the shared responsibility of the political leaders in Albania .
That is what the citizens of Albania expect , and they are right .
Democratically elected representatives must act as such : represent the people and find democratic compromise .
If the solution to the crisis lies in domestic hands , we as outsiders must do all we can to help facilitate such a solution .
The External Action Service managing director , Miroslav Lajčák , visited Tirana twice to meet the President , the Prime Minister and the leader of the Opposition , and I am happy he has joined me today .
His messages on behalf of the High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission , Cathy Ashton , and myself were clear : first , stop the violence and investigate the events of 21 January correctly .
These investigations should be conducted by the judicial authorities without political interference .
Second , stop the verbal abuse and the implicit and explicit undermining of State institutions .
Third , get the political dialogue back on track : acknowledge that you have a shared responsibility to secure a more positive future for Albania .
In the near future , this means jointly ensuring the conduct of free , fair and transparent local elections .
Fourth , begin the important task of implementing the 12 priorities outlined in the 2010 Commission opinion .
The government and opposition must do it together .
The reactions of the political leaders and the general public to Miroslav Lajčák 's visit were encouraging and positive respectively .
There is some momentum which can , and should , be used to turn the crisis into opportunity .
The two Albanian leaders welcome the attention given to them , but they are stuck in their own internal impasse , and European Union goodwill and assistance cannot replace dialogue between the leaders .
We can help to bridge the gap through our active engagement .
However , we cannot do so before both sides signal a genuine willingness to put the European future of Albania above party politics and personal mistrust .
There is no place for cherry-picking .
Albania must meet all the Copenhagen criteria , including interactive political dialogue and a functioning Parliament - or nothing .
The following is on the table for Albania : an EU perspective in line with the Council conclusions and based on the Copenhagen criteria ; a clear identification in the 2010 Commission opinion of the 12 priorities whose effective implementation would enable Albania to begin accession negotiations with the European Union .
These 12 priorities include , among others , improving the functioning of democratic institutions and the political dialogue , the rule of law and reform of the judiciary , the fight against organised crime and the protection of human rights .
These 12 priorities and the Copenhagen criteria are not just an exercise for politicians .
Rather , they bring clear , measurable benefits for citizens .
Albania 's politicians urgently need to put the interests of Albania 's citizens first .
Let us turn these priorities into a European framework to address the current political challenges in Albania .
For this reason , I sent a letter to Prime Minister Berisha one week before the January demonstrations , in which I set out a road map based on these 12 priorities , to help Albania emerge from the current impasse .
We all witnessed the tragic events that ensued .
It is not too late .
If we receive irreversible signals that there is a mutual willingness to use this European framework to gradually overcome the political stalemate and the recent crisis , then we will respond positively .
The European Parliament also has a vital role to play .
You as politicians can send a clear message to politicians .
A clear united message from this House and the whole European Union with the readiness to engage would make all in Albania reflect upon the best course of action .
Let me use this opportunity to call on the Prime Minister of Albania , Mr Berisha , to create a truly inclusive political environment in Albania .
Other political forces and civil society organisations would benefit from European integration .
Let me also call on the leader of the Socialist Party , Mr Rama , to ensure that his party is a truly constructive opposition - one which enjoys the benefits but also the responsibilities of this inclusive political environment we wish to see in Albania .

Mr President , Mr Füle , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to thank you very much for your clear statement .
I believe that it has been well received .
I think that developments in the fields of democracy and the rule of law are essential requirements for the start of Albania 's accession process to the EU .
This includes functioning democratic institutions which are used properly .
The parliament is the place where democratic debates should take place .
This is why the citizens have elected the members of the parliament .
This forum cannot be replaced by events on the streets and particularly not in the way in which Mr Rama attempted to do on 21 January .
I call on the socialist party to take full part in the parliamentary process and to come up with political alternatives in parliament .
It is time to bring an end to the doubts about the election result .
The socialist party should take responsibility for its role as parliamentary opposition .
It should make use of the opportunity to produce specific proposals for the future , including in the parliamentary investigation committee .
The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights ( ODIHR ) have produced recommendations for improving the basic conditions of elections .
It is also important for the socialists to be involved in this area too .
I have heard that Mr Rama agreed , while he was here in Strasbourg , to take part in the local elections on 8 May .
I welcome his decision .
I hope that his assurance does not involve any conditions or loopholes .
Mr Rama is obviously listening to the good advice given to him by his socialist colleagues and also in the meetings with other groups .
I can assure him that many people in our group are playing an active role on our behalf in Albania and support the inclusive approach referred to by Mr Füle .
This has enabled us to make a joint contribution to ensuring a positive future for Albania .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , we could certainly call the political situation in Albania today a stalemate .
Sometimes calmer , at other times violent , this crisis has no end .
Last year , this Parliament adopted a resolution calling on all domestic political players to find a negotiated political solution to the crisis and to build a minimum national consensus .
This resolution was ignored by the political forces , and by the government especially .
Likewise , the recommendations of the Commission and of the Council are being disregarded at this moment in time .
It is inadmissible that exercising the right to rally and to protest in a country plagued by corruption be described as a coup d 'état .
It is inadmissible that the credibility of the State institutions - the Presidency , Public Attorney and others - be undermined by statements by the Head of Government .
It is inadmissible that those who shoot civilian demonstrators be called heroes of the nation and promised an amnesty .
New local elections will take place soon .
In the present circumstances , they will be a political test for all political stakeholders .
We ask Commissioner Füle and managing director Lajčák to do their best in order to assure international assistance and international monitoring of these elections in such a way as to make sure that they will be free and fair , or at least that we could assess their freedom and their fairness .
We support the Commission approach , and that of Commissioner Füle in particular .
We support the action by Mr Lajčák .
We have to ask all political forces to bring this crisis to an end , because the alternative is the isolation of Albania and the jeopardising of its European perspectives .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I had a very interesting day today when it comes to Albania .
I have spoken to the representatives of the two main political parties there .
I asked both of them to share ideas on how to move the country forward and how to break the political stalemate to focus on problems affecting all citizens : fighting organised crime , ending corruption , creating employment and opportunities for the young generation .
None of them was able to come up with an answer .
The blame game seemed more important .
It occurs to me that the political establishment in Albania is more concerned with itself than with its people .
I do not have to tell you how difficult it is for us to convince our constituents to join us when we are making the case for EU enlargement .
Despite resistance , the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe would like to see the Western Balkans become part of the territory of the European Union .
We believe that the EU is a community of values which has left behind a divided past , choosing a united future .
We must call on the Albanian authorities to do the same and not be suffocated by the shadows of the past , but to step into the light of the future .
And let them not forget that it is their responsibility , first and foremost , to provide for the wellbeing of citizens and not to deny them a European future , because it is crystal clear that the political crisis hampers any and all progress .
New elections will take place in May and the preparations are under way .
They should be supported by all political parties .
I welcome the suggestion that the EU should play an active role in ensuring that they are both free and fair .
But democracy is a long process and it is certainly more than just ' one man , one vote ' .
It requires democratic institutions , the rule of law and its strength is determined by respect for minorities .
Democracy is not ' winner takes all ' .
EU accession is a long journey which requires hard work and shared commitment , and the reforms Albania has made are best served by collaboration and continuing commitment to the EU process .
Mr President , the crisis in Albania is nothing new .
The crisis did not begin in January with the violence against the demonstrators , nor did it begin in 2009 , when the Socialist Party boycotted parliament after the elections and when the hunger strike began .
This crisis is a crisis of political culture .
Boycotts , hunger strikes , demonstrations , they are normal methods of doing business in Albanian politics .
So are corruption , manipulation of the media and political appointments .
All of that is a world away from the kind of politics we would like to see in a country which is on the road to accession .
I so , so hope that the citizens of Albania eventually get a responsible government and a responsible parliament , with politicians who will put the welfare of their citizens above their own prestige and interests .
Both sides need to start to move in order to reach that stage .
The government has a particular responsibility .
Governments have a monopoly on violence and governments have an additional responsibility to stand above party politics , in order to do what is right for the people .
We should be able to expect this government to do everything possible to prevent the January events from happening again .
We should also be able to expect it to cooperate fully with the launch of an independent inquiry into what happened in January , to clamp down on corruption within its own ranks , and to provide room for parliamentary debate .
The opposition also has a responsibility .
It , too , must do everything to prevent a repeat of the January violence , by cooperating fully with proper and fair elections in May and by participating in parliamentary debate , preferably on content , for once , such as the sky-high levels of unemployment in Albania .
How do you get both parties that far , though ?
I had every hope in November when Commissioner Füle put the ball in Albania 's court and said : no more progress until you resolve this .
When that happens , we will be able to grant Albania candidate status .
Unfortunately , that did not bring about any change .
I am now hoping that Mr Lajčák will succeed where others have failed : that is , in bringing both parties to the table and achieving a breakthrough .
I am hopeful , but I am not very confident that this will be possible without us wielding a big stick .
I think that we should hold the prospect of a sanction over them .
It must be clear that failure in this negotiation effort will not be without consequences .
The sanction must hit the political leaders , however , and not the citizens .
That means that we must by no means tamper with Albania 's visa waiver , which is a suggestion I have heard in the corridors .
We would really be harming the citizens if we did that .
I would really like an assurance from the Commissioner that visa liberalisation will not be abused in this political process .
One idea we could start considering , however , is withdrawing the control of IPA funds from Albania and putting it back in the hands of the EU .
That would allow all major investments in the country to go through , but the government would more or less be placed under guardianship .
That seems to me to be a sanction that would hit the politicians , but not the people .
I sincerely hope that all this will be unnecessary , because both sides will be willing to compromise , and that Mr Lajčák will succeed , in the interests of the Albanian people .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , if Albania is to make progress towards its eventual goal of EU accession , its political leaders need to engage in a more constructive , democratic and mature way .
Last month 's violence was a reminder of the inherent instability of Albanian politics .
I also wonder whether the Council and Commission have considered revisiting last year 's decision to grant Albanians visa-free travel to the EU in the light of the bloodshed , which may , of course , generate more economic emigration to the Schengen area if foreign direct investment dries up .
Such a step would certainly underline the fact that Albania continues to fall well short of the EU 's expectations .
Organised crime and corruption still flourish and the judiciary is too often manipulated by politicians .
Prime Minister Berisha even interfered with the arrest , ordered by the Prosecutor-General , of guardsmen who had shot protestors , claiming that a coup d 'état was imminent .
Democratic institutions are weak and press freedom is scarce .
The decision by Edi Rama 's Socialist Party to boycott the parliament on the basis of alleged electoral fraud has compounded Albania 's instability .
There is no way Albania can even begin to enact the reforms necessary to regain the EU 's confidence in the current political environment of instability .
This instability may also now cause NATO to reconsider its own enlargement policy , Albania having joined the alliance less than two years ago .
NATO leaders must now question whether Albanian membership was granted too soon .
Aside from my own concerns about Albania 's political instability and how it will impact on the country 's EU aspirations , I am also sceptical about Albania 's strategic priorities .
Albania is a full member of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference , an increasingly powerful and influential lobby in the UN promoting the interests of its members and voting as a bloc on human rights and foreign policy matters .
OIC members include Albania and Turkey , both of whom are signatories to the Cairo Declaration on Human Rights , which cites sharia as the basis for human rights in Muslim countries .
Albania , like Turkey , must now decide between embracing western values , or whether to give primacy to those of sharia law which the European Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg has deemed incompatible with European values , though so far , in my view , Albania 's membership of the OIC , in fairness , seems only nominal .
Albania is , after all , a secular country in practice .
It seems to have been designed by the Albanian leadership that they join the OIC in order to attract Middle Eastern money , rather than based on any strong religious convictions , but , of course , this could all change in the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , I had hoped that , eighteen months after the last parliamentary elections in Albania , the political impasse would have been resolved .
I had hoped , following the recommendations made and the resolution adopted by the European Parliament , that what we were saying would be borne in mind .
I was convinced that Albania 's hopes of European integration would act as a strong incentive - as that is what the Albanian people want - to resolve not only the political problem , but also the economic , social and democratic problems .
Unfortunately , the impasse persists .
As to who bears the lion 's share of responsibility , I believe that it is not our job here to judge the Albanian people .
Unfortunately , however , things have got worse .
Once again , I would like to express my sorrow for the victims of the demonstration on 21 January .
We are opposed to the escalation of violence ; we call for repression to stop , for human and democratic rights to be respected , and for those responsible to be punished .
However , I will not conceal the fact that I am concerned about the imminent local elections in May .
We simply must do whatever we can to ensure that all the necessary safeguards are in place for them to proceed smoothly .
We must persuade all the political forces to participate in this election procedure and these elections must be held on the basis of international rules for proper , democratic elections .
I believe that our help , help from the European Parliament and the European Union in general - and I agree here with Mr Füle - must be supplementary , must be auxiliary and , obviously , must not be coloured by party affiliations and political friendships ( if you will pardon the expression ) .
It will not be for us to provide the solution to Albanian society and to the Albanian problem .
This must be dealt with by the Albanian people , by the political forces in Albania .
I do not agree with the thoughts voiced about threats to take measures , when most of the measures we have heard about are measures against the Albanian people .
I do not think that this will bring about any particular result .
I believe that we can exert the greatest possible pressure through the EU institutions , within the framework of relations with a country which is knocking at the door of the European Union , by stressing that , unfortunately , all these procedures are delaying its accession prospects .
We must point out that the impasse will only be resolved by a responsible stand on the part of the political leaders , with a readiness for political dialogue and not , as we have heard , with a ' winner takes all ' attitude and similar practices and conduct .
I believe that , if the political leaders in Albania insist on this sort of practice and this sort of approach , the impasse and the crisis will get worse , making it impossible for the country to address serious problems in addition to the political problem : problems that will arise - if they have not already arisen - from the economic crisis which has hit the neighbouring countries of Italy and Greece , given that money sent from these countries is , to a degree , helping the economic situation in Albania .
Consequently , a solution to the political impasse , political responsibility and political dialogue are what will help the political leaders find a rapid solution to the problems facing Albania .
Mr President , I visited Albania as a journalist on several occasions in the 1990s .
Each time , I was impressed by the talented young people I met there .
Surely , a country with young people like that must have a future .
Last summer , my faith in Albania 's European prospects was renewed during a summer school in southern Vlorë County .
This morning , I exchanged emails with a couple of Albanian academics about this evening 's debate .
They are both in their thirties and they have both decided to stay in Albania : they could earn much more abroad , but they are staying .
They want to be of service to their own people and to their church .
However , what can they do about the political impasse in their home country ?
In both cases , their message is clear , and it is a cry for help : ' Europe , do not leave our political leaders to their own devices .
Because , if you do , they will destroy our nation 's future .
Europe , force both parties , the socialists and the democrats , to negotiate until they reach a solution ' .
Commissioner , I will be the first one to admit that this is easier said than done , but theirs was a cry for help , nonetheless .
However , I am confident that you will want to do your best to fulfil the hope that many upstanding Albanian citizens have placed in Europe and in you , as the Commissioner responsible .
I wish you a great deal of strength and success in this .
To conclude , there is another , equally important Albanian issue which I would like to raise .
An informant in Tirana has alerted me to the danger that , this spring , a large number of Albanian girls and women are going to travel to Western Europe and end up in prostitution rings .
Do you share this concern , Commissioner , and what resources does the European Union have at its disposal to take preventive action against the trafficking of women and the grooming of girls for prostitution in Albania ?
( HU ) Mr President , the political life of Albania has been at an impasse since the parliamentary elections in 2009 .
The parliament cannot exercise its supervisory role over the government , and parliamentary institutions are , unfortunately , not operating effectively .
The fact that the socialists are accusing the government of electoral fraud and corruption , demanding its resignation and early elections before those due in 2013 , as well as the fact that Prime Minister Berisha is unwilling to resign and is accusing the opposition of attempting to come into power by force , indicate that negotiations with the European Union are doomed to fail very quickly .
The European Union considers it vital for candidate countries to step up their efforts in the fight against corruption and organised crime .
This is not only important for the EU , but is also beneficial for the society of the countries concerned , not to mention that it can contribute to the improvement of the image of the candidate countries .
For this reason , the settlement of the current situation will definitely require the restoration of democratic institutions .
Mr President , the political crisis in Albania has lasted for far too long now .
Yes , it is not deadlock , it is not a stalemate , it is a protracted political crisis .
It is hurting the reputation of the country , its citizens and their ambitions for a European future .
We should not allow this political crisis and tensions to go any further .
What we need now is to send a common message that we want to have Albania as a candidate country , but political leaders on both sides must show the will to solve political problems in full respect for the rule of law , the constitution and on the foundation of democratic institutions .
We have tried for too long to help find a solution to the situation without any tangible results .
We strongly condemn the violence which took place in the streets of Tirana during the demonstrations on 21 January .
The events that cost the lives of four people need to be properly investigated .
Albania is awaiting the local elections of May this year .
This will be another check on democracy in the country .
Again , now is the time for the political leaders to concentrate their efforts on finding guarantees that the elections are not going to bring further tensions and prolong the crisis .
In concluding , I wish to emphasise the importance of the political messages and proposals contained in the speech by Commissioner Füle at the beginning of this debate .
The best possible contribution Parliament can make in this situation is to put all its weight behind these proposals and , accordingly , send a clear joint message to the Albanian political parties .

( DE ) Mr President , I would first of all like to thank Mr Füle for his clear statement today and for his commitment to this issue over a long period .
I would also like to thank Mr Lajčák for the dedication that he has shown over recent months .
He is used to addressing and resolving tricky problems .
I wish both of them the best of luck .
This debate has resulted in a united front and in joint support for the efforts of both men to find a solution for Albania .
I admit that I was sceptical when this debate started .
Nothing could be worse for the development of Albania than accusations being made by one side in this House against the other that are similar to those being made by the two major political groups , the government and the opposition , in Albania .
I am very pleased that we have been able to agree on a joint approach , at least until now .
I hope that this remains the case .
Both sides , both political groups - the government and the opposition - must commit to finding a way out of this crisis .
I agree with Mr Belder .
Not long after the fall of the Hoxha regime , I went to Albania .
I was very struck by the mood there and by the enthusiasm of the young people .
However , I am very disappointed when I look at what has come out of this and what has not .
I must say that the political class in Albania is not able to satisfy the wishes and the ideas of the people .
Of course , we still have our political affinities and our personal friendship .
However , it is crucial for us now to tell both sides that they must sit down together and attempt to ensure that the local elections at least are transparent and open .
We must also call on both sides to be prepared to implement the requirements drawn up by the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights ( ODIHR ) for these elections , either by means of legislation or practical action , so that there will be genuinely fair and transparent elections in future .
I also believe that Parliament should send as many election observers as possible , despite the fact that these are local elections , because the elections could represent the beginning of a new political climate in Albania .
This is what Albania urgently needs .
I agree with everyone who has said that if nothing changes in Albania , it will find itself in an isolated position .
However , we do not want Albania to be isolated .
We want it to start out on the road towards Europe .
( BG ) Mr President , I would like to start by saying that Albanian society , and the Albanian people , are a special case , but please do not misunderstand me .
Their history is different , and their cultural traditions are different , and some of these differences have survived in the national character , the way in which it has developed , to this day , and this affects the way they perceive political processes and develop them .
Therefore , if we are going to instrumentalise the problem under discussion , we will need to show creativity , flexibility and imagination .
For example , I believe that we should contact not just the leaders of the two main political parties which are at loggerheads , but also the unofficial leaders of Albanian society .
Some correct things have been said here about sharia and the Islamic Conference , but we must bear in mind that the Albanians are tolerant towards all three main religions in their country , including the Eastern Orthodox and the Catholic churches .
All three of these communities have influential leaders , as do NGOs and youth .
We should also be addressing these leaders in our attempts to reconcile the two political parties .


( DE ) Mr President , Mr Füle , Mr Lajčák , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to join in thanking Mr Füle and Mr Lajčák for their hard work and their attempts to find a way out of this problem .

I am also pleased that the debate today has not descended into squabbles between the political groups which are in conflict with one another in Albania .
It would have been very regrettable for Parliament if this had happened and I hope that we do not reach this point .
The institutional crisis in Albania is really also a crisis in the political culture .
It is all about verbal violence that has turned into violence on the streets and resulted in four deaths .
I agree with those who say that this needs to be investigated .
It is important to find out who is really to blame .
However , this process of verbal violence becoming actual violence on the streets is something that could put Albania 's accession to the European Union at risk .
As Mr Füle has already explained , this is all about making it clear to the political opponents in Albania that their job is to act in the interests of the Albanian people .
The route towards the European Union means finding a solution for this political crisis , sitting down at the same table and putting an end to the constant blame game , in which one group always blames the other and fails to recognise that it , too , can make a contribution to changing things .
That is what is needed .
The constant accusations about who started the situation and who is to blame have no place in a European state .
I hope that the opposing parties will learn from this and realise that this situation cannot go on .
If Mr Rama and his party really take part in the local elections , as he has indicated to some of us today that he will , and appoint members of the election commission , I welcome this and I hope it is a first step towards ensuring that these local elections can take place in an open and transparent form and that the results will be accepted afterwards .
The parliament fully supported the liberalisation process which has already been mentioned .
My request to Mr Füle is as follows : I hope that the Commission does not consider abandoning visa liberalisation for the citizens of Albania as a possible sanction against the two opposing parties .
I hope that will not be the case .
My other question concerns the opportunities for applying more pressure if the two parties do not come to an agreement .
One option is , as Mrs Cornelissen has already said , taking responsibility for managing the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( IPA ) funds away from the government and returning it to the Commission .
The other possibility would be to freeze the IPA funds .
However , this would cause suffering among the population , which cannot be our intention .
What are your plans in the event that no solution can be reached ?
One last point : in the Marty report to the Council of Europe , the accusation was made that the Albanian secret service was involved or supported organ trafficking .
Do you know whether the Albanian secret service and the Albanian justice system are prepared to cooperate ?
( SK ) Mr President , since the 2009 general elections , there has been political tension in Albania arising from the close result of the vote , which the losing political forces have described as electoral manipulation .
The Albanian socialists , led by Edi Rama , accuse Prime Minister Sali Berisha not only of electoral fraud , but also of being responsible for extensive corruption and the deteriorating living conditions of the people .
At a protest rally organised by the opposition in the Albania capital , Tirana , on 21 January , there were more than 20 000 demonstrators demanding the resignation of the government of Sali Berisha .
However , police intervention involving water cannon , tear gas and rubber bullets resulted in four deaths and more than 150 injuries .
The brutality of the police intervention , as well as the fact that Sali Berisha gave all members of the security forces participating in suppressing the demonstration an extraordinary reward amounting to one month 's pay , is clear evidence of the fact that the Albanian premier is buying the favour of the security forces and trying to win their support and to set them against the Albanian people .
In decent , civilised countries , government is usually decided by the citizens , the voters , and not by bribed security forces or the police .
If Mr Berisha has forgotten this elementary principle of democratic government , then in my opinion , he has no business being the leader of a democratic state .
Ladies and gentlemen , I do not think any of us would like to see in Europe the promotion of governments which build their power on electoral fraud and corrupt policemen , and which are represented by little dictators who do not know how to hand over power to others in the proper way in a country .
We must therefore be more vigorous in defending democracy in Albania .


( DE ) Mr President , Mr Füle , Mr Lajčák , ladies and gentlemen , the issue that we are discussing did not begin on 21 January .
Therefore , we need to ask ourselves and I am also asking you : Why did the Commission and the other international bodies not put out the fire when the flames first appeared in mid 2009 ?
The 2009 elections were the best that have so far taken place in Albania and they were based on election legislation which , amazingly , was adopted following a consensus between the socialists and democrats .
Reaching a consensus is something entirely new in Albania .
I believe that this is important .
All the socialist election boards , the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights ( ODIHR ) , the election observers and we ourselves believed that the elections were managed correctly .
The government which was subsequently formed was also something new for Albania .
Two parties which cannot stand each other sat down and worked together .
The democratic party , on the one hand , and the smaller social democratic party , on the other .
Two opposing groups have come together to help Albania to make progress .
It has joined NATO and it has a visa regime , but unfortunately , it has not yet been granted candidate status .
However , just at the moment when the government was formed , the opposition decided that the elections had not been properly conducted and called for the ballot boxes to be opened .
What sort of government opens ballot boxes ?
Not the sort that we have in my country or in yours .
We have to go before the constitutional court or the election commission .
Protests like the ones which we have seen , the hunger strikes , and the refusal to cooperate in Parliament to pass important legislation , are all simply unacceptable .
It is important that we make this clear and that we face the facts .
It is not always possible to bring everything onto the same level .
I would like to find out what the most important and the most difficult issues are .
The accusations that have been made both recently and right from the beginning concerned the issue of opening the ballot boxes .
This is not possible , because the constitution does not allow it .
How can negotiations take place about this if it is not allowed ?
Now the situation has escalated and four people have been killed .
It is good that you have attempted today to present a road map .
However , it may be exaggerating slightly to describe it in that way .
I would very much like Mr Lajčák and you , Mr Füle , to use this road map to draw up a route towards a better future for the people of the country .
Mr President , I welcome the statement by the Commissioner .
I would also like to emphasise the contribution made by Mr Lajčák in trying to identify solutions for overcoming the dramatic situation .
The recent demonstrations in Tunisia and Egypt were certainly opposed by the local dictators who finally had to leave their country - but without major violence and executions like those in Tirana as witnessed by the media .
As for Prime Minister Berisha 's allegations that the demonstrations were nothing more than a coup d 'état led by the Opposition , the President of Albania , the Prosecutor General and the head of the secret services - all appointed under Mr Berisha 's leadership - are these people all now Socialists or is something wrong with Mr Berisha ?

I would like here to quote Thomas Countryman , a Deputy Assistant Secretary at the US Department of State , who publicly rejected the hypothesis that what happened on 24 January was a coup d 'état .
We need to be committed and as effective as the United States and NATO right now in trying to push , assist and help the two Albanian sides reach a negotiated solution , but I also call on all my colleagues who are giving Mr Berisha their unconditional support to stop their one-sided approach .
It is important to put pressure on both sides so that the two blocs finally reach a solution .
Up until now , only one side has shown some readiness to implement both the European Parliament resolution and the 12 proposals you mentioned before , Commissioner .
I call on the Commission to be strong and committed towards an agreement based on the European Parliament resolution and the 12 conditions you mentioned before , bearing in mind that without complete agreement from both sides , Albania 's European integration process might be completely frozen .
( IT ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for the road map he has set out for Albania this evening , which I endorse wholeheartedly .
I am totally convinced that this country has a European future and should therefore be a candidate for accession .
The bloodshed of 21 January dragged Tirana backwards by several years .
It felt like we were watching the same scenes of protest and violence seen in the 1990s .
I am therefore very concerned about the recent events and the short-term future of the country .
During our last visit there in November 2010 , in our capacity as the Delegation for South-East Europe and , on 3 and 4 May 2010 , as the Stabilisation and Association Parliamentary Committee , together with other colleagues , I witnessed Albania 's difficulties with my own eyes .
We did not manage to bring the negotiations to a close with a final resolution for an agreement .
Is it possible that we failed to address the country 's true problems ?
Aside from mere political alchemy , was the true social cancer of unemployment even mentioned ?
We need to recover our sense of responsibility , which is what we are crying out for .
On this issue , in searching for at least some convergence on basic rules from both the majority and the opposition , it is necessary to guarantee , in all possible ways , that the next round of elections is hallmarked by the highest possible level of transparency and democracy .
Mayor Edi Rama will stand in elections for the district of Tirana , so we will shortly have the chance to check and assess the political situation and standard of democracy , as naturally , we shall be present there .
Irrespective of the progress made by Albania in this period , Europe must never stop searching for dialogue and collaboration .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for the work he has carried out and will continue to carry out , because our presence in Albania is important .
( EL ) Mr President , I have been following events in Albania with a great deal of concern .
The tragic incidents during the demonstration held against corruption , with people killed in clashes with the security forces , must be expressly condemned .
The continuing political crisis harbours very serious dangers to the stability of the country .
Everyone bears their share of responsibility .
However , the elected government should listen to the message being sent by the people , that the country needs sound governance .
The creation of rule of law , by stamping out corruption , should be one of the Albanian government 's priorities .
The people are entitled to demonstrate within the limits of the law when they feel that the government is acting against their interests .
The European Union must do whatever it can to help ensure that calm and caution prevail .
We must all be involved in this process .
I call on my fellow Members in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) not to overlook the government 's serious responsibilities and blame the opposition alone for the political crisis .
At this stage , I think that political dialogue should be resumed and that a solution should be found using the procedures laid down in the constitution and by law .
( MT ) Mr President , when I look at what is happening in Albania , it saddens me greatly because I recall my country 's own history in the beginning of the eighties , thirty years ago that is , when Malta was facing a similar situation : deep division , tension , political rivalry , threats and even violence .
It was a suffocating atmosphere that did not make me proud of my homeland .
In the same way , I believe that Albanian citizens are equally saddened by their country 's current plight , and are far from proud of what is going on .
Today , I am deeply proud of my country , because we have created a stable , democratic system , and above all , we are now part of the European family .
The political environment has changed drastically .
My wish for Albania is the achievement of its aim of having a stable country that is part of the European family .
However , it is clear that if the two main parties in the country persist in their stubbornness then this aim will never be achieved .
It is a pity , but it is a reality .
The European Union is doing what it can ; the Visa requirement for Albanians has now been removed .
Nonetheless , Albania must also play its part , and for this to happen , then all the parties concerned , including the government and the opposition , have to adopt a different policy , one that embraces politics based on dialogue , on maturity and on responsibility towards the Albanian people ; politics that do not seek to divide , but to unite .
It is not up to us to tell the Albanians and Albania what to do .
We are here to tell them that the decision on whether Albania is to find its place within the European family is in their hands .
( SV ) Mr President , though the crisis in Albania has been going on for a long time , it is only now that it has really started to escalate , and this time , the EU has acted immediately and in the right way .
Through the commitment of Commissioner Füle and others , the EU has shown that Albania does not have to face its problems alone .
This is a major problem that is damaging the country 's credibility as one that is serious about drawing closer to the EU .
It is not a question of who is right and who is wrong , but of the need to put the political dialogue back into the domain of the political institutions .
We should not give our backing to any side as being right or wrong , and we must be extremely clear that the election in May must be a signal as to the direction Albania is going to take - towards the EU or towards continued isolation .
( LT ) Mr President , I share the concern expressed by my fellow Members that the situation in Albania is worrying and may have a negative impact not just on Albania itself , but the future prospects of countries throughout the entire Balkan region .
At the end of last year , the European Union expressed its confidence that Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina were making and could make progress initiating important reforms , and liberalised the visa regime for their citizens .
However , the political unrest that began scarcely a few months later and resulted in several deaths suggests that Albania has failed this test .
This eruption of violence in Albania calls for a rethink of long-term prospects for the region 's integration , because European Union policy is concentrated on regional stability and such an approach is right .
There should therefore be solidarity between the countries of the Balkan region and it should be in their common interest to maintain and promote greater regional integration and political stability .
( RO ) Mr President , the tense situation which developed in Albania at the end of January highlights how important it is to maintain certain boundaries in political debate .
The extreme escalation of the disputes between the government and opposition has resulted in the loss of human life .
I need to stress that in a democratic state , these conflicts should not go beyond parliament 's walls .
The street is no place for them .
The assault by organised opposition groups against the government 's building in an attempt to take power by force is a serious matter , while the ploy used by some authorities to hide those who are guilty is unacceptable .
This is why I am calling on the leaders of the Albanian opposition to return to the discussion process in parliament .
The elections held in 2009 were fair and it is the political parties ' duty to respect the will of the people .
Compromising state institutions is not the answer for expressing one 's convictions or discontent .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to make the following observation : it is most surprising that , while growth indicators for Albania are constantly rising , with growth exceeding 2 % in 2010 , in the midst of global economic instability , and expected to reach 3 % in 2011 , social tension is , nonetheless , getting worse rather than better .
Obviously , Commissioner , growth has not instilled a feeling of prosperity in the Albanian people .
On the contrary , it is equally obvious that disappointment - and with it the fear of a new wave of immigration to neighbouring countries - is increasing .
We experienced this very acutely in Greece in the 1990s .
At this difficult juncture , therefore , Europe has a duty , in addition to giving Albania political advice , to pass on practices and examples , so that growth benefits all sections of society .
The situation in which Albania finds itself is best described as a cold civil war .
Political parties play the role of warring sides and are pulling the country into a downward spiral .
The explanation is that both left and right believe that political parties should rule exclusively , as the Communist Party once did .
Once a polarisation of this kind has begun , it is very difficult to transform the situation into one that resembles the democratic norm , because in this context , exclusive power is completely rational , which is tragic .
Is there a way out ?
Yes : catharsis .
But only a major crisis or a grand historic compromise can bring this about .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank you for this lovely debate and , before I share with you my concluding remarks , let me address the two questions which were put during the debate .
The first one , put forward by Mr Belder , I will answer in written form , taking into account our primary focus in today 's discussion .
But there was another question : whether we are considering sanctions .
No we are not .
Why is this ?
Because in issues of enlargement , conditionality works very fairly , as is clearly the case here .
If you fulfil the conditions , you are allowed to proceed with accession and eventually join the European Union .
If you do not fulfil the conditions and requirements , the process is slowed down and eventually stopped .
Unfortunately , this is the ultimate price that is being paid not only by the politicians but also by the citizens of that respective country .
The High Representative and I will continue to strive to facilitate dialogue between Albania 's majority and opposition .
We have a clear idea of how to do this .
We also need your support to make sure that the leaders of the main opposition party and the prime minister of Albania understand our message .
This could lead the country out of the political crisis and could allow positive steps towards its integration into Europe .
The European Union made a commitment to all the Western Balkan countries that they would enter the European Union .
We stand by our commitment and will step up our efforts , provided the countries fulfil the criteria .
Albania urgently needs to implement the 12 key priorities of the opinion .
These include addressing the fundamental principles of democracy , such as the proper functioning of Parliament , separation of powers , the conduct of elections and respect for the rule of law .
All of this will only be possible once the current political situation has taken a fundamental positive turn with the resumption of a full and constructive political dialogue in Parliament , respect for all State institutions and the realisation that the citizens of Albania have aspirations that require attention .
The leaders of Albania must act now for the benefit of their people .
The European Union stands ready to assist .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The crisis under way in Albania , which is jeopardising geopolitical stability in the Balkans , is causing acute concern and alarm .
The political standoff between the government and the opposition is calling Albania 's European prospects into question and President Sali Berisha has no intention of stepping down .
Although few parallels can be drawn between Albania and recent developments in North Africa , what they do have in common are poverty , unemployment , a corrupt , clientelist regime and a lack of democracy .
Although the crisis in Albania has been temporarily averted , we need to work closely with Albania in order to smooth out the political situation .
The Commission should explain how it intends to safeguard the rights of Greeks and other minorities in Albania , through the smooth , democratic operation of the system , and to strengthen Frontex on the Greek-Albanian border , given the danger of an influx of immigrants into Greece due to the political unrest .
Also , the Commission should take serious account of the fact that Albanian nationals no longer require a visa to travel to Turkey , which makes it easier to breach the southern borders of Europe from there , starting with Greece as the first port of call , followed by the rest of Europe .
Eavesdropping scandal in Bulgaria ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the eavesdropping scandal in Bulgaria .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me stress that EU law protects the confidentiality of electronic communications .
It prohibits listening , tapping , storage or other kinds of interception or surveillance of communications without the consent of the users concerned .
Apart from the legally authorised recording of certain communications in the course of lawful business practice such as commercial transactions , further interception practice , such as wiretapping , is subject to specific conditions .
The conditions for exceptional interception practice must be provided by legislation and be necessary , appropriate and proportionate within a democratic society to safeguard public objectives , such as public security or combating criminal offences .
The general principles of EU law must also be respected .
For the Commission , Bulgarian legislation seems to comply with these requirements .
The Law on Special Investigative Means and the Law on Electronic Communications already provide appropriate mechanisms for legal authorisation , oversight , handling and access to personal data , and thus ensure respect of fundamental rights .
The issue at stake here concerns the enforcement of legal obligations .
It is the responsibility of the Bulgarian authorities to ensure that legal and procedural guarantees enshrined in the Bulgarian legislation on Special Investigative Means are respected .
The Commission highlights the necessity for Member States to respect fundamental rights and procedural guarantees in compliance with the rule of law when implementing EU law .
The Commission understands that the Bulgarian authorities took the necessary steps to check the legality of the deployment of Special Investigative Means and to establish whether the information published in the press resulted from abusive use of Special Investigative Means .
The Commission , while not having received any related complaints on the interception of electronic communications in Bulgaria , will continue to monitor the current situation with a view to ensuring compliance with EU law .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I am very surprised by this debate , which was not even raised in the competent committee , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , before it came here .
The measure which is being attacked in this debate is a legitimate legal instrument which can be used in the fight against crime .
If anything , it is proof that Bulgaria is serious in taking up the great challenge of fighting corruption and organised crime , which is something we have long asked it to do .
The measures foreseen in the law can be exercised in a legitimate manner and we expect them to be exercised in a legitimate manner .
The law foresees that phone tapping can only be requested by public prosecutors or by law enforcement agencies , such as the police and the national security agency , if they suspect that the person in question is involved in criminal activity and after there is authorisation by a judge .
The law on the use of special intelligence lays down a purpose limitation , stipulating that these measures can only be used for the purpose of fighting organised crime or for protecting national security .
The information collected must be kept confidential and must only be used for the purposes outlined in the law .
There is also established parliamentary scrutiny of this legal system .
So it is clear that there are safeguards , especially safeguards on the privacy of citizens and respect of data protection , and there is no question , as I see it , of it being in breach of the law .
Therefore , attacking this instrument at this point would be tantamount to an irresponsible attack against the effort of a Member State to try to fight organised crime and corruption .
This attack damages Bulgaria greatly , as this fight is of utmost importance for this country in the light of its cooperation and verification mechanism and also of its prospective entry into the Schengen area .
The only plausible explanation for this debate therefore seems to be that it is politically motivated .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I was one of those in this Parliament who strongly promoted the accession of Bulgaria to the European Union .
I am very happy that Bulgaria is now a Member State , but I am very disappointed at some of the measures taken by the present Bulgarian Government .
Yes , we fully support the fight against corruption .
This is a very important fight , and we fully support what the Commission has said that there must be laws in Bulgaria concerning videotaping and interception .
The Commissioner was very careful .
He said it seems to comply with European standards and he said very clearly that the measures must be proportionate .
Is it proportionate when , all of a sudden , in a timeframe of three years , interception grows from 6 000 in 2008 to 16 000 in 2010 ?
Is it proportionate and fair that only 2 % of the videotaping is going to the courts and is used for 1 % of convictions ?
Is it proportionate and fair that the proceedings are filtered by the Ministry of the Interior ?
Why is everything not given to the judicial authorities ?
Why is it filtered by the Ministry of the Interior ?
What does the Ministry of the Interior do with what is coming in ?
I would like to ask the Commission to look into its monitoring process regarding what is happening to the rest of the data .
There are also reports in the Parliament in Sofia and in the media in Bulgaria that there are serious doubts that the Ministry of the Interior can protect the information .
We have already seen leakage of the information .
You mentioned Schengen and , yes , we want the Schengen border extended .
It now includes Bulgaria and Romania , but when we see what is happening here , you cannot be surprised that some in Europe are critical about this enlargement .
I would ask the Commissioner to do his job , as he did , and ask the Bulgarian Government to stop this kind of wrong implementation and wrong law enforcement tending towards a very restrictive practice concerning these interceptions .
Be fair , be open , be transparent and stop violations of this kind of the spirit of European laws .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( BG ) Mr President , Mr Swoboda , I would like to ask you a question .
You cited data from 2008 and 2010 .
Would you tell me where you got these figures from , and do you believe them to be correct ?
You stated that only one or two percent are used in court .
The data circulating in Bulgaria are quite different , and the figures regarding the number of people who were actually eavesdropped and the percentage of data used as evidence in court are completely different .
For 2009 , they were 30 % , and in 2010 , they were 40 % .
In other words , the figures differ completely from those you cited just now .
Mr President , we have received different figures from Bulgarian sources .
Perhaps it should be left up to the Commission to prove who is right .
As far as I know from sources in Bulgaria , there is a very low percentage of referrals to prosecutors , of which very few lead to convictions .
This is what we know ; this is the information we have from various sources .
There is also , I think , a report from the parliament in Bulgaria .
The Commission should look into that .
Why is there this scandal in Bulgaria ?
We really have to look into this matter .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( BG ) Mr President , just a quick question , Mr Swoboda .
Are you aware that the investigation which you just mentioned as being with the Ministry of the Interior was moved there from the judicial authorities when the Bulgarian Socialist Party , which is part of your group , was in power ?
Mr President , it always seems to be a party political issue for Mr Stoyanov and Mr Busuttil .
For me , it is not a party political issue .
For me , it is a basic issue of rights , of human rights , and of obeying and respecting European law , regardless of who transferred it to the Ministry of the Interior .
Secondly , the important thing is how it is used .
You can use the same instrument in a very restricted way , or you can use it in a very wide way .
As I said before , it is very interesting what is done with the data kept by the Ministry of the Interior .
That is the major issue .
There is always the danger that when so much data is kept and not given to the prosecutors , that it will be misused .
This may be politically motivated or it may be personally motivated .
We should fight against this kind of misuse .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , thank you , Commissioner , for your very careful statement .
Those in this Parliament who know me and know the 12 years I have spent here will know that I intervene in such debates with a great reticence .
But over a year ago , as a Vice-President of this Parliament , I was asked to visit Bulgaria to speak about the Stockholm Programme for Justice .
It is clear that our programme for justice has moved from an emphasis on security to an emphasis on justice , and all of us in our Member States have to get that balance right .
I remember from my visit to Bulgaria the great interest of Bulgarian judges in what we are doing and want to pursue at Union level .
But I was surprised last week to receive a visitor in my office in Brussels who spoke about people in Bulgaria receiving visits from the secret service in their homes at night .
This is something that is totally alien to me and I find it very difficult to understand and to stand here saying this .
That said , it seems to me , as Mr Swoboda has already said , that the current legislation that exists on phone tapping - let us call it what it is - appears to be correct .
Where there was formerly scrutiny by an independent body , there is now scrutiny by a parliamentary body .
Has that led to a lessening of the regard for rights ?
There does seem to be an increase in the numbers and an increase in the numbers seems to indicate , and I underline ' seems ' , that there is an easier or a quicker granting by judges of this possibility .
Part of the reason I want to speak is a linked matter which relates to the citizen 's initiative .
It appears that people feel that they are being pressurised to withdraw signatures .
We have to implement the European Citizens ' Initiative over the course of the next year .
I would ask the Commission to watch this space very carefully .
Mr President , the use of special forms of surveillance is a sensitive issue in any country .
We often encounter suspicions that the government is using them not only in the fight against organised crime , but also to monitor and suppress political opposition .
The situation in Bulgaria , however , is particularly strange .
Information obtained by listening in on telephone conversations under dubious conditions is not ending up with the relevant bodies , but is appearing in various media .
The Bulgarian premier has even announced that the highest representatives of the State are also constantly bugged by the secret service .
Apparently , this is for the fight against corruption and organised crime .
Well , it does not often happen that a Head of Government admits that he has such great faith in his closest colleagues that he has to have them bugged so that they do not surrender to the temptation of corruption or collaborating with organised crime .
In any case , there is a peculiar situation in this area in Bulgaria , and I think it would be good to assist our Bulgarian friends in sorting matters out regarding the application of the relevant legislation .
( BG ) Mr President , in Bulgaria , we have a saying for what we are witnessing in the current debate : ' the thief who cries ' thief ! " .
When the tripartite coalition was in power , the services were infiltrated by the mafia , with the toxic results that we now see .
When the coalition was in power , I myself was beaten by the police during an opposition protest .
Afterwards , these wolves in sheep 's clothing , who now present themselves to you as fighters against a police state , amended the law by virtue of which the case against my assailants has been pending in the court for three years now .
During your rule , socialists and royalists , the police attacked peaceful demonstrators , but now you are stirring up a fuss about infringements of civil liberties .
When you were in power , the journalist Ognyan Stefanov was beaten to death , and now you complain of censorship .
While you were in power , kidnappings were a daily occurrence .
The mafia was all-powerful , while citizens had no rights .
The courts were bought and sold .
When you were in power , wheeler-dealing and selling off national assets became models of rule .
Now you are up to your old tricks again , trying to stop Bulgaria joining Schengen in the hope that you can blame the sins of your criminal rule on others .
However , it will not work , because the voters are not blind .
They swept you from power , threw you on to the political scrapheap , and no iniquity that you may dream up will change this fact .
( BG ) Mr President , every debate in the European Parliament reflects the interests of European citizens .
Today 's debate , however , can serve as a good example of how the European scene can become a tool for selfish , national political interests .
Every time the European agenda is subverted by a national agenda , this cannot be interpreted as a position of national responsibility but as being in conflict with the values for which Bulgarian citizens voted their representatives into the European Parliament .
Would they recognise themselves in this debate ?
I doubt it .
My fellow MEPs are undoubtedly right when they say that the Bulgarian public must know what is going on in its own country and whether its constitutional rights are being observed .
However , there is a limit beyond which democratic institutions are ignored to protect the interest of dubious interest groups whose purpose is clear : to discredit Bulgaria on its road to Europe and to discredit the government of GERB in its attempts to put an end to shady practices that have been allowed to build up for many years .
I would like to draw your attention to some of the things my fellow Members have expressed .
First of all , the assertion that the number of cases of eavesdropping has doubled .
The official figures are completely different .
They are publicly available to anyone who cares about the truth .
However , I would like to ask a question .
Since when has this information been transparent ?
There is only one answer : thanks to the GERB government , which regards transparency and free access by citizens to State information as a fundamental principle .
Secondly , the assertion that closing the bureau set up to control eavesdropping devices in Bulgaria has put an end to legal control over their use is completely unfounded .
I would like to remind you that this bureau never has worked properly , particularly as the original idea for it came from the executive authorities .
You do not need reminding that Bulgaria is a parliamentary republic , and the special sub-committee for parliamentary control and monitoring of the procedures for authorising , applying and using eavesdropping devices was set up within the very framework of respect for democratic institutions and the constitution .
I would also like to remind you that all political parties are represented on the sub-committee and represented according to the principle of parity .
Furthermore , the ruling party is not entitled to chair the committee .
All of this shows that the Bulgarian legislator has incorporated absolute guarantees for carrying out such lawful activities , and these are backed up by reliable controls .
Changing the status quo is difficult ; building something positive is even more so .
Most difficult , however , is when some of our country 's representatives come to the most democratic institution of Europe to embroil themselves in internal polemics whose aims are far removed from those we uphold here every day .
Mr President , it is always uncomfortable when any Member State has its internal situation scrutinised .
I want to say , in the same spirit that Mrs Wallis indicated , that my own government in the United Kingdom was investigated for its operation of rendition - taking people to be tortured allegedly .
This , of course , was very uncomfortable for me and for my government in the United Kingdom , but I took part actively in that investigation because it was necessary to do it in a European-wide way .
Why ?
And why are we here today discussing the internal interception arrangements of the Bulgarian Government ?
Not because of Bulgaria , but because we are a community of values .
As a community of values , the issue is that raised by the Commissioner - I quote , ' that interception must be used exceptionally ' .
While not a great lawyer like Mrs Wallis , I am a lawyer , and I know that you must only use interception exceptionally .
It is one of those things which , if used in an unnecessary , inappropriate or disproportionate way , instead of becoming an aid to the attack on organised crime , which is very important in Bulgaria and elsewhere in the European Union , becomes a weapon of the state .
It does not matter which political party is originating this debate , to move from discussing an attack on organised crime to using an instrument of the State disproportionately is a very serious matter for the European Union and it is not exclusive today to Bulgaria .
Tomorrow , it may be another Member State .
I genuinely looked into all the sources and figures , and I would ask colleagues across the parties in this House : is there anyone who is saying that an inappropriate or disproportionate use of interception was or was not used ?
If you want to dispute the figures used by Mr Swoboda , is anyone disputing that a disproportionate use of interception has happened ?
I have looked at many sources before speaking today , because we have to speak carefully about such issues .
I have not seen anyone on any side of the debate saying disproportionate use has not happened .
For that reason , the Commission must investigate this .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as an Italian citizen , I am certainly not against wiretapping when it is used legally .
In Italy , it is very useful for combating the Mafia and recently , it has been used to incriminate President Berlusconi for the alleged crimes of bribery and underage prostitution .
The case of the Bulgarian Government appears to be completely different , since it seems that it was using wiretapping to criminalise the opposition , causing widespread fear in complex societal organisations and attempting to link the opposition to common criminals -which allows it to act with no respect for human rights and to install a police state .
Situations like this can only lead to further social violence .
I therefore believe that Parliament and the European Commission need to pay particular attention to the situation in Bulgaria and seek to limit the damage that the behaviour of its government threatens to cause .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Piebalgs , I have followed this debate and the debate on Albania very closely .
What a difference !
In that debate , efforts were made to maintain a polite , friendly tone across party boundaries .
Here , insinuations have been made which are completely unproven .
There , the aim was to bring the two major parties together .
Here , the objective of one of them is to drive a wedge between the two parties .
There , the desire was for the two parties to come together and work together for the welfare of the people .
Here , it is unfortunately all about one part of Parliament prejudging the situation .
Why are you doing this ?
Why have I not heard you state a single fact ?
You have just used phrases such as ' It seems to be the case ... ' or ' We have been informed by certain sources ... ' or ' We have heard that ... ' .
If that is how you see the situation , why do you not go to the relevant committees in Parliament ?
Why do you not go to the Subcommittee on Security and Defence ?
Why do you not ask the Commission questions ?
Instead , you are pushing for a public debate because you want it to take place for political reasons .
We are opposed to this .
We do not understand why this debate is taking place at the expense of the Bulgarian Government and the Bulgarian people .
If there is something which needs to be discussed , I invite you to do so in the relevant committees .
It goes without saying for us that there must be the rule of law , a functioning justice system and appropriate parliamentary controls , in particular , in the case of sensitive issues like this instrument , all of which are the responsibility of a parliament which has been put in place by this government , which consists of representatives of all the parliamentary parties .
I am grateful to Mrs Malmström for saying last week in Sofia that this is an internal matter and to the Commissioner for stating clearly that the Bulgarian Government has taken all the necessary steps .

Mr President , on a point of order , there was a guy up there filming us , including when we were signing .
He says he is from the Bulgarian Delegation .
I do not know how that can be , as all the Bulgarian Members seem to be here .
It is very strange that somebody has come into the Chamber and filmed us while we were speaking and signing .
Perhaps the services could look into what has happened , because it is unacceptable for outsiders to come in here and film what we are doing .
Yes , Mr Swoboda , I will enquire about this , and we will take steps as necessary .
( BG ) Mr President , today 's debate is not just about widespread eavesdropping in Bulgaria .
It is about the alarming tendencies towards the suspension of citizens ' rights in Europe
Internal political problems are the responsibility of the competent authorities in Bulgaria , who have to refer the issues to themselves to resolve them .
At European level , there are no flaws in harmonisation with European legislation and , you are right , Commissioner ; the problems lie in the implementation .
For that reason , we asked you what you would do to ensure there is no abuse of European law .
Therefore , my answer to you too , Mr Strasser , is that we have referred it to the Commission .
The Bulgarian scandal has put the Charter , the Stockholm Programme , Directive 9546 and numerous documents on data protection in jeopardy , because in Bulgaria , recorded conversations of doctors are made public without legal justification and with no opportunity for a legal defence .
The drastic increase in eavesdropping devices is in inverse proportion to their judicial effectiveness .
Doubts remain that the information from them will be collected and used for political purposes , which is particularly dangerous comes the elections in a year 's time .
Commissioner , we urge the Commission to issue an initiative for the establishment of independent bodies to control eavesdropping devices in Member States .
These devices are very important in fighting corruption and criminality , and that is why we are appealing to you to ensure that they are lawfully used in the context of the mechanism for verification and cooperation .
( BG ) Mr President , the escalation in the use of special eavesdropping devices in Bulgaria is a fact , which is why the public is so excited and concerned .
It was the Bulgarian parliamentary control body that came up with the critical findings .
I ask the Commission to familiarise itself with these findings .
There are other important issues .
Will the Commission send a signal to those who are unaware of the fine line between security and freedom ?
Will the Commission convict the people who use the tools of the state for party political and even personal interests ?
Moreover , how categorically will the Commission exhort a national parliament - not necessarily the Bulgarian parliament - to resolve the issue of legislative gaps and to reinstate any independent control bodies it has closed down ?
It has become clear that clandestinely gathered information has been shared not only within the confines of the special services , but with political figures in the hierarchy of the security services ; that field operatives filter information , which is not their job by law ; that eavesdropping devices are frequently used on spurious technical grounds and probably for no good reason .
Unfortunately , the Bulgarian special services , embroiled as they are in the fight against crime , have developed a basic reflex of watching almost anything that breathes and moves .
It is not surprising that respected magistrates - not politicians , note - claim that either the system is flawed or there is a deliberate policy of regression .
Flawed ought to be repaired , and that is what we are fighting for now .
However , when it comes to deliberate steps backward , I think we should all oppose it and proclaim that the core of the European political philosophy is human rights , freedoms and the sanctity of human life .
The Stockholm Programme has not been consigned to the museum .
It demands that we turn Europe into an area of freedom , security and justice , and we must not allow individuals , parties or governments to take any Member State back to a dark age of repression , injustice and uncertainty .
( BG ) Mr President , what we heard from the Commission confirms the fact that Bulgarian legislation regarding the use of eavesdropping devices conforms with European law .
We cannot be different because each Member State is obliged to guarantee its citizens fundamental rights and to observe the legal procedures , which is what Bulgaria does .
So what is it that has provoked the debate in this House today ?
The answer is simple .
An election campaign is under way in Bulgaria and the Bulgarian opposition has brought the fight to the European Parliament , obviously irrespective of whether it discredits Bulgaria or not and for the sole purpose of extracting political dividends which , I assure you , is doubtful in the extreme .
It must be hard for the European institutions to convince themselves of the good intentions of representatives of the former tripartite coalition in Bulgaria , during whose rule there were plenty of examples of corruption , an unwillingness to fight crime and lack of confidence on the part of the European Union .
The fellow Members who initiated this debate have clearly lost the patience to wait for the Commission 's answers , and wanted the debate to be held prior to the interim report on Bulgaria 's progress under the Mechanism for Verification and Cooperation .
I would like to make a little joke here .
My fellow Members are obviously guided by high-minded patriotic ideas of doing as much damage to the Bulgarian Government as possible .
It is a disgrace that in this empty , half-empty , or practically empty hall , we Bulgarians are at each other 's throats .
Instead of working together in the interests of our citizens , we are dealing with hearsay , manipulations and a war of political mud-slinging .
Bulgaria 's present government is under attack from the old status quo , the remnants of the communist regime in the structures of power and those who illegally enriched themselves during the period of transition .
The aim of this united front is not just to destabilise Bulgaria and to halt GERB 's efforts for a fairer society , but to discredit our country in the eyes of our European partners .
I repeat : what is happening here this evening is pitiful and disgraceful .
This clearly smacks of the envy of those circles , both political and economic , with the government 's success in its uncompromising war against criminality and corruption , and with its honest and open way of conducting policy .
In recent days , fellow Members of the Bulgarian opposition have presented the situation in Bulgaria in the darkest possible terms .
They talk of fear , a police state , repressions , hunger , poverty , regression , as we just heard and so forth .
Bulgaria 's reputation is being tarnished for the sake of short-term political gains .
The very opposite is true .
There are no contract killings or kidnappings , organised crime has been dealt a severe blow and the channels of corruption which benefited the circles of the old status quo , not just economically but also politically , have been cut off .
The country is stable at the macro-economic level , and offers some of the best conditions for investment in Europe .
The government is stable , the Bulgarian parliament enjoys a stable majority , it governs openly and is a respected and worthy European partner .
Finally , I would like to once again apologise to my fellow MEPs from other Member States who are here , for wasting their time in this , unfortunately , very Bulgarian pre-election debate .
( RO ) Mr President , the use of illegal phone tapping and eavesdropping in Bulgaria is an extremely serious situation .
What is more serious still is that it is not the only case of this kind in the European Union .
Commissioner , this debate ought to have been held about another Member State as well , namely , Romania .
In Romania in 2011 , we have the situation where eavesdropping on private discussions is carried out without any legal remit , even though the constitution , national laws and EU legislation impose a total ban on any kind of intrusion of a person 's privacy without having sound justification and explicit authorisation from a judge .
Discussions are being recorded illegally between journalists , politicians , as well as internal discussions during opposition parties ' meetings or private meetings in courtrooms .
The fundamental right to the protection of privacy is being systematically and repeatedly violated .
Illegal phone tapping has become prosecutors ' investigation method of choice .
The secret services permanently monitor the telephone conversations of the current government 's political opponents .
This is a very serious situation and I call on the European Commission to intervene urgently to uphold the rule of law and democracy in both Member States .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to repeat the European Commission 's assessment that the present government of Bulgaria is showing a real ambition to crack down on organised crime .
Hardly anybody will deny that for the first time , our country has made real progress on this .
That is what the Bulgarian electorate voted for in 2009 .
The results have been achieved thanks to the decisive actions of the law enforcement agencies , which mustered all legal crime detection methods .
It is only natural for the number of operations - and hence the number of people investigated - to increase , resulting in greater effectiveness .
However , let us not be naïve .
Organised crime has plenty of resources to hand , acquired over years of impunity and inaction , to cause an unprecedented response .
They have activated the machinery of undermining the ruling coalition to discredit it in the very area in which it is strongest .
The campaign was kicked off by publishing carefully selected and manipulated wire-tap recordings disseminated on flash drives by persons unknown .
The media and politicians are falling over each other to comment on the horrors going on in Bulgaria , on the threat to citizens , on how much fundamental conventions and declarations have been undermined .
Those who initiated this hysteria , those who acquired and illegally spread this discrediting information , are now rubbing their hands with glee .
They probably did not even imagine how easily the bait would be taken , to the extent that even the 4x4 in which the flash drives were being transported was stolen .
Some of the politicians present here have managed to spread this hysteria to the European Parliament , presenting it as the Bulgarian eavesdropping scandal .
No such scandal exists in Bulgaria .
All there is is a well-organised offensive to discredit the country 's ruling coalition and its most prominent figures .
Discredited politicians from the opposition parties jumped on this bandwagon , hoping to reap dividends in the coming election campaign .
May we ask my fellow Members whether they are aware of whose hands they are playing into by their present actions ?
( BG ) Mr President , I would like to turn to Commissioner Piebalgs , because a great deal of propaganda has been coming from Bulgaria 's ruling party today .
The Parliamentary Commission , headed by the ruling party 's coalition partner , the nationalists of Ataka , presented the Bulgarian parliament with a report saying that the government is filtering information acquired from wiretaps before passing it on to the courts .
The report states that the government does not protect confidential personal information , which is published in the media .
The report also says - and , I repeat , the report was prepared by the Bulgarian parliament - that fundamental rights of people living in Bulgaria , who are likewise European citizens , are being broken .
This is an infringement of a number of European directives .
It is an infringement of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I also believe that the only option left open to the Commission is to compare Bulgarian law and its implementation with what the requirements are for all European citizens .
This is not a question of propaganda or a party political campaign .
It is a question of clear facts and we believe that the Commission , as the guardian of the treaties , will familiarise itself with them and issue its opinion .
( BG ) Mr President , as I am among the last to take the floor in this debate , I would like to summarise by saying a few words .
Today 's debate is not to do with special eavesdropping devices in Bulgaria , nor is it a debate for or against a particular minister .
It is a debate on the principles and values of Europe , which is why it is only natural that it should be held in this House .
That is because it is a matter of freedom , of human rights , of democratic laws , which is not and cannot be purely a domestic debate .
The debate on human rights is the philosophy of a unified Europe , the purpose that inspired the new democracies after the fall of the Berlin Wall .
If they lose their faith that Europe is based on principles , many of their citizens will decide that the road to Europe , which has been so long and hard , was a futile exercise .
Today 's debate is about the truth .
The truth cannot be right-wing or left-wing .
There can be no half-truths .
There is always one truth , and we urge the institutions responsible in Bulgaria to name it as soon as possible .
Because , deliberately or not , the more they delay their answer , the more they feed into the iniquitous soil of rumour and , in that way , are only serving those who claim to be fighting it .
Today 's debate is also one about the responsibility - not of past or future governments , but of the present one .
What distinguishes democratic governments is the fact that they are always responsible to their electorates , regardless of whether they supported or opposed them .
Equating the opposition with organised crime is the device of a different form of governance which has nothing to do with democracy .
( BG ) Mr President , after everything I have heard so far , all I can say is that we have , unfortunately , yet again been witness to a pitiful performance put on by the Bulgarian opposition to bring a domestic political debate to the European Parliament .
Those who initiated this debate , the socialists and liberals who , for eight years , ruled our country , obviously want to use every opportunity to publicly destroy Bulgaria 's image before our European partners .
Today 's argument will not solve who is right and who is wrong , but what will be remembered is the acrimony of our debate , our accusations against one another .
I appeal to you , fellow MEPs of the opposition : if you cannot act as a constructive counterbalance to the present Bulgarian Government , if you cannot focus on constructive , expert , consensual proposals on how to improve standards for Bulgarian citizens , at least do not get in the way of those who can do so .
Mr President , I was not intending to take the floor now under the catch-the-eye procedure , but was denied the right to raise the blue card .
I wanted to respond to Mr Strasser .
( BG ) First of all , Mr Strasser , I would like to say that I cannot agree that there is no information on how eavesdropping devices have been used .
According to information from the Supreme Court of Cassation , in 2010 , 15 946 wiretapping warrants were issued , while only 1 918 were used in court , which is 12 % of the total .
As you can see , the remaining wiretaps were clearly used for other purposes .
16 000 eavesdropping devices means that before 2010 , between 5 % and 10 % of Bulgarian citizens were wiretapped , directly or indirectly .
I would like to ask you , Mr Strasser , is that what you did in Austria ?
Would you agree to your interior ministry and prosecutor 's office behaving this way in Austria ?
Moreover , do you not believe that this debate is a debate on the principle of what the state of freedom and democracy is in a Member State of the European Union ?
It is my view that these questions have to be debated here , because obviously we do not have the strength to do so in Bulgaria .
( BG ) Mr President , I would like to ask the European Commission whether it is aware of the fact that there have been 27 rulings against Bulgaria at the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg for misuse of police powers .
Today , we are discussing eavesdropping devices , but the Citizens ' Initiative has also been watched by the State Agency for National Security and people have been forced to withdraw their signatures .
People taking part in peaceful demonstrations on economic issues have afterwards been summoned to the police and questioned .
Show arrests have been carried out with deliberate heavy-handedness .
The declaration of the ruling political party claims that the opposition , both on the right and the left , have a hand in organised crime and the enemies of GERB are the enemies of the state , while the political and criminal oppositions today are the same thing .
That is the style used by Mussolini and it concerns me greatly .
Similarly , pressure was yesterday exerted at an official meeting between my political party and the leadership of GERB to withdraw our oral question , an action which I consider undemocratic and intolerable .
What measures does the Commission intend to take to restore human rights in my country ?
This debate today is not a matter of Bulgarians opposing Bulgarians , but Bulgarians in the interest of their state and their citizens .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to speak to you directly .
I find it regrettable that you do not make use of the blue card when we are all trying to make parliamentary debates more animated .
It would have significantly improved the quality of this debate .
If you are not listening to me , Mr President , then I do not need to continue .
This is simply futile .
This is what one Member of this House for a long time referred to as a karaoke parliament , where attempts to hold debates and to improve their quality are completely disregarded .
Mr President , I just wanted to add my voice to those insisting that you pretended not to see the blue cards tonight .
Since everyone was trying to imply that there are not enough colleagues here , I would like to say that there are indeed enough respectable colleagues listening to the debate .
I just want to express my disappointment at what Mr Strasser said .
Really , this was not an example of a good democratic speech from someone from a country which we really respect as a democratic one .
( LT ) Mr President , this really is a rather complex issue .
Based on the information provided , it is clear that there is a problem .
I would definitely agree with my colleague who said previously that this is not just a Bulgarian issue .
It is a question of certain values , European Union values , recognised values and we must all respect anyone who is participating in the debate here in this Chamber .
There is a certain charter in the European Union called the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Bulgaria , Lithuania , which I myself represent today , and the other European Union Member States must all comply with it .
It clearly defines what we can and cannot do , and what government can and cannot do .
However , the fundamental idea is to respect human rights .
Commissioner , I therefore feel that the representative of the Commission really should follow this case very closely , because the tension felt in this Chamber today is still excessive .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that there will be debates when it comes to fundamental and inalienable European values such as security and human rights , and when the fine line between them is widened .
Paradoxical though it may appear , the different positions expressed this evening did have one thing in common , and that is concern .
The European Commission asked the Bulgarian authorities to provide information so it could check whether eavesdropping devices are being used lawfully .
We liberal and socialist MEPs wanted a debate because of our concern with legality .
We expressed our opinions to reassure the people who sent us here that we are on the alert for any infringements of their rights .
In their statements , my fellow Members from the European People 's Party have shown concern at poor practices and confidence that they will be improved .
I hope that in this united role , we will be able to provoke rapid processes which will restore the normal functions of democracy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am a liberal democrat both in Europe and in Italy .
Sometimes , however , in my country , my fellow party members and I are called communists merely for opposing the current government .
It seems that the same thing is now happening to our colleagues in Bulgaria , with liberal democrats and socialists being called criminals simply because they represent an opposition force in their country .
We disapprove of this move , because if it is a joke , then it really should only be a short one .
Behaviour of this kind can become really dangerous in the end .
In addition , after everything that has happened in Egypt and Tunisia , only yesterday , the Italian Foreign Minister visited Damascus in Syria and called it ' a democratic country that completely satisfies its citizens ' need for modernisation ' .
If our representatives make speeches like this , it is our duty as Members of the European Parliament to denounce them and the Commission must keep a close watch .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this has been a rather heated debate , but I would like to emphasise three points which I believe are fundamental .
The accession process to the EU - and my country went through this - is not an easy one , but when a country is accepted into the EU , we really believe that this Member State has the ability to be the guarantor of fundamental human rights and also of the implementation of EU law .
For this particular sector , we have specific legislation .
This is the directive concerning the processing of personal data and protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector .
So , the Commission has a very long and , I would say , a very respectable , track record on following EU legislation being implemented in Member States .
I reported to you where we start now and I believe that you should have full trust that the Commission will act if EU law is breached .
If it is not breached , it will not act .
So the Commission is monitoring the situation and , if there is the need , the Commission will act , but I think we should not go beyond the structures that are in Community law and the Commission will definitely stay within Community law .
The debate is closed .
World Bank energy strategy ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Eva Joly , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the World Bank 's energy strategy for developing countries - B70012 / 2011 ) .
author . - Mr President , today , 1.5 billion people are currently without access to electricity , but access to energy is a prerequisite for the eradication of the poverty that these people live in .
The right to energy implies that energy supplies achieve universal and reliable access : equitable access that bridges the gap between urban and rural areas and is also affordable .
It is also crucial for a country to develop a sustainable and secure energy supply , and the most reliable and secure one is a decentralised use of renewables .
But energy does not only need to be secure and reliable ; its production also needs to take into account other issues such as climate change , deforestation , environmental degradation , human health , and the poverty it causes .
These problems cannot be tackled by fossil fuels .
Fossil fuels have a disastrous impact on health , environment and climate .
At the same time , the climate crisis is doing more damage to those living in extreme poverty .
Fossil fuels create pollution that endangers both human health and a healthy environment , and they are expensive and their prices increase the more we run out of oil and gas .
Fossil fuels create centralised , hierarchic and inflexible energy distribution .
We have to focus on renewables .
We have to assist developing countries to leapfrog our destructive fossil fuel path .
Only renewables can bring a solution to these problems .
Renewable energy uses resources that will never run out and that many developing countries have in abundance : sun and wind mainly .
They can be employed locally on a very small and inexpensive scale , which is also , in a very literal sense , empowering people .
Decentralised power supplies are in the hands of the people .
They are democratic .
Nevertheless , the World Bank continues to push fossils in its energy strategy .
Recent increases in lending for renewable and energy sufficiency remain tiny and cannot cover up the obvious preferences .
Fossil fuel investments are also taking place through financial intermediaries which the World Bank does not sufficiently monitor .
There is an under-reporting of fossil fuels .
The bank continues to make significant investment in coal-fired power plants , locking developing countries into coal-based energy for decades to come .
This is not what an energy revolution looks like .
The World Bank 's energy policy suffers from a lack of transparency .
This problem should be addressed through the definition of clear requirements that financial intermediaries must meet in order to be eligible for multilateral financing .
40 % of World Bank loans to the private sector are transferred through those financial intermediaries and a large part of those loans goes to the energy sector , in particular , extractives .
However , unlike direct bank project investments , there is no information publicly available on these individual sub-project investments , making it very difficult to track what ultimately happens to financial intermediaries ' funding .
When we look at what sort of energy is counted as low carbon , we can find large hydropower plants in the strategy .
Such large hydroplants destroy vast amounts of nature and drive people from their homes .
This is not sustainable and this is not in the interests of the people and of society .
Also , carbon capture and storage do not make coal power low carbon .
The CO2 is still there and nobody can predict what will happen to it underground .
None of us can say for sure that it will stay there , calmly for the next millennia .
This is fortune telling and not research , and certainly not policy making .
The same goes for nuclear energy .
Uranium mining produces huge amounts of CO2 and nobody knows what to do with the waste we are producing .
This is not low carbon and this is not sustainable .
This is why the Green / EFA Group will vote against the resolution unless the low carbon wording is replaced .
However , we also see some good points in the resolution : for example , the focus on off-grid renewables for rural areas and small-scale local production , as well as the concern about the dominance of export orientation , large-scale plants and bio fuels .
A last word : we also very much focus on the call for enhanced technology transfer .
In particular , technology transfer will not need much if intellectual property rights are left intact .
The overriding goal should be to treat intellectual property rights in a manner that allows access to technology at affordable prices .
This is what we promised at the climate negotiations , and we should stick to our promise .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I can only congratulate Ms Keller for what she has said and her analysis .
The question though is this .
We have known about these problems for two decades now .
Ms Keller , since you have dealt with the issue in more depth than most of us , is there any particular point that makes you optimistic that what we are about to decide upon could actually bring some progress , or that the World Bank is now finally heading in the right direction ?
author . - Mr President , indeed , we have been discussing these issues for more than two decades , and I really hope that the World Bank will learn from these discussions since everybody agrees that the future lies with renewables .
We have seen a slight change in this strategy .
For instance , it has moved a bit more towards renewables , but this is a little step and not enough by far .
There is still too much dominance of fossils and , when it comes to renewables , too much focus on hydropower plants - and they are not renewable , they are not sustainable , not for anybody .
So I hope that this Parliament can make a strong statement on where we want the European energy policy and the policy that we promote for energy in the world to go .
I hope for your support to remove the wording on low carbon and go for proper , sustainable , renewable energy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I feel I also made a very strong statement .
Firstly , I would emphasise that the World Bank energy strategy is very welcome because the World Bank plays a very particular role in the world , particularly in dealing with development issues .
It is not an understatement to say that they are leaders of public opinion and approaches to development strategies .
My point is that we should address this issue with all seriousness .
At the same time , we should not forget a couple of elements that are very crucial when we are estimating our answer to the strategy .
There are still a substantial number of households today that have no access to any type of energy .
It is true that , although we have been discussing the issue for 20 years , substantial investment in the energy sector or energy service provision have not been delivered to hundreds of millions of people , particularly in sub-Saharan Africa .
So I believe that we need to understand the scale of the challenge .
The second point that we need to take into account is growth .
Each of the countries that are on the path of development have an immense growth in demand .
We should respond to growth in demand with supply .
There is an additional fundamental challenge because of the scale of this .
The third point - and here I fully agree with Ms Keller - is sustainability and anticipation .
Whatever the energy sector does should be considered in the light of the consequences that it has on climate change .
We know that the energy sector which exists today is the biggest cause of greenhouse gases .
Additionally , we should also look at the price of fossil fuel , because we should not forget that the challenge of fossil fuel prices is still ahead of us .
I hope that we will face this later rather than sooner , but it is definitely part of anticipation of the strategy .
As for the orientation , I would expect Parliament to take account of the Green Paper on EU development policy , where we make access to renewable energy in developing countries one of the central pillars of the new EU development policy .
If we do not take this pioneering step , we cannot easily expect to convince the World Bank and others that we should be focusing investment on renewable energy .
I believe that we are capable of managing the scale of investment in renewable energy .
We just need to have courage .
It is true that it requires a lot of financial means today , but any energy strategy would require quite a lot of investment .
So , if I see anticipation of the prices , I would always argue that renewable energy is definitely the one that should be at the heart of any energy policy in any part of the world .
Our knowledge of renewable technologies today gives a good guarantee that we really could make a change in these countries .
I also believe that there is a lot of untapped potential .
I know that hydropower , for example , is a rather challenging source of energy from all points of view but , provided environmental sustainability analysis is being done , I believe that most countries also have a fantastic untapped potential in hydropower , which gives additional arguments that the scale - the Inga Dam , for example - is huge .
At the beginning , we need to lead by example .
If the EU is able and you discuss a report on the EU development policy 's Green Paper , Parliament should strongly support driving EU development policy in this direction .
We will have a better argument for convincing the World Bank to actually follow this drive and be more focused on investments in the coal-fired power station .
The Bank has now established six criteria as general guidelines for future coal investment .
The World Bank , under the leadership of Bob Zoellick , is extremely active in the debate , so it would seem that the World Bank is an asset and not something that we should be afraid of .
It is our ally but we really need to provide European leadership on this issue and in the energy sector for the developing world .
I would also like to address the issue of the EIB , because it was in the question .
The Cotonou Agreement is the legislative basis for EIB activity for an amount of EUR 3.1 billion to ACP countries .
A major instrument in this framework is the ACP Investment Facility .
The facility finances infrastructure and climate friendly energy projects .
As far as the energy sector is concerned , no projects exist in the area of fossil fuels .
The general policy is very clear - to fund climate friendly energy projects based on wind , hydraulic or solar energy .
In the context of the mid-term review of the EIB External Mandate - covering pre-accession , neighbourhood and partner countries , Asia , Latin America and South Africa - a proposal has been put forward by the Commission to activate an additional EUR 2 billion mandate for 2011-2013 to support EIB financing operations in the field of climate change mitigation and adaptation across all regions .
The proposal stresses that the EIB 's own rules and procedures shall include the necessary provisions to ensure that only projects that are economically , financially , environmentally and socially sustainable are supported under the mandate .
I believe that the EU has already taken some steps in the right direction , but we could really take more steps to provide real leadership for the world , not least by addressing the World Bank 's energy strategy .
Mr President , it is a very pressing and important matter that is being addressed in this Chamber , namely , that of the phasing out of loans for fossil fuel projects .
I believe that we should have the courage to say exactly what Commissioner Piebalgs said , namely , that the World Bank has a very deliberate energy strategy .
We can even talk about incentives in this regard , and that is obviously a positive thing .
Of course , it is not just a question of phasing out , but also , as has been said , of phasing in .
Being rather persistent , I want to repeat that there are opportunities here for the EU to make specific investments to help people in developing countries , in Africa , Asia and Latin America .
I believe the Commissioner has heard me speak on a previous occasion about the wood stoves currently found in huts and ordinary houses that are poisoning people .
Two million people are dying prematurely on account of the gases that are found in ordinary homes .
In this regard , like the United States and a number of European countries , we could invest in simple solar-powered stoves that at least eliminate 95 % of the gases .
Then they would no longer need to use manure , which we know that they need for cultivating crops , and they would no longer need to use black coal for heating .
Nor would they need to chop down forests that absolutely should not be chopped down .
I would like , once again , to emphasise that there are opportunities to do something tangible .
Often , when we talk about alternative energy sources , we talk ostentatiously about wind energy and solar energy , and of course we should do that .
However , there is a lack of tangible results , despite the fact that the opportunities are there .
Do not allow the EU to get left behind on these matters , but let the EU be involved in developing concrete ways of replacing this fossil fuel that we no longer want in either the industrialised nations or the developing countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , first , I should like to thank Mrs Keller for her exceptional work on this report .
Indeed , everyone who worked on this report saw just how unviable the World Bank strategy is on several counts .
As Mrs Keller said , it finances unviable , large-scale projects , such as hydroelectric and numerous other projects .
It is a fact that financing for renewable energy sources has risen by 300 % .
At the same time , however , financing for fossil fuel projects has risen by 430 % .
The World Bank - and , to my mind , this is a scandal - has failed to take account of the environmental impact of the projects which it finances .
At the same time , it is still discussing , even today , the possibility of starting financing for programmes for palm oil plantations .
It has no respect for the principle of free , prior and informed consent by locals to projects being financed , nor has it integrated ( and it should integrate ) a full cycle analysis of the projects it finances .
I truly hope that this report , in its final version after the vote , will send a strong message about the environmental reforms which the World Bank needs to implement internally .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , under the terms of its mandate , the World Bank is required to contribute to eradicating poverty in developing countries .
All projects financed by the World Bank must have this aim .
Even when financing a business project to invest in basic social services - health , education , access to water - this requirement must be met .
If the World Bank makes combating poverty a priority , we can be satisfied that it is fulfilling the remit that we laid down .
The oral question that we are debating expresses grave reservations about funding petrol or coal-related projects .
I would like to make a number of comments .
Firstly , the terms of reference for a World Bank-financed project must include the evaluation criteria to be applied from the outset .
It must be clear what is to be evaluated and , consequently , the evaluation criteria need to be integrated throughout the project 's lifetime .
Secondly , political dialogue between the World Bank and its partner must consider political and economic governance , both in the country concerned and in relation to the lender .
Thirdly , where it is possible to promote renewable energies and the costs are justifiable , we need to favour this form of energy generation .
Fourthly , and here I need to thank Commissioner Piebalgs for having already addressed one of my concerns in his answer to Mrs Keller , the European Investment Bank already takes all these factors into account .
I can but hope that the World Bank will follow the example of others who have already adopted these priorities , not least the European Investment Bank .
Given that the 27 Member States of the European Union are also members of the World Bank , we cannot claim to be without any influence on its policy .
I think that it would be well worth discussing combining forces within the World Bank with a view to resolving the issues raised by Mrs Keller .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Keller on her excellent work .
Mr President , before I go on , I would also like to praise the work which has been done by my fellow Member , and say that I fully support the issues that have been mentioned here .
I am going to do something now that I have not done before , but which I think is worthwhile .
We have a series of documents which holds a set of assumptions , all of them rarely discussed .
It is as if they were assumptions unworthy of discussion .
We have the oral question , and we have a resolution which tells us various things , including that the conventional rural electrification programmes financed by the World Bank have failed globally in their task of reaching the poorest in rural areas .
We are also finding that there will be a possible , putative , change in the World Bank 's energy strategy in mid-2011 , but we also know that it is in the energy sectors that we can combat poverty in a very specific way , and help to lift people out of poverty .
We therefore appeal to the World Bank to adopt a development approach that can maximise benefits to the poor while , at the same time , allowing us to combat climate change .
We have also already said that the loans intended for fossil fuels continue to play a predominant role in the overall energy portfolio of the World Bank , and that we must abandon this predominance .
We also have the promise that this predominance will no longer be a predominance by 2015 , and that there will be a gradual reduction in the financing of these projects based on fossil fuels .
We have , finally , a set of statements , specifically regarding the need for the World Bank to give priority to access to local energy on a small scale .
There are many , many others , taking climate change into account .
Having said that , I would like to edit what has been said , and to which I subscribe .
I will edit all of the statements that we have made , and leave just two , final , questions , because it is not worthwhile continuing with mere statements of intent .
The first question is : why can we not draw from all this such a basic conclusion as this ?
Why do we continue to allow those who pay the piper to call the tune ?
Why does the World Bank continue to hold responsibility for the world energy strategy ?
When are we going to make the decision that the world energy strategy should be the object of worldwide coordination anchored in the United Nations ?
The second question that I will leave with you - I apologise for going slightly over time - is : when are we going to stop imposing a development model upon others , whether this be first or second generation , that is , whether first or second hand , upon the rest of the world , as if it were a development model that should be applied to everyone ?
There are limits to arrogance .
We must be more democratic .
( DE ) Mr President , in the 1970s and the early 1980s , the blindness of the World Bank to environmental issues was a major topic for discussion .
The same speeches were made then as are being made here today , together with certain promises by the World Bank .
Moves were made to reform the World Bank , but decades have passed since then .
For a wide variety of reasons , I recently made a visit to a number of countries which are generally referred to as developing countries .
The situation was unacceptable .
What has happened to all the projects ?
Where are the solar plants in the tropics ?
Where are the sustainable forests in the Amazon or in Vietnam ?
Where are the solar panels and wind turbines in Kenya ?
There is absolutely nothing there .
The only thing that has happened is that the European system of self-government has been copied exactly .
The people there are governing themselves and they have played into the hands of a few large interested parties , but they have not made any progress .
Then we are surprised when citizens of the developing countries say despairingly : ' I do not want to live in the Caribbean any more .
I want to move to the USA and get into the EU via Martinique ' .
We are surprised when the people in the Maghreb countries all want to move here .
The hypocrisy of this debate is totally unbelievable .
We have to understand that millions of people have been radicalised .
They have simply said ' We have had enough ! ' .
Everyone who has seen the European Parliament motion for a resolution will have to admit that it could not have been that .
We should have spoken out much more loudly .
We should have called on the World Bank much more clearly to take the necessary action .
Why do we have all these committees - the Committee on Development , the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and so on - if all they can produce is a scrappy little piece of paper that , in part , contains the conclusions of the debate which took place in the late 1970s ?
The whole thing is embarrassing .
( PL ) Mr President , we need convince no one of the importance of energy for developing countries .
I have seen the surprise on people 's faces many times when they learn how much electricity costs in Africa .
It is probably also true that we need convince no one that the World Bank plays a far from insignificant role when it comes to energy matters in developing countries .
My political group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , tabled a number of amendments to be voted on separately to the resolution we are discussing .
It seems to us that some parts of the resolution are too critical of the World Bank .
I do not believe , for example , that we can draw the World Bank 's attention to the fact that it regards some types of energy as clean when they should be regarded as environmentally wrong or undesirable .
Nuclear energy , for example , is widely used in the EU 's Member States , and an increasing number of European countries which are dependent on coal or gas are suffering to a certain extent since they are having to limit their emissions , which gives rise to costs which are distributed very unequally between the individual Member States .
We must therefore exercise caution when telling external bodies which types of energy should be developed .
I do agree , however , with the idea that it is worth giving particular support to local projects covering small areas , that it is worth supporting low emission projects and that it is worth supporting ideas relating to diversified sources of energy and avoiding energy dependency .
We would like the World Bank to invest in renewable energy and increased energy efficiency , but we must always bear in mind the fundamental goal , or , in other words , how access to energy is supposed to help people break out of poverty .
We want to kill several birds with one stone - to create the conditions for development , limit emissions and take into account social and environmental aspects in new energy projects .
These are ambitious tasks , and I hope the World Bank is not afraid of them .
At the same time , I know that Commissioner Piebalgs places a great deal of emphasis on the development of energy projects in developing countries , and I can confirm that this is discussed in the Green Paper and that the European Parliament should support this strategy .
( RO ) Mr President , there are currently 1.4 billion people in the world without access to electricity , 85 % of whom live in rural areas .
The Millennium Development Goals to eradicate poverty by 2015 will not be achieved due to the lack of significant progress on providing access to energy .
Achieving this goal by 2015 means that 395 million people will have access to electricity and 1 billion people will gain access to hygienic facilities for preparing food .
All these measures will require an annual investment of roughly USD 40 billion in the 2010-2015 period , which amounts to 0.6 % of global GDP .
Universal access to electricity is one of the most important goals set by the governments in developing countries .
Among the barriers identified as preventing electrification are the high cost of supplying electricity in rural areas and to houses in peri-urban areas , the lack of tax or financial incentives , insufficient capacity for developing and implementing electrification projects , along with the limited ability to generate electricity .
Rural areas are a special case when it comes to energy requirements .
In rural areas , not only does the required energy need to be provided , but the actual process of generating it as well , which also creates jobs and supports economic and social development .
On 11 February 2011 , a World Bank report showed that local energy production from renewable sources at a low production cost is a more viable economic solution in the long term .
This may play a key role in increasing India 's energy security so that energy imports and the influence of oil price fluctuations can be reduced .
The World Bank could therefore act as a partner to the developing countries .
I believe that the World Bank should support the projects concerned with boosting energy efficiency and local energy production from renewable sources , as well as extensive projects involving electrification and establishing interconnections between different countries .
( LT ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur for raising in a timely manner what truly is a very relevant issue .
Energy poverty remains a huge problem , and related issues are preventing those living in the world 's poorest regions from improving their quality of life , from having the opportunity to earn a living and generally contribute towards increasing growth and productivity .
This is one of the fundamental factors impeding general social and economic development and preventing these regions from being lifted out of poverty .
As the rapporteur mentioned , the statistics are disturbing - around 1.5 billion people do not have any access to electricity , and more than 2.5 billion people are still using traditional fuel obtained from biomass .
According to World Health Organisation data , across the world , two million people die prematurely from respiratory diseases each year due to the use of this fuel .
So far , the World Bank 's previous energy strategy has not produced tangible results .
Furthermore , support for the use of fossil fuel still remains greater than for renewable or clean sources of energy .
Hitherto , significant investment has been provided for coal-fired power plants , and this continues to make these poor countries dependent on fossil fuel , which heavily pollutes the environment .
The agreement adopted by the G20 leaders to reduce support and funding for fossil fuel projects , which should not receive any funding at all from 2015 , is a positive and welcome stimulus .
The new strategy must also thoroughly assess the issue of funding supervision and control , so that this assistance is used for those energy projects that may bring long-term benefits and genuinely contribute to the development of these regions and improving the quality of people 's lives .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Piebalgs in particular .
As a former Commissioner for energy , he naturally knows all about our strategy .
I believe that there is a lot to be done in the field of development cooperation , particularly with regard to technical aid .
Europe must not only make payments to the World Bank ; it must also take action .
Europe and the European institutions must play a stronger role in the World Bank and it will be a major challenge to ensure that family businesses can be supported with development aid , that small and medium-sized energy generation enterprises can be promoted , because a lot of small businesses together can achieve economies of scale and produce a corresponding return on investment .
One of the most important issues is , of course , the storage of energy .
This will play a central role in development cooperation .
Mr President , I suppose one could say that those of us who are still here at this hour of the night are probably powered by some form of renewable energy , perhaps solar power or maybe even divine power in the form of a halo above our heads .
Either way , the discussion has been very varied , and not surprisingly , because this is always a contentious issue .
But I think the Commissioner got the balance right , probably better than most of us , in terms of where we are going and what needs to be done in the future .
I think a few points need to be made more precise .
Whether countries are in the developing world or the developed world , if they have resources of fossil fuel - coal - or nuclear energy , they are going to utilise them .
The question is : do we finance them or do we not ?
Obviously in Europe , in terms of Cancún , Kyoto , etc. we want to push the renewable agenda , and that is absolutely correct .
But I think in doing that , Mr Martin is probably right in one sense that we need to speak with a louder voice and push the World Bank into promoting and financing more renewable energy projects than they are perhaps doing right now .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this is very important to our debate , even if it is late at night , because I think the World Bank 's energy strategy is an opportunity .
It is a genuine opportunity to respond to energy challenges .
If we also look at what the International Energy Agency is saying about energy poverty , about renewable energy , it is certainly a huge challenge , but the World Bank , together with our leadership , could make the necessary change .
If we go back a couple of years in our Union 's history , our renewable energy target seemed impossible to meet , even if it was a rather humble target of 18 % , if I recall correctly .
Now it seems that we are well on track .
Sometimes , however , you need to take your courage in both hands and anticipate the real challenges .
The World Bank makes the whole process very open .
There will be the World Bank energy week in Washington .
We could also submit our contributions to the World Bank , which is very open to new ideas .
If we are courageous , that will give even more courage to the World Bank .
So it is important that we go with open hearts and put these very ambitious ideas to the World Bank .
Otherwise , many people could attempt to evade this challenge .
It is definitely a question of where to start .
I would say it is still access to energy that we should be looking at , because access to energy also means sustainable and efficient energy .
The recent trends in the countries we are working with show huge urbanisation , so in a way , it has changed the pattern of the whole energy riddle .
It means not only decentralised generation , but also agglomeration areas , so energy efficiency , strange as it sounds , should also be part of the strategy .
Most importantly , we should beef up .
We have energy facilities : EUR 200 million .
You cannot do too much on energy with EUR 200 million .
We need to envisage long-term funding , because I believe Europe 's trademark should be renewable energy .
With this , and the capacities of the World Bank , we really could do something that matters , not only for energy supply , but also in terms of taking substantial steps to combat climate change .
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 17 February 2011 .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure
The interpretation of Rules 56 and 50 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , which was adopted by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs at its sitting of Monday 14 February 2011 , was announced during yesterday 's voting time .
As this interpretation was not contested by anyone pursuant to Rule 211 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , the interpretation can be deemed to have been adopted .
As a result , the vote on the Mathieu report on the procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State has been removed from the agenda for this part-session .
As you are aware , the matter has been the subject of much debate , and now we have an interpretation on the basis of the Rules of Procedure and the principles governing our work .
2010 progress report on Croatia ( debate )
- The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the 2010 progress report on Croatia .
Yesterday I met with the Croatian Prime Minister , and I was accompanied by two representatives of key institutions of ours ; Mr Swoboda , the rapporteur , and Mr Hökmark , the head of our permanent delegation to Croatia .
We discussed the subject of Croatia 's progress on its path towards the European Union .
I am extremely pleased that today we can discuss the status of the negotiations and the outlook for Croatia 's future in the European Union directly , with all our fellow Members present .
I am also pleased that Commissioner Füle , who is responsible for our neighbourhood policy , is present in the Chamber .
I would now like Mr Martonyi to take the floor on behalf of the Council .
Mr Martonyi and the Hungarian Presidency attach a great deal of importance to enlarging the EU to include Croatia , and this is therefore an important item on the Hungarian Presidency 's agenda .
Please take the floor , Mr Martonyi .
The neighbourhood policy is very important for the European Union , the Mediterranean region , the Eastern Partnership and , first and foremost , the Western Balkans .
I will now give the floor to the Commissioner responsible for that policy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on Croatia , Mr Hannes Swoboda , and express my appreciation for his fair and balanced report .
It acknowledges the impressive progress achieved by Croatia in meeting the criteria for accession , while recognising the efforts that are still necessary to conclude the negotiations .
The European Union and Croatia have provisionally closed 28 of the 35 negotiating chapters .
The ministerial accession conference of 19 April should be able to provisionally close additional chapters where Croatia has either fulfilled , or is very close to fulfilling , the closing benchmarks .
As noted by the December 2010 General Affairs Council , the conclusion of negotiations is within reach .
As with all negotiations , the most difficult issues remain to be tackled in the final phase .
As Minister Martonyi has just underlined , the Hungarian Presidency announced earlier its goal to finish negotiations in the first half of 2011 , if all criteria and benchmarks are fulfilled .
This is an ambitious goal which can only be achieved if Croatia continues to make an exceptional effort to fulfil the remaining requirements in time .
The main outstanding challenges are the closing benchmarks for Chapter 23 : Judiciary and fundamental rights and Chapter 8 : Competition policy .
Croatia has been working hard in both areas , but now is the time to go the final mile .
As regards the judiciary and fundamental rights , the main areas where Croatia is called upon to deliver on its commitments are : establishing a credible and sustainable track-record in the fight against corruption ; strengthening the independence , accountability , impartiality and professionalism of the judiciary ; addressing the issue of impunity for war crimes ; meeting targets in the Housing Care Programme for refugees and improving the implementation of minority rights .
Full cooperation with ICTY remains a requirement .
In each of these areas , there are clear benchmarks to be met .
The Commission is currently taking stock of the progress achieved by Croatia for each of the benchmarks , on which we will report in our upcoming interim report on this chapter due by the middle of March .
I had a very useful and constructive meeting with Prime Minister Kosor yesterday .
We discussed the importance of maintaining the momentum of the accession negotiations and of tackling the remaining outstanding issues .
The Croatian authorities are well aware of what they still need to do .
Indeed , I was very pleased to be reassured of the Prime Minister 's personal commitment to ensuring that the work continues at full speed until the European Union accession process can be concluded .
I could not agree more with those who call on the European Union neither to make ' special discounts ' nor to impose artificial hurdles on Croatia .
The principles of full respect for the conditionality that applies to the candidate countries , and full respect for the commitments that the European Union has made , remain the cornerstones of the enlargement process .
This is the essence of its credibility .
The Commission will continue to give its full support to Croatia , which is working hard to achieve its goal of accession to the European Union .
I am sure , and here I am following the line of Minister Martonyi , that the Member States will decide that accession negotiations can be concluded as soon as we can ascertain that the remaining closing benchmarks have been met .
I am equally sure that , when Parliament is requested to give its consent on the draft Accession Treaty , it will play this critical role in accordance with the very constructive approach that it has shown with regard to Croatia 's accession process .
Along with your rapporteur , Mr Swoboda , I firmly believe that the citizens of Croatia , after being called upon to endorse their country 's accession to the European Union , will be able to vote for their representatives in the next elections to the European Parliament .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to express my sincere thanks to all of the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation , the result of which is that we have a report that will hopefully receive broad support .
I will start by mentioning what , I am sure , was a very successful visit to this House yesterday by the Prime Minister , Jadranka Kosor .
Mr President , you mentioned that Croatia 's accession is not only important for Croatia and for the European Union , but it is also important as a signal to the whole region .
The first point that I would like to use to emphasise this relates to the reforms .
If a country carries out the tasks that have been asked of it , then we must also keep the promises that were made with regard to membership .
As Mr Martonyi and the Commissioner have said , there is still work to be done .
The message must still be : please also take the final steps of the reforms so that we can achieve our common goal of concluding the treaty in June .
During the conversation with Mrs Kosor , Mr Schulz said that the dispute in the Gulf of Piran would previously have been settled by fighting a war .
Today , we sit around a table and try to find a method of negotiating these matters .
That , too , is an important signal to the region as a whole - I am thinking of Serbia and Kosovo here - that such disputes can be settled , not by fighting , but simply by negotiations and dialogue .
The Prime Minister said that in her country the government and opposition were moving in the same direction with regard to the EU .
My last conversation with Zoran Milanović , the leader of the Social Democrat opposition , also confirmed that to be the case .
Yesterday , we discussed Albania .
Albania , too , could take this as an example of how to go about things when it comes to important common concerns , over and above any political debate .
We should therefore send a dual message to Zagreb and Croatia as a whole to the effect that we - the Council , Commission and European Parliament - are working together to be able to conclude the negotiations in June so that the treaty can be concluded and we can then give our consent in the autumn , so allowing the ratification process to actually be carried out , but please - and this is addressed to Croatia - deal with the issues that are still outstanding .
With regard to combating corruption , courageous steps have already been taken , but there are a few final steps that are still needed .
With regard to the reform of the justice system and also where the shipyards are concerned there is still work to be done .
However , all of these points are also referred to in our report , and they do not represent insurmountable barriers , but provide the opportunity for Croatia to still fulfil the relevant requirements .
With this in mind , ladies and gentlemen , we should send a joint message today from all of us here to Croatia , and indeed to the whole region , to the effect that if a country carries out the tasks it has been asked to do , the European Union will also keep its promise of allowing it to become a member of this Union .
Mr President , as you too said yesterday : it will also benefit the European Union if we accept Croatia , provided it has done what it has been asked to do .
I would therefore like to thank the shadow rapporteurs once again .
If we are able to send out a signal that is as united as possible to Croatia and the whole region , we will have taken a major step forward for the peaceful integration of the entire region .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have to admit that I feel very moved today , because this year marks 20 years since the movement for democracy in Slovenia and Croatia was consolidated .
It was a year old and the people rejoiced as they did in Hungary , the Czech Republic and elsewhere .
Then on 28 June 1991 came the brutal attack by the Yugoslav People 's Army .
At that time , everything seemed to have reverted back to how it used to be .
I was in Vukovar when this small , blossoming model of Europe was destroyed and hundreds of thousands of people lost their homes and thousands lost their lives .
Since then , I have been able to accompany Croatia along the path towards the European Union .
We quite clearly have to acknowledge that Croatia has made an extraordinary effort to move along this path .
The Commissioner has come up with the key word today .
He spoke of fairness .
We could give the Swoboda report the overall title of ' Fairness for Croatia ' , because that is the heart of the matter .
It is not about privileges or discounts - that has rightly been said - but about fairness .
Croatia is ready for accession to the European Union now .
Final efforts still need to be made in a few areas in the next few months .
However , we must not create artificial barriers for this country , as has , unfortunately , repeatedly been the case over the last few years .
Croatia belongs in a historical and cultural context with Slovenia and Hungary .
It should have been accepted into the European Union along with these Central European countries - Croatia is also very much a Central European country .
This did not happen for a multitude of reasons , but now the time is ripe .
That is why we are pressing for this .
We are not setting any dates - we are sticking to our line that criteria are more important than dates .
However , we are calling very strongly for no artificial barriers to be created and for this country to be treated fairly and justly .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SL ) Mr President , today is the last time we are debating the report on the progress of Croatia as a candidate for full membership of the European Union .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Hannes Swoboda , who has been doing this work for a number of years , for his constructive and friendly approach , both amongst the shadow rapporteurs and in his dealings with the Croatian Government , and I would say , the Croatian people .
In retrospect and given the circumstances in which Croatia became an independent country twenty years ago , we could perhaps say that it has been waiting long enough , if not too long , for membership .
Minister Martonyi , you have given us very specific information about your plans concerning Croatia 's accession negotiations .
We support your plans and hope that they will become a reality in their entirety .
For the leadership in Zagreb , there remains much to be done in the months before Croatia wraps up negotiations .
Chapter 23 has throughout been the subject of the special attention of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( ALDE ) .
We discussed and agreed on this yesterday during the friendly conversation between Mr Verhofstadt , President of the ALDE Group , and Mrs Kosor .
This chapter holds the key to the rule of law , to dealing seriously with the legacy of the past , to an effective and impartial judiciary , to legal certainty and equality for all citizens .
Any democratic country based on the rule of law - any member of the European Union - must ensure freedoms such as openness and media independence , protection of minorities , gender equality and protection of everyone who is different .
The Croatian Government and Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor deserve credit for tackling corruption and crime in a determined way .
Croatia should also be credited with successfully establishing friendly relations with its neighbours , but it should be encouraged at the same time to resolve the issues outstanding .
When we give Croatia the green light for the last round of negotiations and for its last push on the way to full membership , we should point out that this report is addressed to all the countries of south-eastern Europe which have the same expectations .
We , too , have expectations : we expect Europe to complete the enlargement process and become a continent of cohesion and equal values .
Please allow me to add just one more sentence .
Only in this way will the European Union , in today 's world , be able to become , and play the part of , a world leader .
Thank you for your patience , Mr President .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to join those who have thanked Mr Swoboda for the good cooperation last year and , for the first time , this year .
I agree with Mr Posselt that it is a fair report .
We very much look forward to welcoming Croatia - as has been said - as soon as it has met all the criteria .
It is a special country to be joining , and the EU will have a special responsibility to make sure afterwards that all the other countries in the Western Balkans will be able to join too .
It is from that regional perspective that Croatia needs to be the best in the class now , so that its fellow classmates can join afterwards .
We have a responsibility to the other countries , because if we fail now and make mistakes now it will be much harder for others to join .
We cannot give up on this objective for the Western Balkans .
Some of you have mentioned Chapter 23 on corruption .
We believe that the EU also has to be honest about itself , and really to consider to what extent it was also implicated in corruption .
Therefore , we also call on OLAF to look at what the implications are for the EU .
I urge all Groups to join that effort , as we need to be honest with ourselves too .
My last point is that how we deal with the past is an important part of joining the EU .
The ICTY has been mentioned .
This is crucial , but we also feel that the local war crimes tribunals need to work better .
A report by Amnesty International highlights that there are still a number of pitfalls and deficiencies .
We feel there is room for improvement , for example on witness protection , and we would like to see improvement there as well .
We feel it is crucial for the EU to insist on that aspect of the past and working with the past .
Apart from this , we are all looking forward to welcoming Croatia to this House .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , we believe that enlargement is one of the more successful aspects of EU policy , provided it is carried out according to rigorous criteria and that lessons are learned from previous accessions .
According to the Council , the conclusion of accession negotiations with Croatia is within reach , but we know from the Commission that corruption issues and judicial reform have not yet been properly dealt with .
This is very serious .
Our concerns are not artificial .
Croatia , with a population of 4.5 million , apparently suffers from nearly a million backlogged court cases , with a significant number of cases connected to the abuse of property rights .
Media freedom is also under assault .
Former ministers have been charged with corruption .
Some might see this as evidence of action .
Actually it reveals the depth of a malaise that has hardly been addressed .
Widespread corruption among politicians and the judiciary has meant a failure to tackle organised crime directly connected to the Balkan route .
Despite the litany of problems outlined here , Croatia 's early accession seems a foregone conclusion .
It would be a pity if the accession process became a mere formality , dependent on subjective political whim , completed before these fundamental problems are resolved .
Mr President , we in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left are in favour of the accession of Croatia to the European Union and trust that it will soon become a full member , provided that this is the will of the Croatian people and provided that the country satisfies all the accession criteria .
The progress report notes , and we welcome , the progress which has been made in returning refugees , in women 's rights and gender equality and in bridging differences with neighbouring countries .
However , we insist on further reforms , especially in the judiciary and in stamping out corruption .
However , we must also pay attention to the socio-economic problems of the people of Croatia , such as poverty , long-term unemployment and the undermining of labour rights .
Unfortunately , the proposals to promote a liberal economy will exacerbate the socio-economic situation of the Croatians .
We therefore support the promotion of real social development which will guarantee quality of life for all citizens of Croatia by modernising the social protection system , addressing unemployment , improving access to health services , housing and education and wiping out discrimination , especially towards minorities .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( SK ) Mr President , since October 2005 , when the decision was taken to commence talks over Croatia 's accession to the EU , the Croatian Government has made extensive changes to the running of the country , with the aim of best preparing Croatia for EU accession .
The greatest progress in the accession process was made in 2010 , when our Croatian friends concluded negotiations on a number of complex chapters and made fundamental changes to the constitution , as well as making progress over a civilised solution to border disputes with neighbouring countries .
The official visit of Serbian president Tadic to Vukovar showed that relations between Croat and Serb citizens can also be built on mutual respect , esteem and understanding .
The speed at which the accession process is finalised now rests solely with the Croatian side , who , after fulfilling all of the conditions for EU accession , must also seek the consent of their citizens for such a step in a nationwide referendum .
I sincerely wish our Croatian friends well in rapidly concluding the final chapters and in being capable of confirming , through a popular vote , their readiness to become part of the European Community .
Mr President , less than 20 years ago Croatia fought to secure its independence .
Now it is being handed out without a shot being fired .
Croatia has had to make extensive and intrusive legislative changes .
It has also had to withdraw support from its vital industries and the people who work in them .
The Croatians must do all of these things before the European Union condescends to accept Croatia for membership .
Of greatest importance , all of these changes are being conceded before the consent of the people through a promised referendum has been granted , or even asked for .
Despite opinion-poll evidence of majority opposition to EU membership , a positive outcome of the referendum is taken for granted .
When enormous changes are carried out in anticipation of a consent that is yet to be obtained , we can be assured that consent is seen as a mere formality .
The report here says that editors and journalists complain about undue political pressure .
However , it is silent about how this pressure will allow the referendum to be conducted freely and fairly .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are in fact now in the last round before accession , insofar as we are to discuss this matter here in the Community institutions , because then there still remains the ratification process in the national parliaments , which will certainly not be easy , either .
However , as I was able , during my time as chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , to closely observe the previous twelve Member States to join as part of the enlargement process , I can say that Croatia is a country that has done a considerable amount of work over a long period of time in order to fulfil the criteria and , for that reason , the progression to a ' yes ' is a positive one .
We should support this for political reasons .
It is also a signal to other countries that may perhaps have to wait a long time until the door to Europe is open rather than , by and large , being closed .
The general political message is important .
However , based on our experiences with other countries , I would say that Croatia needs to work on reforming its judicial and administrative systems in its own interests , too - irrespective of the accession process .
When proceedings remain unresolved for too long or accusations of corruption are made but the proceedings taken against the accused take too long , it damages the overall development of the country .
More work ought to be done in this regard .
( SV ) Mr President , first of all I would like say a big thank you to the rapporteur , Mr Swoboda , who has done an excellent job .
Croatia 's membership of the EU is getting close now , but a few challenges still remain , for example the fight against corruption .
Croatia has adopted new and better legislation , but now the reforms need to be implemented .
Effective investigations , prosecutions and court rulings are needed .
Right now all eyes are on the case of the former conservative Prime Minister , Ivo Sanader , who is in prison in Austria .
We applaud what journalists and politicians in Croatia have shown by uncovering the corruption in the political elite .
However , the case of Ivo Sanader also represents a moment of truth for the EU , as corruption requires the involvement of two parties .
Given the accusations that Ivo Sanader attempted to influence the EU in an improper manner , I have proposed that the European Anti-Fraud Office , OLAF , should work together with Croatian investigators to clarify this information because , of course , we do not know if it is true .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) wants to delete this important part of the resolution , but , along with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , we are calling on all of the political groups to support it .
The EU must be proactive and not simply place the responsibility on Croatia .
Mr President , in the stormy waters of the global economic crisis , it is encouraging to see that Croatia is holding a steady course towards membership .
The progress so far has been impressive , but I want to emphasise that this positive momentum should now feed into other areas where much remains to be done .
There are two points I would like to stress here today .
The first is the reform and strengthening of the judiciary .
A robust and independent judicial syste m is absolutely essential in order to fight corruption and to ensure the rule of law in the long term .
It is not merely a matter of arresting criminals ; it is about dealing with them afterwards .
Otherwise , efforts to tackle corruption and organised crime will have no effect .
The second point I want to mention is the need for society in Croatia to build on tolerance .
The European project is about reconciliation , and this applies not only between countries - and I applaud the improved relations with Croatia 's neighbours - but within them as well .
Threats of violence against minorities are completely unacceptable .
I fully understand how difficult this is , but I am of the firm belief that this would not only boost the accession talks , but also that the effort itself would be of direct benefit to Croatian society .
( PL ) Mr President , we should without a doubt support the Hungarian Presidency in its ambitious plans to conclude negotiations with Croatia during the first half of this year .
Croatia 's membership in the European Union will mean we gain an important and constructive ally , since the country is already playing an important role and acting as a major stabilising force in the region , and setting an example for many other Balkan countries also thinking about acceding to the European Union in the future .
Today I would like to express my great respect and admiration for the reforms undertaken by the Croatian Government and Croatian society , particularly those relating to the fight against corruption and organised crime and reforms of the public administration and the judiciary .
It goes without saying that there are still areas requiring improvement and completion .
I hope that this is achieved as soon as possible .
It is also true that we are hearing reports from Croatia that the Croatian people are not entirely convinced that membership will benefit their country .
I believe that it would be wise for us to take steps which help to reverse this trend without delay , in cooperation with the Croatian Government .
( NL ) Mr President , Croatia has made good progress on its way to achieving EU membership .
That is beyond dispute and I am pleased about that .
There are two issues , however , which I am still seriously concerned about .
Corruption in this Balkan country is still widespread , see for example recitals 7 and 8 of the resolution we are debating .
That is having a major impact on the economy and on trade relations with this country .
We urgently need a better approach to tackling this problem , possibly in cooperation with European institutions .
My second concern is the poor administrative organisation in the country , see recital 28 of the resolution .
Sound administrative organisation is necessary if EU legislation is to be properly implemented and if Croatia is not to be caught napping by events .
As long as these two bottlenecks remain unaddressed , I will continue to feel concerned about the swift pace with which the Hungarian Presidency wants to bring about Croatia 's accession .
In my opinion , past experience should lead us to make the quality of accession our objective , not accession itself .
That will help us to secure people 's support , and the support of my Dutch citizens .
( DE ) Mr President , overall , developments in Croatia are going in the right direction .
The theory is complete , but it still needs to be proven in practice .
However , there are three areas where significant work still remains to be done .
Firstly , Croatia must work closer with the International Court of Justice in The Hague to speed up progress with regard to human rights and the prosecution of former war criminals .
As stated by Amnesty International in ' Behind a Wall of Silence ' , there are blatant individual cases of human rights violations that are still be dealt with .
The protection of human rights is a key issue for the EU .
We must not be prepared to compromise where this is concerned , and indeed we are not prepared to compromise where this is concerned .
Secondly , there is the corruption .
It still permeates society , industry and politics .
I welcome the efforts of the Croatian Government to tackle corruption in its own country , but at the same time we must insist that this problem is also rigorously pursued .
Thirdly , Croatia must ensure , in its own interests , that swift progress is now made with regard to the reforms initiated in the judicial system .

( PL ) Madam President , two years ago , when I was the chair of the Polish Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , I had the pleasure of playing host to members of Croatia 's Committee on Foreign Affairs .
On this occasion , the members of the Croatian committee asked me if I knew how many Poles were currently on sailing holidays in Croatia .
It turned out that the answer was several tens of thousands in total .
The millions of tourists who visit this beautiful country today can tell us that Croatia is a modern and democratic country , and confirm that it is ready for membership of the European Union .
Yet those same members of the Croatian committee also asked me how Poland was restructuring its shipyards .
In other words , several problems still remain , as everyone here has mentioned , and they are problems which need to be resolved .
In spite of everything , I hope that Mr Martonyi 's hopes will be fulfilled , that our Hungarian friends and the European Commission will conclude the negotiations and that today we will hear from Mr Sikorski , the head of Polish diplomacy , who will be with us in Parliament , that Poland will have the pleasure of witnessing Croatia 's accession to the European Union while holding the Presidency of the European Council .

( SL ) Madam President , allow me to join in the chorus of praise for rapporteur Swoboda 's approach and work .
I sincerely hope that , for Croatia and for Mr Swoboda , this really will be the last report and that Croatia will join us as soon as possible .
In any case , membership will allow Croatia to make up for some of the time it has lost in joining the EU .
Indeed , if we go by the stage of development of Croatia 's economy , society , culture and arts , this country could easily have joined the group of countries which joined the European Union seven years ago .
I suggest that the authorities in Zagreb take advantage of Croatia 's accession to the European Union in order to tackle decisively the culture of corruption and crime .
Developing the freedoms of objective media and protecting objective journalists working for the Croatian public television broadcaster is another matter of paramount importance .
Croatia 's accession to the EU will mean that we are embracing and holding out a hand to the Balkan region .
I look forward to us working together with our Croatian colleagues to bring stabilisation and progress to this , still turbulent , region .

( BG ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Swoboda for his good work and I really hope that this report will be the last one before Croatia signs the Treaty of Accession to the European Union .
I believe that Croatia 's entry into the EU will give an impetus to reforms in the region and will be a success for the whole of Europe .
Croatia recently signalled this itself by providing free legal translations of the acquis communautaire to its neighbours from the former Yugoslavia - Bosnia-Herzegovina , Serbia , Montenegro and Macedonia .
The country has thus shown that it is willing and able to contribute to the region 's European future .
Accepting Croatia into the EU will give a clear signal that the EU honours its undertakings towards the Western Balkans and that expansion is an open-ended process .
I would like to highlight that although every country on our continent has its own problems , we should be careful when pointing the finger at eastern European countries , when talking about corruption and crime .
These are not a trademark just of this region , but a challenge for all of us , and only through combined efforts can we limit the negative tendencies in this area .
Transparency and democracy are immutable values and it is for this very reason that we have to support and encourage reforms in the Western Balkans .
I wish Croatia all the best and look forward to greeting it here as the 28th Member State of the European Union .
( HU ) Madam President , we must note with strong criticism towards the EU that even though Croatia was , in several respects , already prepared for accession at the time of the last enlargement wave six years ago , it is still being prevented from joining .
For this reason we can only agree with the objective of the Hungarian Presidency of making the integration of Croatia one of its highest priorities during its term .
Similarly , we can only agree with the statement of Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán that the unification of Europe cannot be complete without the integration of the countries of the Western Balkans .
The states of the former Yugoslavia that remain outside are like gaping black holes in the map of the EU .
The accession of Croatia marks the beginning of the change of that situation .
As Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor said yesterday , it is our moral obligation to provide this encouragement for the countries of South Eastern Europe , because for them there is no alternative to integration .
( PL ) Madam President , both the Swoboda report and the statements by the Presidency and Commissioner Füle indicate that the climate for concluding negotiations with Croatia is very positive .
Particular emphasis should be given to the determination shown by Croatia itself , for example by the Prime Minister , Mrs Kosor , not only with regard to concluding the negotiations themselves , but also with regard to cooperation with the country 's neighbours and the International Criminal Tribunal .
The prospect of concluding negotiations in the near future and the mood prevailing in the Chamber will also help Croatia .
It is an important sign that any future problems will not be allowed to accumulate , and that the 20-year wait will end with the signature of the Treaty of Accession .
Let us also acknowledge the symbolic gestures made by Croatia , for example by passing on a translation of the full acquis communautaire to all its neighbours working towards membership .
I would like to acknowledge the work done by Mr Swoboda , and I too am sure that this is the last report on Croatia 's progress in preparations for membership .
We will soon welcome the country as a Member State of the European Union .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , I clearly support the Hungarian Presidency in its endeavour to conclude the accession negotiations of Croatia in June .
In several respects , Croatia has achieved a higher degree of development than some EU Member States .
It is obvious that , as Mr Martonyi mentioned , there is still a lot to be done .
Mr Hannes Swoboda has an excellent understanding of the complexities of the Western Balkan region .
The success of Croatia could serve as an incentive for Serbia and the other countries of the Western Balkans .
It is important for our friends in the Western Balkans and our Croatian colleagues to understand that their internal reforms must be implemented not for the sake of the EU , but for the sake of their own people .
I believe it is of exceptional importance to improve the situation of Serb , Hungarian and other national minorities , and to ensure the well-deserved return of the Serbs who fled or had been driven away , the Serbs of Krajina , and to settle the neighbourhood relations between Slovenia and Croatia .
We must appreciate that the Croatian head of state has made several gestures toward the historic reconciliation of Serbia , Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia .
( SL ) Madam President , to the Croatian Government and the European Commission I wish plenty of determination , patience , perseverance and energy in finalising reforms and I also wish that perhaps Croatia should mark the twentieth anniversary of its independence by concluding its negotiations .
That is my sincere wish .
What will prove possible , however , depends on the Croatian Government and the cooperation between it , that is the ruling coalition , and the opposition in the Croatian Parliament .
What we also need now is much greater social sensitivity and responsiveness amongst politicians .
The current economic crisis is pushing any benefits which accession to the EU might bring Croatia 's economy and its citizens to the margins of social priorities and is increasing criticism of the European Union .
Last but not least , Croatia also needs its people to vote yes in a referendum .
Any slowing down of the momentum of Croatia 's accession would not have any disastrous consequences for Croatia , but it would send out an extremely negative message to the countries of the Western Balkans which are on the way to the EU .
Without negotiations being concluded , Croatian MPs will not be able to gain observer status in this House and there will be no membership .
I therefore call on you to keep up the pace and to make every effort .
( NL ) Madam President , I am happy that Croatia is coming ever closer to accession .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is strongly in favour of the accession of all the Balkan countries , as well as Turkey .
However , we are such great advocates of their accession precisely because we attach such great importance to the reforms that are required in order to attain membership .
Croatia has not completed these reforms yet .
The process must continue .
When voting , we will therefore seek to ensure that no specific date is given in the report .
It is possible that the negotiations might be completed in the first half of this year but , equally , that might not happen .
This is not about when negotiations are completed .
This is about Croatia complying with all the criteria by then .
Indeed , if there is one lesson we have learned from the accession of Romania and Bulgaria , it is this : that we should not be giving a specific date .
Instead , we need to make clear what still needs to be done .
One more point : one of the issues on which Croatia could be doing a little more is the protection of sexual minorities .
It would be nice if our current EU Presidency set a good example by allowing the gay pride in Budapest on 18 June 2011 to go ahead .
Madam President , Croatia 's progress towards EU membership continues smoothly , as the report makes clear .
British Conservatives support the enlargement of the EU to include countries that fully meet the Copenhagen criteria , as we believe that a larger EU should result in a more flexible and less centralised union .
Croatia should be congratulated for its efforts to stamp out corruption , as evidenced by the arrest of former Prime Minister Sanader .
I am pleased that Slovenia will no longer be blocking Croatia 's accession over the two countries ' border dispute .
This was always a bilateral issue but should in no way preclude Croatia from joining our Union .
There is also a small dispute with Montenegro , for which I am the rapporteur , which will be resolved by the ICJ .
I also believe that Croatia 's accession will accelerate the integration of the whole region of the former Yugoslavia into the EU , in particular as Montenegro 's rapporteur and a strong friend of Serbia .
I hope that Croatian membership will inspire both countries to press ahead with reforms and that Croatia will not try and settle old scores , once it is in the Union , by blocking Serbian accession .
( DE ) Madam President , among the candidate countries , Croatia is known to be the country that has made the greatest amount of progress .
That is not surprising , as culturally and historically it is firmly rooted in Central Europe .
Croatia has proven its readiness to join the EU many times , for example with the settlement of the fishing dispute .
Further efforts are , of course , needed in connection with corruption , but clearly there is no lack of will here , as can be seen by the arrest of the former prime minister , Ivo Sanader .
There has also been some movement with regard to dealing with war crimes .
In this regard , it remains to be seen what role the German arrest warrants issued for high-ranking former members of the Yugoslav secret service will play .
Croatia seems to be prepared to move away from its past , for example by providing support for returning war refugees .
In this regard , it would also be desirable if the EU were to support not only the war refugees , but also the displaced people and to seek a solution to the restitution claims of the Danube Swabians .

( FR ) Madam President , I would like to pay tribute to the balanced resolution of my colleague , Mr Swoboda , and say that it is vital for us to make a success of this accession .
This leads me to draw attention to the considerable misgivings of certain sectors of public opinion , as this accession has come at the wrong time .
History does not work to a timetable and we are in a period of crisis .
The people of Europe have misgivings .
After the fall of the Berlin Wall , there was a wave of post-communist accessions and today we proceed on a case-by-case basis .
That is why , Commissioner , I think that a major communication campaign is needed in all EU Member States , and perhaps even in Croatia itself , to explain all the work that has been achieved , that all the chapters are well respected and that serious preparations have been made for this accession .
That is my proposal , because the competence for accession does not lie with Europe .
Competence for accession lies with the States and with the peoples of those States .
We have a duty to make a success of this accession .
Let us use all the resources at our disposal during this difficult period of European integration that we are going through .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me thank you very much for this encouraging and constructive debate .
The draft European Parliament resolution , with its balanced message , is of vital support for the work undertaken by the Commission .
It provides much useful guidance for further work by Croatia , and I particularly welcome the many references to fairness , quality and credibility made during today 's debate .
I also fully agree with those statements made today underlining that this whole process and the efforts required are for the benefit of Croatian citizens .
Those benefits will have to be clearly communicated in the months to come .
The constructive and steadfast support provided by Parliament for Croatia 's accession process is an important signal .
It is important not only for Croatia itself , but for all the candidate countries and potential candidates .
Indeed , your support will encourage them to keep up the intensity of their efforts on the path towards the European Union and closing negotiations successfully .

President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , first and foremost , on behalf of the Presidency , I would like to express my acknowledgement and thanks for Parliament 's - and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Swoboda 's - continuous engagement and positive contribution to the efforts we are making to advance not only towards the successful enlargement to include Croatia , but the progress of the enlargement process as a whole .
I firmly believe that all these efforts have been very well demonstrated by this morning 's very constructive and very useful debate .
I also firmly believe that the resolution to be adopted will underline Parliament 's crucial role , which indeed goes beyond the concrete item of Croatia 's accession .
This will send an extremely important message to European public opinion , to the citizens of Europe , to the effect that enlargement does indeed serve their best interests , and it will perhaps convince them that the enlargement fatigue which developed , and was felt , right after what we now call the reunification of Europe , has gone , and that the train of the enlargement process has to go on .
At the same time , it will also send an extremely important political message to the other candidate and aspirant countries .
This is also underlined in your report and resolution .
We all know that the key factor of stability , cooperation and reconciliation in the Western Balkans is indeed the European perspective .
So the European perspective has to be credible and has to be underlined and demonstrated by concrete measures .
That is precisely the upcoming accession of Croatia to the European Union .
We all know that what we have here is unfinished business .
Europe is still not a whole and our fundamental objective is to take this process on .
Some extremely important remarks and comments were made with respect , for example , to whether the accession negotiations have been too long or not .
It is true that they have lasted almost six years and that this is longer than the negotiation process was for our countries .
What I would recommend now is that we look to the future and try to speed up this process as much as we can .
Very many important advances and achievements have been made on both sides , and I would only underline again and again our determination that , with combined efforts on all sides , we can now make a credible , good quality enlargement . This would be an extremely important message for all of us , inside and outside the present European Union .
I would like to thank you again for your extremely important thoughts and comments , and also to express my thanks to the Commission - all that of course in the hope that we will be able to realise our objective , which is , I repeat , to conclude negations before the end of June this year .
I have received a motion for a resolution in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure on the subject of this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 : 00 today , Tuesday , 16 February .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
We hope that Croatia makes fast progress in the negotiations for EU membership .
Speeding up Croatia 's accession is crucial if one considers its strategic geopolitical position as a gateway to markets in Central Europe .
Hence the need for an integrated development of ports and connections to the European corridors , especially in view of the fact that Croatia will enjoy a significant flow of EU funding , of which 60 % will be allocated to infrastructure .
For this to happen , Croatia should continue to adopt the necessary reforms .
In particular , it should strengthen public administration and the judiciary , fight corruption and ensure full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
I welcome the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Croatia on the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
I am disappointed about the situation of the Croatian shipbuilding industry , a sector that was once the pearl of Yugoslav industrial exports , but which is now in almost total ruin .
I hope that the Croatian Government is able conclude the restructuring process as soon as possible so that it can also close the chapter on competition .
In particular , I emphasise the importance of the accession of Croatia in relation to the integrated maritime policy in the Adriatic , which will soon officially be an almost completely European sea .
The report is generally favourable for Croatia .
It shows that the country is close to completing the accession negotiations .
However , at the same time , as in previous years , it draws attention to persistent , and often serious , shortcomings .
In light of previous experience with the Croatia-Slovenia territorial dispute , it is concerning that there has not been significant positive progress in respect of Croatia 's numerous territorial disputes with its other neighbours ( in particular , Bosnia and Herzegovina , but also Serbia and Montenegro ) .
The extremely slow approach to the punishment of war crimes against the Serbs continues to raise some important issues .
' Several hundred cases ' remain to be investigated and prosecuted ; the fact that the Croatian judiciary is ignoring these cases ensures the continuing distrust of the Serbs .
Croatia has also still not submitted the documents known as the artillery diaries to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague ( ICTY ) .
The time has therefore come to consider how far the EU should get involved in this matter .
Even the 2010 return of Serbian refugees was very limited .
The report does not say how many of the 130,000 Serbs who returned to Croatia after the war were from Serbia and how many were from the Republika Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The number of Serbian refugees in the Republika Srpska ( Bosnia and Herzegovina ) has remained relatively stable for several years ( between 25,000 and 35,000 persons ) .
The Croatian authorities have made their return impossible mainly by failing to resolve issues such as the return of property , housing , tenancy rights , pensions and so on .
Croatia , as a candidate country since 2003 , when it submitted its application , has completed the demanding preparation for EU membership .
This process requires profound reforms which are often highly unpopular with the public .
As a representative for Slovakia , which completed this demanding process only seven years ago , I admire Croatia , and believe that Croatia will complete the remaining 10 chapters as soon as possible .
Since the break-up of Yugoslavia and the end of the military conflict , Croatia has made great progress in a short space of time in infrastructure , services and tourism , which is the dominant branch of the country 's national economy .
As a tourist who visits Croatia every year , I think Croatia belongs within the family of EU states , and I will join my colleagues in supporting Croatian accession .
in writing . - ( HU ) Croatia is one step away from the fulfilment of its historic goal .
The question is what this step will be like .
Will it be a long step fraught with obstacles , perhaps even artificial ones ?
Or will it be an easier , shorter step , one that is based on cooperation and one that appreciates the performance of the difficult commitments undertaken so far ?
The Croatian people have done considerable work to ensure the conclusion of the accession negotiations , and the recognition of their cooperation is well deserved , whether it be for their efforts in the reduction of corruption , conflicts of interest and organised crime , or for the improvement of their neighbourhood policy .
Some questions , of course , still remain open to this day , most of them being of a bilateral nature , but it is important to stress that these should not be confused with European matters .
I am convinced that Croatia is worthy of becoming a Member State of the EU , and is worthy of successfully concluding the negotiations during the term of the Hungarian Presidency .
The position of Croatia in the Western Balkans is of strategic importance .
This role is reinforced by the three agreements signed by Croatia and the Hungarian Government on the strengthening of energy supply security , joint research in cross-border hydrocarbon fields and the storage of oil supplies .
I honestly wish for the Croatian people that all natural - and perhaps artificially erected - barriers are removed from the path of their accession , because Croatia is not only mature enough for , but also worthy of joining the EU .
What I ask of you , my fellow Members , is to contribute with your supporting votes to Croatia joining the EU as soon as possible , because that way , the accession would be achieved in the symbolic 20th year of Croatia 's independence .
in writing . - ( HU ) The acceleration of the Croatian accession negotiations brings the possibility of EU integration in the South-East European region within reach .
Not only Croatia , but the other countries of the Western Balkans , too , are looking with optimism towards their future in Europe .
This , in turn , will bring about stability , and the irreversibility of the process of democratisation , and economic growth in this region , which carries a heavy historic legacy .
I commend the efforts of the Croatian Government in combating corruption , ensuring the proper use of EU funds and endeavouring to conclude the chapters of the negotiations that are still open .
Significant progress has also been made in improving relations with neighbouring countries .
I consistently support the EU accession of Croatia taking place as soon as possible , because , as a Romanian Member of Hungarian nationality , I have been closely monitoring the fate of the Hungarian community in Croatia .
It would be to my great satisfaction if we could soon welcome another Hungarian community living outside their home country into the European Union .
The European Parliament must clearly support Croatia 's accession efforts .
It is not the easing of requirements that is needed , but the facilitation of meeting those requirements .
I agree with my fellow Members who are asking the European Commission to specify the further dates for the conclusion of the process as soon as possible , and to close the accession chapters while we are still in the term of the Hungarian Presidency .
The Hungarian Presidency 's intention to conclude the negotiations in the first half of 2011 makes us very optimistic about the future of the Balkan region and about the accession of those countries to the European Union .
The Croatian Government has gone to great lengths to tackle the process of reform and protection of human rights .
Improvements are still required on some points to ensure that Croatia can be considered ready for the European Union and the objectives enshrined in the Europe 2020 Strategy : the fight against corruption , protection of minorities , including Italian minorities , shortening the duration of judicial proceedings , support for court infrastructure and equipment , strengthening of tax reforms and public spending cuts .
If Croatia continues to implement all the reforms necessary for the completion of the acquis communautaire , then from next autumn the European Union will have a valuable addition to help increase its wealth and ensure geopolitical balance between East and West , starting from the Mediterranean region and the north-east of Italy .
The development of European macro-regions , from the Adriatic and Ionian region , which will include Italy , will quickly bring Croatia into the heart of European programmes and policies .
in writing . - ( PL ) Croatia 's accession to the European Union is the subject of lively public debate .
The country is an extremely attractive destination for European tourists , yet it also has problems to contend with .
I would like to note that Croatia still faces many challenges and many state reforms , which should be carried out effectively so that the country can meet the EU 's requirements as soon as possible .
An enlargement policy which facilitates the consolidation of democracy , particularly in the Balkan countries , should however also be in the interests of the European Union .
The European Parliament should be positive in its assessment of the changes made in Croatia to date , since the country is demonstrating a great deal of willingness to resolve its internal problems .
We must be open to new Member States .
I hope that the pace of negotiations will make it possible for the Croatians to sign the Treaty of Accession during the Polish Presidency , since this country deserves to be a member of the European Union . Thank you .
Guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States - Europe 2020 - Implementation of the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States ( debate )
Τhe next item is the joint debate on
the Council and Commission statements on Europe 2020 ;
the report by Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States - C7-0033 / 2011 - ;
the Commission statement on the implementation of the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I very much welcome this opportunity to appear before you to talk about a subject which is of particular importance for the Hungarian Presidency : the Europe 2020 Strategy .
Indeed , it is of particular importance for all of us .
It is clear that Europe has to overcome a number of serious challenges if it wishes to remain competitive with the rest of the world .
Some of these challenges have been generated by the financial and economic crisis , but some of them are inherent in our limited capacities and determination to fulfil the objectives and targets of the 2010 Lisbon Strategy .
As is often said , crisis can be an opportunity - both in the Ancient Greek and in the Chinese interpretation .
It can be an opportunity for a breakthrough , for a solution and to make progress .
That is why we believe that the crisis is currently a key factor in motivating Member States to adopt quickly a new European strategy for jobs and smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
This is the Europe 2020 Strategy .
I am convinced that this strategy will play an important role in helping Europe recover from the crisis and emerge stronger , both internally and at international level , by boosting productivity , growth potential , social cohesion and economic governance .
This is essential if we are going to be able to remain competitive globally , not least in the face of rapidly growing markets in Asia .
It is also essential if we are to maintain the social model , our way of life , which is a key characteristic of Europe , dear to us all , and which we must preserve .
The 2020 Strategy confirmed five EU headline targets which constitute shared objectives guiding the action of Member States and the Union as regards promoting employment , improving the conditions for innovation , research and development , meeting our climate change and energy objectives , improving education levels and promoting social inclusion , in particular through the reduction of poverty .
As part of meeting these targets , the Commission developed and presented seven flagship initiatives containing the actions it proposes to take to strengthen the single market and to boost growth and jobs : the Digital Agenda for Europe , Innovation Union , Youth on the Move , Resource Efficient Europe , an Industrial Policy for the Globalisation Era , an Agenda for New Skills and Jobs and the European Platform against Poverty .
For each initiative , both the EU and national authorities have to coordinate their efforts so that action at national and European level is mutually reinforcing .
In December 2010 , the first implementation report prepared by the Presidency , in close cooperation with the Commission and the incoming Hungarian Presidency , provided an overview of work undertaken since the launch of the strategy in June .
The report highlights the most important work done in the Council , in all its forms , regarding the seven flagship initiatives .
Furthermore , the report stresses the technologies progress achieved in the various policy areas which play a major role in the new strategy : the single market , cohesion policy and agricultural policy .
It also lists the activities and initiatives that have been conducted at EU level in the last six months as regards the five EU headline targets .
Let me emphasise some important elements concerning economic governance .
The implementation of economic governance reform is a fundamental condition for fighting the crisis and boosting the European economy .
This is why the 2020 Strategy is closely linked with what is known as the ' European semester ' : a new key instrument of macroeconomic surveillance , to be applied for the first time under this presidency .
This new process started in January 2011 with the presentation of the Commission 's annual growth survey .
The Hungarian Presidency is paying particular attention to ensuring that the European semester runs smoothly and successfully .
To that end , we will organise a series of debates in all relevant Council meetings in the run-up to the March European Council .
The General Affairs Council has , in particular , been tasked with preparing a synthesis report for its meeting of 21 March , which will set out the main messages on the work being undertaken in the various sectoral councils .
This report will be presented to the European Council in March and will form the basis for the discussions , with the aim of agreeing on a set of priorities for structural reforms and fiscal consolidation .
Following on from the March European Council , Member States will finalise the drafting of the national reform programmes and stability or convergence reports , which will be submitted to the Commission in April .
After that , work should be taken forward with a view to elaborating country-specific recommendations which the Member States will take into account when finalising their budgets for 2012 and implementing their growth strategies .
I recognise that this calendar is very tight , but we hope to complete it by June or July .
The 2020 Strategy is key in ensuring the future economic success of the European Union .
It is closely linked to economic governance reform , which will also play a key role .
Unless we remain competitive and can secure strong growth in the future , we will find it increasingly difficult both to maintain a sufficiently high level of social protection internally and to bring Europe 's voice to bear on events externally .
This is the major challenge for Europe in the years to come .
I am absolutely sure that we can count on the support of the European Parliament to help us deliver .
Mr President-in-Office , thank you for your introductory speech .
We are talking about a very important issue : the Europe 2020 Strategy .
We are in a crisis and the unemployment rate is very high , which is the biggest threat for our citizens .
Employment policy is therefore absolutely crucial , including under the 2020 Strategy .
We welcome the Commissioner responsible for that area , Mr László Andor , to the European Parliament .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as you know , the Commission adopted the first Annual Growth Survey in connection with the Europe 2020 Strategy last month .
The Annual Growth Survey makes a break with the past and sets in motion the first cycle of economic policy coordination under the European Semester .
The main idea behind the European Semester is very simple : to ensure the stability of economic and monetary union , we have no choice but to carry out ex-ante coordination of economic policies within the EU .
The recent debt crisis in some euro area countries illustrates this all too clearly .
This more robust and demanding approach shows that the European Union recognises how closely interlinked the Member States ' economies are and how policy choices in one Member State can have an impact on the others .
Managing the European Semester will be a real test for the EU .
Strengthening political ownership of the Strategy and local partnerships has been a key priority for us .
The challenge now is to demonstrate that the Union can collectively identify the key policy reforms most urgently needed and provide the right policy responses .
The Annual Growth Survey is very clear about the top priorities .
It sets out an integrated approach to recovery with 10 priority actions under three main headings : first , a rigorous fiscal consolidation and restructuring of the financial sector to step up macroeconomic stability ; second , structural reforms for higher employment ; and finally , growth-enhancing measures .
We have taken good note of your concerns on the key messages of the Annual Growth Survey , to the effect that they may seem to depart from the Integrated Guidelines .
However , I want to be clear on this .
The Commission has deliberately chosen to focus this year 's Annual Growth Survey on the most immediate challenges stemming from the current economic crisis and on the need to frontload the reforms that are necessary for economic recovery and job creation .
The Annual Growth Survey is fully consistent with the Integrated Guidelines , including the Employment Guidelines .
I welcome Parliament 's support to the Commission 's proposal to maintain the Employment Guidelines unchanged for 2011 .
Indeed , it is vital to ensure a stable policy framework until the mid-term review of the Europe 2020 Strategy in 2014 for Member States to have enough time to implement the necessary reforms .
The Employment Guidelines also provide the basis for the draft Joint Employment Report ( part of the Annual Growth Survey ) , which identifies the most urgent measures in the area of employment , including : first , introducing employment-friendly taxation systems , namely by shifting taxes away from labour ; second , reducing labour market segmentation ; third , removing barriers to balancing private and work life ; fourth , supporting unemployed people , through high-quality training and job search services , to get back into work and go into self-employment ; and finally , increasing the participation of older workers in labour markets .
More importantly , the Employment Guidelines will form the basis for possible country-specific recommendations which the Council may address to Member States on the basis of Article 148 of the Treaty .
The Annual Growth Survey provides the basis for discussion at the Spring European Council in March and for the economic policy guidance to be addressed to the Member States .
The Commission expects the Member States to take this guidance into account when they draft their stability or convergence programmes and the national reform programmes under the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The Commission will examine the national reform programmes , which are due in the second half of April .
On the basis of that examination and in line with the Treaty , we will propose country-specific policy guidance and recommendations that Member States should take into account when finalising their budgets for 2012 .
The policy guidance and recommendations should be adopted by the Council before the summer .
Let me close by stressing the importance of your role in the successful implementation of Europe 2020 and specifically the seven flagship initiatives .
Your role as co legislator is fundamental to their successful implementation .
Setting the right framework conditions is vital if we are to meet the Europe 2020 targets .
Discussion of the new multiannual financial framework will start soon .
The Commission will present its proposals by June .
Your role as a budgetary authority together with the Council will be crucial to ensuring that the Europe 2020 priorities are reflected in the EU budget .
If we are to be credible we need to make sure our financial priorities are in line with our strategies and political priorities .
At a time of fiscal constraints , it is more important than ever to show that the EU has added value and that a euro spent at EU level can have a greater impact than a euro spent at national level .
To ensure the success of Europe 2020 we need political ownership at all levels .
Only if everyone plays their part can we achieve our objectives and set the right course for future growth .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would like to say how much I welcome this first opportunity to debate the European Semester and the importance that should be given , in this semester , to the Annual Growth Survey .
Within this framework , you , Commissioner , along with the members of the College , have decided to renew the Employment Guidelines and this Parliament intends to acknowledge that decision .
We would simply like to draw your attention to three points .
The first concerns the content of this Annual Growth Survey .
We are struck by the fact that the issues of employment and unemployment appear to be secondary to budgetary consolidation objectives .
When you raise these issues , which are directly linked to the operation of the labour market , we feel that you are breaching the social contract between the people of the Member States and their governments .
You are proposing that the retirement age should be raised , that the amount paid in unemployment allowance should be reduced , that wage levels and the mechanisms for calculating these should be modified , and that shops should be allowed to open on Sundays .
We believe that this constitutes an extremely dangerous breach of the social contract .
We also believe that greater attention should be paid to the most vulnerable populations , whether they are young people , women , older people or the disabled .
We also think that there is a considerable danger of seeing budgetary consolidation as the be-all and end-all of this Annual Growth Survey .
Our second concern is the fact that , as you have said yourself , you are going to draw up national reform programmes on the basis of this Annual Growth Survey .
However , it is here that important matters will be decided .
How are you putting the debate in Parliament on those issues to good use , now that the guidelines are being renewed ?
How do you envisage democratic debate on this issue ?
How do you join up Article 148 , which coordinates employment policies , with Article 12 , which coordinates economic policies ?
There is a great deal of confusion today for the European Parliament , insofar as we are considering at the same time , the Europe 2020 Strategy , President Van Rompuy 's working parties , the package on economic governance , into which this Parliament is putting a great deal of effort , and a revision of the Treaty to maintain a European financial stability mechanism .
Moreover , while this is in train , we are also debating the possible amendment of that mechanism .
You are launching the European semester at the same time as Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy are launching the competitiveness pact .
At the same time as all this , you are renewing the Employment Guidelines , which in all likelihood will be no more than a very vague space to be defined in these national programmes .
So , Commissioner , I would like to alert you to a third concern of ours .
When , last year , with the support of the Belgian Presidency , we managed to change the direction of the Employment Guidelines , there was one point on which we placed great emphasis : the issue of governance .
What do we mean by this governance ?
It means that economic and social policies cannot be conducted successfully if they are not accompanied by genuine democratic debate .
Now , democratic debate means giving power to the European Parliament , power to national parliaments and genuinely respecting , involving and including social partners .
We often have the impression that your proposals ignore these elements , which are part and parcel of the democratic life of our countries .
I believe that , unless we get to grips with this issue , we are in danger of being inconsistent , of turning our people away from what we are trying to achieve together and of neglecting that which is the key to our success , namely the Community spirit .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Mr President , we are moving into a new era of economic governance .
The European Semester offers a structure into which the existing tools of the Integrated Guidelines , provided for under Articles 121 and 148 of the Treaty , should be incorporated , with the strong involvement of Parliament .
Looking wider , it is in the Semester that monitoring of the Stability and Growth Pact and macroeconomic surveillance can join up with the Europe 2020 Strategy and the Integrated Guidelines .
This means that the Semester can provide a coherent framework for the various economic governance processes in the Union in a mutually enhancing fashion .
More broadly , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs emphasises that economic governance must be based on the Community method .
Processes must be transparent and accountable if they are to connect with , and have the support of , citizens .
This mandates the involvement of Parliament .
Where Parliament already has been given a role , it must have the time required to fulfil its democratic mandate .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs stands shoulder to shoulder with the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in pursuing that demand .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the financial and economic crisis has made it painfully clear that our competitiveness , and consequently the sustainability of our social market economy , is at risk .
That is why we now need to draw lessons from the crisis , if we are to make better use of our internal market , bolster the sustainability of our pensions and also enable the labour market to function better .
Our group therefore welcomes the Annual Growth Survey and the Ecofin conclusions of 15 January 2011 , which encourage ambitious expectations for the European Semester .
All of us in this house want a Europe of sustainable economic growth with healthy businesses and enough jobs for all our citizens .
We can only achieve that with a stable currency and a stable economy .
In order to attain both , the Member States must keep their domestic finances in order , because that will not only help us prevent problems such as those we are currently witnessing in Member States which are struggling with soaring deficits and debt , but also lay the foundation for growth and jobs for our citizens , and also for our children and future generations .
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will continue to work for a strong European economic governance package , based on three pillars : a robust Stability and Growth Pact , ambitious macroeconomic surveillance and an ambitious Europe 2020 Strategy .
However , that demands that we use the community method and involve the European Parliament and national parliaments .
If we do that , we will not need a new competitiveness pact , because we will have already achieved our objective .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I have listened closely to what you have said , I have read the Annual Growth Survey , I have read the Ecofin conclusions and now I am absolutely clear about one thing : the European Union is not only experiencing an economic crisis , it is also experiencing a political crisis .
What you are recommending to us is nothing new .
Ask your staff to show you the documents from the last ten years .
The same thing can be seen in all of them , namely that public expenditure is too high , and the only mechanism for adjustment to new times relates to wages and they are always too high .
I have not seen any other recommendations .
Whether it is raining or snowing , whether we are in a crisis or a boom - it is always the same ideology , but it has nothing whatsoever to do with empirical economic reality .
Allow me to suggest something to you : send those people who write these things for you , who carry out the economic analyses in the Council and the Commission , to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs sometime .
We want to get to know your economic models .
We want to discuss with them whether they do not see that Europe is on the brink of recession .
Remove the German export rates and the German growth rates for example and then you will see what I am talking about .
I will then ask you why there is not a single word about investments - when we have lowest level of investment so far , which we ourselves can no longer afford - why there is not a single word about improvements in revenue and nothing about following the cycles or about the fact that we must finally learn to grow together or how we will get out of the crisis .
There is nothing about any of these things in your documents .
You missed the start of this year , and you will have to make a great effort to meet the expectations of citizens in Europe .
However , let me tell you something : if this is the spirit in which you intend to take a decision in March concerning the cconomic governance package and the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact , my group will be unable to be involved in this .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , a year ago we debated here in this Chamber what actions were necessary to tackle the global financial crisis .
At the time , some of my Group 's proposals on economic governance were dismissed as too ambitious and too far-reaching , but today I am happy to note that several of our suggestions are realities .
Today , however , there is a significant gap between the ambitions declared in the Europe 2020 Strategy and the financial resources needed to attain the goals .
In the draft 2012 budget , the Commission needs to clarify , clearly identify and make visible the expenditure related to the Strategy .
This is also true for the upcoming revision of the Multiannual Financial Framework .
I would also like to address the Member States directly .
There is a clear unwillingness in the Council among the Finance Ministers - including my own , Anders Borg from Sweden - to invest in the future .
National budgets need to reflect the Council 's stated ambitions , and EU projects need budgets if they are ever to happen .
Mark my words , without the money in the right place there will be no growth and jobs strategy , and we risk failure .
I therefore urge the Commission to come forward with more concrete legislative proposals and the Member States to show more commitment .
We need binding commitments to reach headline targets and legislation in key job-creating areas , such as energy efficiency targets at a common European level .
Existing initiatives , such as the Strategic Energy Technology Plan , the Lifelong Learning Programme and the Energy Efficiency Action Plan , have already been adopted , but you in the Council failed to bring the money to the table .
We need financing of these projects .
They all have the potential to create jobs and growth .
With our 2020 resolution , the ALDE Group sends a strong message to the Council that the current governance structure is too weak , the method of open coordination has failed and the Community method should be restored .
I applaud the huge majority behind the joint resolution .
This is a strong message from Parliament that we need action .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , you know that the Greens are strong supporters of a more integrated Europe in order to be able to ensure sustainable development for our citizens , but also in order to ensure the possibility of Europe to mean something on this planet in the 21st century .
- ( FR ) Our confidence has today been seriously shaken by an act of yours , namely the Annual Growth Survey , because here you have revealed an ideological bias which has nothing to do with the facts of the matter and everything to do with ideological choices .
What exactly is your recommendation ?
To cut public expenditure !
You do not get stable public finances by cutting expenditure .
There is no talk of revenues .
The aim is also to increase flexibility , to reform , as you will argue , the labour markets - in other words , to clearly create flexisecurity without the security .
You will argue that we must take these measures to enable the economy to recover .
However , that is not all .
There are also measures for the financial sector .
Let us talk about those , because this is a good example of double standards .
What do you have to say about the measures on pay and public expenditure ?
We must strike soon and strike hard .
However , when it comes to the financial sector , you say that we have to look at things , examine the impact , and , above all , have transition periods .
In the case of economic governance and budgetary consolidation , you are quick to state : 1 January 2011 -1 January 2012 .
For the banks , it will be 1 January 2019 , just as if no study or transition period were needed to help the labour markets adapt or to put public finances on a stable footing .
Can you tell me what Europe 2020 has to do with all that ?
This is , after all , the issue but it is not what you are telling me about .
Europe 2020 , Commissioner , Members of the Council , is rendered absolutely impossible by the recommendations you are making within the Annual Growth Survey .
You are taking us for a ride when you pretend that it is possible to conduct the necessary investment policies in the areas of research , education , poverty reduction , the fight against climate change , and employment by conducting the policies that you are recommending .
That is a lie , and in my view this debate is a farce .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , my group has signed , and will support , this resolution .
I am not saying we agree with everything in it , but we endorse the core passage .
I want to put this to both Commission and Council and will read out the headline that we have agreed : ' A bold single market act and small business act to create jobs ' .
Now where are the jobs going to come from ?
They are going to come from private investment enterprise and new business start-ups .
We already know that small enterprises have been the main engine of job creation over the last decade .
My message to both the Commission and Council today is that all 27 Member States have got to start taking job creation enterprise seriously at the level of the single market .
We all believe in the single market and Member States have invested huge amounts of money and resources in opening up the services market , but have they told their businesses about it ?
Have they promoted the single market ?
Have they encouraged enterprise ?
Have they encouraged online trading ?
Why do they not get down to doing these practical things to unleash the power of what we already have , alongside all the other projects that my colleagues have talked about ?
They need to start on that tomorrow , today even , rather than talk about some of the other longer-term projects .
They should get down to work !
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Harms mentioned something important yesterday .
Hardly anyone on the outside knows any more what strategy , what stability mechanism , which pact is being proposed , supplemented , brought into force or amended by whom and pursuant to what regulations .
One thing that is clear is that the Europe 2020 Strategy has not so far provided a solution to the problems experienced by the people during the crisis .
Quite the contrary - it continues to pursue the misguided EU policies that were part of the reason for the crisis in the first place .
It continues to count on the Stability and Growth Pact .
This is now intended to be tightened up and strengthened with better sanction mechanisms .
In practice , this means austerity measures to the detriment of citizens .
It means extending working life , in other words pension cuts .
Whether the indexation of wages and salaries is now to be abolished or the basis for negotiation between the social partners is to be restricted or the rules governing working hours made more flexible - all of this means wage restraint and cuts .
It also means the reduction in the formative state intervention in the economic life of society .
In this regard , many people talk about limiting debt .
It makes no difference to me if it is called economic governance , the stability and growth policy , the competitiveness pact or a Commission recommendation on the basis of the Annual Growth Survey .
This antisocial policy is not something that my group and I can support .
However , it does of course make a difference whether parliaments still have some say with regard to this policy .
Yesterday 's debate on the amendment procedure for the Treaty gives reason to hope that the Members of this Parliament are united on one point .
We should not allow ourselves to return to the governmental secrecy policy of the 19th century .
Nobody wants that .
Equally , however , we should not allow ourselves to revert back to a two-speed Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Energy 2020 is a vast programme , but we should ask ourselves if we can achieve the target of 20 % renewable energy by the due date , not least because the financial crisis is slowing investment .
There remains one problem : supporting solar energy .
Indeed , we subsidise China , now the world 's leading exporter of solar panels , and India , the leading exporter of wind power equipment .
Hence the need to support research into the production of solar panels designed and produced in Europe and to promote the adoption of economies of scale in the photovoltaic-solar sector , by introducing such devices , for example , extensively in European cities .
Something very different should have been done : a pan-European energy company should have been set up to safeguard a European public service , given that the distribution networks and their infrastructures already constitute existing , natural monopolies , which should clearly come under the same management .
Instead , due to over-enthusiastic economic liberalism , priority was given to other solutions that certainly do not benefit consumers or users , but the shareholders of these big monopolies .
We should remember that the production of CO2 from cars has not dropped for 150 years .
We are entitled to wonder if it could be time to dust off research projects into water engines .
( NL ) Mr President , if we are to implement the employment chapter of the Europe 2020 Strategy , it is of the utmost importance that we make adjustments to the immigration policy of most Member States and that of the EU .
As the Commission 's proposal itself states , the priorities include increasing labour market participation , reducing structural unemployment , the development of skilled manpower to meet the needs of the labour market , lifelong learning and so on .
The large-scale importation of workers from outside the European Union bears witness to a short-term vision and is out of kilter with the priorities I have just mentioned .
Some 25 million people in the European Union are unemployed .
Let us start by helping those people into work first , instead of resorting once again to large-scale immigration .
Bringing skilled workers into Europe , or what we might describe as a brain drain , creates even greater problems in their countries of origin , which only serves to further crank up the immigration of unskilled people into Europe .
This is a vicious circle and we need to recognise that no one stands to benefit from this situation in the long term .
It is high time that we made a cost-benefit analysis of immigration from outside the EU .
That aspect , too , should be part of the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States .
( RO ) Mr President , the Europe 2020 Strategy features objectives which cannot be achieved without attaching suitable importance to areas which are not explicitly mentioned in it .
A dynamic and competitive agricultural sector is required in Europe , which can make an effective contribution in terms of boosting sustainable , smart growth that is also conducive to inclusion .
Reliable food production , sustainable management of natural resources and maintaining the territorial balance and diversity of rural areas are key elements of an effective common agricultural policy and of a productive agricultural sector .
Industrial policy needs to have an infrastructure .
Implementing a single railway area is a vital step towards deregulating rail transport .
The completion of the Single European Sky and speedy implementation of the SESAR project are just as important .
One of the most important factors is the development of trans-European networks , not only in the transport but also in the energy sector , by allocating sufficient financial resources to value-added projects for Europe .
The Nabucco project , for instance , will deliver benefits for all Member States by removing the European Union 's dependency on a single source .
( SV ) Madam President , if we are to be able to start over after the economic crisis , it is vital that people have confidence .
Richard Wilkinson , the British researcher who has written the book ' The Spirit Level ' and who visited the European Parliament in Brussels last week , has described it very well : we need equality and we need small gaps in order for us to have societies where security and confidence reign .
This can be translated directly into the Europe 2020 Strategy .
Firstly , if we want to succeed , employees and their trade union organisations must be involved and respected .
At the moment , however , the crisis is instead being used to attack trade unions , employees and free wage formation and to strike at unemployment benefits and pensions .
These attacks must stop .
Secondly , we women in Europe must , of course , have the same opportunities as men .
This is not always evident in Parliament 's resolutions , but it needs to be evident in practice .
Thirdly , a strong , modern industry and industrial policy and far-sighted investments , including in infrastructure , must play a central role in our work going forward .
The work on climate-smart , resource-efficient processes and products , green energy and green jobs must be stepped up .
How else are we going to compete ?
Fourthly , we need to have clear support for the energy efficiency policy .
We know that we will not meet our current targets because they are not binding .
We must have binding targets , because that is vital to enable us to achieve the targets for growth and competitiveness that are the main elements of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The low level of ambition and the lack of political will are astounding , particularly as energy efficiency measures are one of the best and smartest ways to reduce financial costs for consumers , strengthen companies and really make a difference .
Madam President , if we want the Europe 2020 Strategy to be a success , then the Employment Guidelines have to be implemented effectively , and national reform programmes put in place and given the priority they actually deserve .
We have to make sure that no one is left behind .
Unemployment rates among older people and disabled people are disgracefully high .
I am pleased that both texts refer to the need to implement anti-discrimination laws in the workplace so that jobs are open for all .
It is important that the targets we have agreed at EU level are actually achieved .
Yes , it is up to Member States to set specific targets and adhere to them , but the European Union has an important role to play in improving the exchange of best practice .
That is why I am pleased that paragraph 27 of the committee resolution makes this very clear .
We have had months of introspection and debates about what shape the Europe 2020 Strategy should take , but we have the Employment Guidelines .
Now is the time to start delivering on them .
( DA ) Madam President , there is a great deal of talk about economic responsibility in Europe these days , and economic responsibility is very often identified by cuts in public expenditure and very rarely by an improvement in the employment situation .
I believe that we should ask ourselves what economic responsibility actually means .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance see a very large discrepancy between the policies pursued in Europe and those pursued in the Member States right now .
On the one hand , we can see the Annual Growth Survey , and we can see the European Semester leading to fewer jobs and less growth in Europe .
On the other hand , in the Europe 2020 Strategy and in the Employment Guidelines we say that we want to create more and better jobs .
There is inconsistency here .
It is a fact that we have 23 million unemployed in Europe .
We have 5.5 million unemployed below the age of 25 .
We have increasing numbers of poor workers .
The figures are rising , and the economic policies that we are pursuing are not improving the situation .
I believe that , if we want to create new jobs in Europe , it is vital that we truly implement the Europe 2020 Strategy and the guidelines for employment in our economic policies .
That would be a demonstration of economic responsibility , but I doubt that it will actually happen .
( EL ) Madam President , poverty , climate change , low birth rates , immigration , energy and , more importantly , combating unemployment are the main problems we face today in the European Union .
Addressing them takes money and needs appropriations .
However , unfortunately , funding is being cut back throughout Europe .
What does this mean ?
It means that the Europe 2020 Strategy is at risk and will be hard to achieve .
However , we must try .
I think that we need to pay particular attention to unemployment , which has risen to a ten-year high .
I also think that we need to provide a high standard of education to young people in Europe , in keeping with the needs of the labour market , and that courses should be revised and Member States should commit to reducing the school dropout rate .
Job vacancies need specialised labour .
I call on Europe to adopt without delay the proposed European vacancy monitoring system , which will also include a European skills passport .
We must succeed .
Words are not enough .
We need action .

( ES ) Madam President , this issue raises a question , just one question : at European level what can we do to give work to those who do not have it ?
To respond to that question I want to make clear the first agreed point .
There can be no sustainable growth without a stable macroeconomy .
Some of the quick solutions that have been proposed here , especially from the leftwing Members , would mean bread for today and hunger for tomorrow .
The second agreed point is that Europe 2020 is a compendium of good intentions , it sounds good , but we have to move from contemplation to action .
What are we going to do ?
How are we going to finance the proposed initiatives and actions ?
Is the ambition contained in the words of the 2020 Strategy compatible with the budgets cuts that have been announced ?
The third agreed point is that we need a complete picture if we are to set ourselves on the right path towards stable growth .
To date this picture does not yet exist .
What is currently happening in the Economic and Financial Affairs Council shows that among them there are a huge amount of scattered , incoherent and inconsistent ideas .
There are three important actions to be taken .
Firstly , stifling countries in difficulties cannot continue , and can be solved by a joint issuing of European bonds .
Secondly , the bonds specified in the Monti Report have to be implemented , but they are not mentioned in the Europe 2020 Economic Strategy .
Thirdly , we have to use the European Investment Bank 's resources , two thirds of which are the Commission 's , and which would only have to be increased fourfold in 10 years in order to equal the money that the Marshall Plan had for the reconstruction of the European economy .
( EL ) Madam President , the EU has been debating an efficient , cohesive and viable response to the crisis for several months now , a response that will ensure that our strategic objectives of viable growth , protection for employment , social progress and social cohesion will be attained .
However , there are two problems : firstly , the debate on the Europe 2020 Strategy is still cut off , structurally , from the economic governance package , from the European Semester and from the Annual Growth Survey and , as a result , we have either a fragmented strategy or parallel strategies , strategies which run in tandem , without adequate coordination , which thus risk undermining each other .
The second problem is that the Council 's and the Commission 's current emphasis is on tightening up the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact and budgetary discipline and reform , with no convincing answers or solutions for the effective implementation and financing of the Europe 2020 Strategy objectives .
I think that there is a risk , as happened with the Lisbon Strategy , that many of our objectives will get no further than the drawing board and I worry that this will happen unless we are able to put persuasive arguments to the people of Europe , who are bearing the brunt of the crisis , who cannot and should not have to follow technical debates on the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact and on indicators and penalties .
We must understand that we cannot focus solely on indicators and figures .
We must focus on people .
( FR ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , if you would be so kind as to listen to what I have to say , Commissioner , I have only one minute of speaking time , even though I have a good mind to keep quiet , and to say nothing , since I believe that this Europe 2020 Strategy is very far removed from what we need .
You have given us a lot of fine words .
Do you really think that guidelines , ' flagships ' and all manner of things that you dream up and which keep you busy for hours and days at a time will enable you to provide employment and give confidence to the people of Europe ?
You are wrong .
If you look at the state of the world today , I do not think that the Chinese , the Indians or the emerging countries are very impressed with what we are doing about growth .
Therefore , in my capacity as rapporteur on the economic governance package , I am almost inclined to keep quiet in your presence , and I would like to say just one thing to you : in our work , we shall be extremely firm .
Do not think that if you Council Members simply tell us to speed up , we will have an agreement in June .
We will have an agreement when this Parliament has held debates and when the Council has listened to us .
As far as I am concerned , the creation of Eurobonds , which could create a global market backed up by the euro , is part of this package .
( NL ) Madam President , whenever I hear the word ' eurobonds ' , I always feel a little bit sick , even though it is a word which is frequently bandied about here .
Most jobs come from economic growth and a healthy private sector .
There is no alternative to that .
Governments do not create jobs and are not job creators .
The major problem in Europe is the lack of competitiveness .
The difference between Germany and southern Europe is almost 35 % .
That gap is very large , which is why Mrs Merkel has spoken of a competitiveness pact .
I agree with that , in itself .
Actually , the Lisbon Process was supposed to be an idea along those lines , but little has come of that .
However , there is one thing I would like to warn you about , and that is the harmonisation of corporation tax .
That is a very bad idea .
It is also a very French idea , and we must dismiss it , just as we must dismiss the idea of an economic government .
It will be a job killer .
Last week , a study conducted by the OECD in 21 countries showed , once again , that if we want greater employment in Europe , we need to lower corporation tax .
That is the sort of thing we need to be looking into , because this Parliament does not create any jobs .
( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we are in the midst of a major economic crisis - we have been talking about this for months and everything we have said is true - as a rule , however , we tend to talk in very broad terms and then cheerfully continue to make decisions here as if nothing is happening .
I believe this is because here in Parliament we do not act in a specific enough way and we are not honest enough , but rather pursue something resembling a general , headlines policy .
What are we actually doing to promote growth and stability ?
Are we ourselves actually contributing to a more proper and wiser way of dealing with finances ?
Are we really carrying out a critical review of whether we are making the right kinds of expenditure , or does every one of us not have a new idea every day about where we could spend more money ?
If we do not have the strength to focus our financial resources on projects for the future - and that will involve altercations , debates and decisions - then there is no point in talking about innovation and research only to then fail to make the necessary funds available .
That is rather dishonest .
If we want to breathe life into the economy , we must also pursue a policy that stimulates the economy and not endlessly sit thinking about how we can interfere with industry or the economy .
We cheerfully take more decisions - even today we are constantly calling for new decisions that will interfere with the development of the economy .
Does anyone believe that the question of mandatory energy efficiency - to name just one example - will help to drive the economy forward ?
Do you really believe that , with the decisions we have often made in connection with energy , we have stimulated the economy ?
Or have we obstructed it ?
I would like us for once to talk a bit more honestly about this and then to make somewhat fewer decisions , but perhaps ones that will really bring about progress .
That will be more challenging and it will take more effort , but it is in the interests of democracy .
( HU ) Madam President , the financial and economic crisis has transformed into becoming a social and employment crisis , which is why it is particularly important that the realisation Europe has come to , namely that tighter coordination is necessary in both economic and employment policy , is actually implemented .
This also means that all countries that introduce structural reforms or changes in fiscal policy or , for example , review the Sunday opening hours of shops , must also examine whether such measures facilitate the development of the employment system and contribute to increasing the employment rate .
It is also crucial in all decisions to consult with social partners .
The European Semester will be the first real test to this realisation , when Europe together , led by the Hungarian Presidency , will be able to assess for the first time the degree to which these directives can be transposed , and whether we will be able to embark on the path of implementation .
I believe that the Hungarian Presidency and the Hungarian Government has a special role in this , not only in its position of presidency , but also in leading by example , in taking this into account in all economic policy changes and all employment policy decisions , and in providing an example to the other countries .
( The Member agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )

( HU ) Madam President , I am under the impression that Mrs Göncz has a very good understanding of this whole issue , that is , how the European Union intends to put an end to unemployment .
I have been sitting through this whole debate here and still do not understand it any better .
Please help me answer this question : what are we supposed to tell the people in Borsod or Szabolcs County ?
Where and when will they find work ?
And I expect an answer to the very same question , from Mr Martonyi , by the way , who is here representing the Council , as well as from the Commissioner , who is fortunately also of Hungarian nationality .
Where will the Hungarian people and , for that matter , people in other regions of Europe that are in a catastrophic situation , find work ?
Where and when ?
I expect a concrete answer .
We need to be consistent in our exercise of the right to ask a blue-card question .
A blue-card question is not addressed to plenary in general or to the Commissioner or the Council representative .
It is addressed to a colleague expounding a matter on which you would like to ask for clarification .
Mrs Morvai , that was not the spirit of your question .
( HU ) Madam President , I would be happy to answer , but obviously our time is too short to discuss this in too much detail .
However , what I had in mind was , for example , that if there is a change in the tax system , does that tax change reduce social differences ; does it help companies continue development and job creation , or does it instead urge them to hold back on their intentions of creating jobs ?
What I was referring to is that if we are speaking of a restructuring of the educational system , is it really in the service of social integration ?
If we are speaking of further education , does it really prepare people for the market ; for the labour market ?
This is what I was specifically referring to .
( FI ) Madam President , our fellow Member on the right insisted that policy only interferes with the economy and that people in this House only do things that interfere with policy .
Does my fellow Member really think that economic governance , for example , only interferes with the economy ?
( The speaker puts the question to Mr Reul by raising a blue card under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )


( DE ) If you take a look at the measures that have been adopted here in the last few months and calculate the costs that have resulted from these , they have - not always , but very often - contributed to the disruption of economic development .
Thus , we need to be more careful in our considerations .
The idea presented by the Commissioner for Industry and Entrepreneurship in his industry communications , that we should always gauge future decisions by whether they will serve or damage the competitiveness of European industry , is therefore a very wise one .
( DE ) Madam President , it is clear to everyone here in this Chamber that the closer Europe grows together , the closer the agreement on issues relating to economic policy needs to be .
Therefore , an instrument like the European Semester makes sense .
However , it must stop at interfering in tasks that have traditionally been the job of the social partners , such as wage negotiations and negotiating collective agreements .
We really must exercise restraint in this regard .
It does not make any sense for Europe to decide how high wages should be in the individual countries .
We ought to concentrate more on eliminating market obstacles in order to allow the European economy to flourish .
This relates to oligopolies and monopolies , but also to barriers to market access .
It should also not be the case that various sectors are assured of particular profit margins .
More competition is needed here to enable the European economy to develop its potential .
It must also be the task of the European Union to bring our infrastructure up to the state of the art .
I am talking here about energy , transport and communications .
Europe ought to have the necessary resources in this regard , in particular so that we can eliminate the existing bottlenecks between Member States .
We also need to consider what resources we can make available to Europe .
This includes a clear basis for our own resources .
Therefore , I would make a clear appeal to the Council and the Member States at long last to give Europe the resources it needs .
Clearly this also concerns education , as well as the area of research and development , where , as Europe , we have a part to play .
However , the question of money is crucial here , too .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Europe 2020 Strategy is very important , not only for the development of European social and economic policy , but also for national social and economic policy .
We must take care to ensure that this strategy is not misused at European level to pursue a social clearance policy in the Member States .
I am extremely shocked that , in its Annual Growth Survey , the Commission is proposing pay cuts and a reduction in social protection .
Some previous speakers have already talked about this .
The impact on the people locally will be disastrous .
It is unacceptable for the people , the workers , to bear the costs of budgetary consolidation alone .
I , too , would like to appeal to the Member States to be guided only by the integrated guidelines when they draw up their national reform programmes , as these enable a much better balance between social protection and economic growth .
The Annual Growth Survey once again mentions open-ended contracts , which were previously mentioned in the Agenda for New Skills for New Jobs .
Mr Andor , we debated this once before in November 2010 : young people cannot be integrated into the labour market by watering down employee rights .
Experience in Europe has shown that this watering down simply results in a shift to precarious working conditions and does not create new jobs .
We need specific measures in order to help those people who are most at risk and not flagship initiatives that operate alongside each other rather than being integrated with one another .
Madam President , my reading of the reality of today and of tomorrow is that European jobs will be sustainable only if they are underpinned by a competitive economy , and it is no secret that this not one of our strong points .
To be successful on competitiveness in Europe , we need an institutionalised competitiveness process .
We have to identify success factors and we also have to see how to tailor them to the situation .
We already have a large number of instruments - competitiveness-related instruments - indeed , with a little bit of political will , we can use a substantial part of the institutional framework to launch a Commission-led competitiveness process based on the Community system .
I am referring here to the European Semester , the growth survey that has already been mentioned .
I could also mention imbalances and precision - especially in the scoreboard , which should include structural competitiveness-related factors .
There is also the 2020 Strategy , which should be vigorously implemented now and not after 2013 .
All policies should contribute to improving the competitiveness of the European economy : we need all hands on deck and decoupling Europe 's core from the rest of it would simply generate a divided Europe .
Sustainable jobs can only be created if Europe sticks together .
A divided Europe will not be a competitive Europe .
( HU ) Madam President , I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak , both as the rapporteur for the 2010 Employment Guidelines and as the coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal , which intends to maintain the 2010 Employment Guidelines in 2011 .
We are in agreement with this and we support this .
However , the Treaty of Lisbon requires annual guidelines , and we must therefore indeed track and monitor the changes , maintain contact between each other , between the Commission , the Council and Parliament , and must , of course , still make modifications if necessary .
I therefore recommend that , during the review of the 2020 Strategy and during the work under the European Semester , the Integrated Economic and Employment Guidelines be used as a guide of sorts , and if there are any differences , we should take the trouble and make amendments .
Problems might very well arise .
I recently learned that , in the preliminary National Reform Programmes , there has already been a certain slippage in respect of employment commitments , and instead of the 75 % target we are looking at commitments of around 72 % .
This obviously needs re-thinking in order to avoid a similar case to that of the Lisbon Strategy , where we undertook too much and then managed to implement little .
Still , I would advise that some basic principles be laid down .
I agree on the issue of pensions and wages .
There should be no intervention , subsidiarity should be respected , and specific national commitments are required with regard to special groups , young people , people with disabilities and people with multiple disadvantages .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )

( HU ) Madam President , I am once again compelled to ask a fellow Hungarian Member a question .
Does subsidiarity with regard to pensions and wages mean that the pensions and wages of pensioners and employees in Hungary and other post-communist countries will consistently , continuously and permanently be a fraction of those in Western Europe ?
Because it would be very sad if we were to understand it as such .
This is the case at the moment .
Nurses make 70 000 forints a month , and teachers make 90 000 ; pensioners have basic subsistence difficulties .
How are we to understand this ?
( HU ) No , Mrs Morvai , this is not how it is to be understood , but the issue of pensions essentially depends on economic performance .
It depends on what we are able to produce , and it is this on the basis of which we can provide appropriate pensions .
As such , the strategy we are discussing , the one that intends to make Europe competitive , functional and successful , is what gives us the possibility to increase pensions even in countries that are currently still in a less advantageous situation .
However , uniform rules cannot be introduced , as there are enormous differences at the moment .
Obviously , a gradual approach will be needed in the future as well .
( FR ) Madam President , as part of the Europe 2020 Strategy , these Employment Guidelines must address three major challenges .
The first is to emerge from the crisis through research , innovation and competitiveness so as to ensure a true economic recovery that will enable us to achieve this social recovery .
The second is to replace a whole generation of wage-earners who are now retiring .
The third is to be competitive in a globalised economy by freeing companies from a number of tax burdens which hamper them and weigh them down .
Against this background , we must target three particularly vulnerable groups in society .
Firstly , young people , and it is absolutely vital that we fight to prevent these young people from leaving school with no qualifications , as this will exclude them permanently from the world of work .
Young people because we must facilitate their entry into the world of work , and not only on temporary contracts or work experience placements ; we must fight against youth unemployment .
This is a long-term problem which has a considerable impact in the current climate where the crisis that has hit them harder .
The second target group in society is women , women who fall victim to temporary contracts and who are underpaid .
The third target group is senior citizens whom we must be able to keep in work .
We have European tools to help us achieve this , notably the European Social Fund , and I believe that we must rely on this lever .
( PL ) Madam President , almost a year has passed since the Commission presented the Europe 2020 Strategy .
It has not been an easy time for Europe .
The Member States are still struggling to cope with the aftermath of the crisis .
Measures to implement the new strategy have been put on the back burner .
The ambitious Europe 2020 plans , which include an increase in employment levels to 85 % , a 20 % reduction in the number of people at risk of poverty and an increase in research spending to 3 % appear to be under threat already , less than a year after implementation of the strategy began .
Unemployment currently stands at 10 % in the EU , and there are still no signs of it dropping significantly .
In fact the opposite is true ; if we assume that Europe continues to exit the crisis at the current slow rate , unemployment will rise even further for at least the next few years .
Low levels of employment create favourable conditions for the spread of poverty and social marginalisation , as confirmed by the Eurobarometer report of June 2010 .
( ES ) Madam President , looking towards 2020 and beyond , the EU runs the real systemic risk of losing its ability to compete due to the existence of large economic sectors which are increasingly more technological and powerful .
We need the capacity to compete : to compete in order to grow , to grow in order to create employment and to create employment in order to protect and safeguard our social model .
The only indispensible commodity we have is knowledge and we must use that knowledge to innovate , to adapt to changes and , above all , to lead in those changes .
Therefore , we need to invest much more in universities , in our education system and our research and development in order to be a power in the area in which we can be : knowledge .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , the aims of Europe 2020 are good and ambitious .
In my speech I would mainly like to focus on what the practical factors are , what the tools are , for taking these aims to grassroots level , which we failed to do with the Lisbon Strategy , for example .
Firstly , we really need Europe as a whole .
We need the regions of Europe .
We have to be able to identify each region 's success factors and skills potential .
We can largely respond to this need through cohesion policy .
For us to be able to create more jobs , innovative activity , and , in particular , practicebased innovation , we need a cohesion policy that covers the whole of Europe to implement these targets in the regions .
We also obviously need research and development policy and funding for that sector , but I believe the core issue is effective cohesion policy .
( PT ) Madam President , it is unacceptable that social problems continue to be the poor relation of EU policy , as is the systematic devaluation of the social consequences of budgetary , financial and competition policies that insist on neoliberal dogmas , indifferent to the almost 25 million people unemployed , the almost 30 million people working precarious and poorly paid jobs , and the more than 85 million people living in poverty , while the profits of economic and financial interest groups never stop rising .
Madam President , I would therefore relay here the cries of indignation expressed by various social organisations during the Citizens ' Agora held recently by the European Parliament in Brussels .
This is the reason for the indignation among millions of workers , unemployed , women and young people who continue to fight against such policies throughout Europe .
It is time to break with the Stability and Growth Pact , the competitiveness pact and other pacts of this kind .
People and workers must be respected .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree that Parliament must be allowed sufficient time so as to be able to propose the best employment policy guidelines for 2020 .
During a time of crisis such as the one we are experiencing at the moment in Europe , we cannot disregard the needs of our people .
It is essential to provide aid to families , to young people seeking employment , and to those who find themselves out of work during their career .
Europe must have the courage to make choices , guaranteeing work first to its own citizens and then to those of third countries , and establishing links between employment offices in the various Member States so that anyone , from any country , can know what jobs are available .
Particular attention should be paid to border protection so as to prevent an uncontrolled invasion by the hundreds of thousands of immigrants who are about to flood into our countries as a result of the political situation in North Africa .
The integration of third-country nationals should be permitted only through controlled immigration and should be limited to the actual availability of jobs , thus preventing tension and discrimination from occurring at the expense of economic growth and social welfare .
( DE ) Madam President , expectations in relation to the strategy are widely divergent .
While some people are certain that this is all just hot air and that the strategy is not worth the paper it is written on , we see very dramatic and real scenarios that we will have to face - I am thinking about measures to increase the flexibility of the labour markets .
These are bringing hoards of poorly qualified , cheap workers to Central Europe , and the result is wage dumping .
The goal formulated in the strategy for 40 % of the younger generation to have a higher education qualification seems particularly naïve .
I would like to know what the point of that is .
We already have a situation - I am thinking of Italy - where there are hardly any appropriate jobs for young academics , who have to keep their heads above water by taking low-paid jobs .
Why do we actually need such a high number of academics when there are no suitable jobs for them ?
It is true that we need higher qualifications , but we will not achieve that simply by hanging a university degree around the necks of 40 % of the population .
That is not the right way to go .
( PT ) Madam President , I should like to mention that , at a time when there is a severe sovereign and financial debt crisis , it is crucial to commit to economic development through growth and growth strategies and , not least , to have an employment policy in place .
I believe that , by having an employment policy , we shall not only resolve an economic problem but also a social one .
I should therefore like to send out a message to a specific category of workers that must be taken into account in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
There has been talk of young people , a lot of which took place just this morning .
However , there is a category of workers - a crucial generational category of workers - comprising those who are over the age of 50 and therefore close to retirement .
Should we wish to raise the retirement age and create a more active society , we must adopt a strategy for workers in precarious jobs and for workers over the age of 50 who are experiencing difficulties .
( RO ) Madam President , the Europe 2020 Strategy must pave the way for a new model of economic growth in Europe by promoting structural reforms coordinated at Member State level .
I think that these reforms are essential for every Member State , given the high level of youth unemployment .
At the same time , we must support small and medium-sized enterprises in leveraging their full potential with the aim of creating new jobs .
The inclusion on the European Union 's list of objectives of economic growth , the social objective and the fight against poverty is also important for Europe because achieving them will help safeguard the European Union 's economic independence .
Last but not least , I believe that the Europe 2020 Strategy must be accessible to Europe 's citizens as they must understand the responsibilities which fall on all the actors involved in implementing this strategy , such as national , local and regional authorities , whose efforts are also supplemented by the contribution from European citizens .
( PL ) Madam President , the Employment Guidelines are and should be treated as a fundamental tool in the process of economic governance as expressed in the concept of the European Semester .
These guidelines represent a foundation upon which the Member States ' National Reform Programmes are currently being constructed , and it is after all these programmes which will determine the success of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
According to the schedule , work on the National Reform Programmes will be completed in April .
I would like to stress the importance of involving both national parliaments and regional and local authorities in work on the National Reform Programmes , and in this respect I would also like to make reference to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions .
Making changes to the guidelines at this stage could disrupt the process .
I would like to draw attention to the need for an integrated horizontal approach to the implementation of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
I would therefore also like to reiterate the significance of the cohesion policy instruments for the Europe 2020 Strategy .
- ( SK ) Madam President , the four guidelines of the Council on employment policy should also remain in force in 2011 .
The guidelines relating to improving qualifications would probably end up being implemented through the principle of supply and demand , even without state intervention .
Increasing the employment of women does require such intervention , but before we proceed to that , Member States should recognise the work of women as mothers looking after their children , and the benefit this brings to gross domestic product .
Let us not give work to those who already have enough of it .
The state should therefore focus on combating poverty and social exclusion , as few people can escape the poverty gap by themselves .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , perhaps you could tell President Barroso that we would have liked him to have taken part in this debate as it is the first debate on the issues at stake in the Annual Growth Survey , the cornerstone of this European Semester that he so very much wanted and which he believes is a key element in getting the European Union out of the crisis .
Perhaps you could also tell him that , under these conditions , the European Parliament will not be an easy partner and that the economic governance package needs the Commission to pay greater attention to what emerges from this Parliament .
Finally , you could also tell him that the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon , of the entire Treaty of Lisbon , and particularly of Article 9 , which requires you to make social issues a horizontal issue , will not go unheeded by this Parliament .
We are waiting for the Treaty of Lisbon to be applied in full .
We are constantly being told that a minimum revision of the Treaty is needed and that its potential must be fully exploited .
As far as the potential of Article 9 is concerned , we sometimes get the impression that the Annual Growth Survey completely ignores it .
Finally , I should like to tell you what has struck me at the end of the debate .
We sometimes get the impression that , even after this crisis , people at the European Commission continue to think along ' old lines ' , believing that the most important thing is to reform the labour market .
We are well aware that , according to the dominant way of thinking in the European Commission - one that you undoubtedly do not subscribe to - to talk about labour market reforms is to talk about flexibility - not about flexicurity , but about flexibility .
However , the last 10 years , even before the crisis , have taught us that this mindset - the belief that growth is all it takes to create employment - is no longer enough .
The real challenge we face is that of employment , whether our own employment or that of the countries around us .
However , when I see the debate getting under way on the subject of competitiveness , I see a debate that overlooks this priority for employment , and that worries me .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank Members for this very substantial , inspirational and stimulating discussion .
I would like to answer all the major points that have been raised as questions or comments and observations concerning the annual growth survey , the Economic Semester and Europe 2020 in general .
The most important thing is that we get the picture right , both about the documents and also about the economic situation in the European Union .
The inconvenient truth is that Europe is experiencing a recovery .
Last year we already had economic growth in the European Union - but not in every Member State - and that is where the second part of the inconvenient truth comes .
We are experiencing a very fragile and divided recovery .
The Commission has looked at this situation very thoroughly and developed policies accordingly .
We need to maintain and strengthen the recovery , and we have to address the current division .
This will not , however , be possible without addressing the weaknesses that have been exposed by the crisis in economic and monetary union , which we will do by developing further the architecture of economic and monetary governance in the European Union .
That is where the complications begin and where it may be true that the priorities are not always immediately recognised by everyone .
For us , economic growth is the priority and all other policies in this phase serve this .
We need to strengthen growth and make it more robust , but in order to do this we need a greater level of financial stability , and for that we also need fiscal consolidation .
It is inevitable that , in the coming years , fiscal consolidation will remain on the agenda in the interests of stabilisation and of being consistent with the kinds of cyclical intervention which the Member States implemented against the recession in previous years .
We need a smart consolidation which does not undermine demand in the economy and which preserves the integrity of the EU economy as a whole .
This lesson has to be learned .
This must begin by stabilising the euro .
I could obviously use stronger expressions here , but let us just stick to this one .
We need to stabilise the euro and economic and monetary union .
The lesson we share is that , in order to do that , we need to strengthen the economic leg of this Union and the economic leg of policy coordination at European level .
Let me just ask a question and leave it as a question on this .
The question is whether the strengthening of the economic leg of governance can succeed without a collective effort on wages , on coordinating wage developments in the European Union .
When I say that , and when we include suggestions in this area in the annual growth survey , it does not mean that we would question the importance of the social dialogue - quite the contrary .
We have praised countries with a tradition and culture of strong social partnership .
We recognise that they suffered less from the crisis and , in particular , suffered fewer losses in terms of human resources .
Unemployment remained lower in these countries .
We advocate the strengthening of social dialogue in other Member States which have suffered more and which responded to the crisis with less flexibility than countries like Germany , the Netherlands or Austria .
We have also increased the level of social dialogue at European level .
We recently held macroeconomic dialogue with the social partners and we will have a new tripartite social forum in March in order to enhance coordination and dialogue with the social partners .
I would like to reject very categorically the notion that the Commission is doing business as usual .
In the last year the Commission has introduced a number of qualitatively new initiatives .
We are pursuing a robust agenda for Financial Regulation .
Commissioner Barnier 's work should not be underestimated .
As part of Europe 2020 , we outlined a new concept for industrial policy at European level which does much more for competitiveness and the sustainability of jobs in the European Union .
We are pursuing a number of innovative approaches to boost investment and to find funding for it .
A group of Commissioners has been working to develop innovative financial instruments .
The first example of this is going to be an outline for supporting developing energy networks in Europe .
This is absolutely necessary in order to develop the energy markets and the necessary infrastructure that is vital for it .
We have launched the microfinance facility .
I am grateful to Parliament and the Council for the final consensus that made this possible last year .
Just last week I was present in the Netherlands at the launch of the first EU-supported microfinance facility and there are more in the pipeline in order to support potential entrepreneurs , perhaps after the experience of being unemployed : women coming back to the labour market after childbirth or people who have already been working and want to seek a new form of enterprise beyond 50 , or even 60 .
When we discuss employment policies - and a good example of this was a couple of weeks ago when the EPSCO Council was hosted by the Hungarian Presidency in Gödöllő - we focus on how to generate job-rich goals , but also on the groups in most difficulty .
In this case I must mention in particular young people .
Youth unemployment is very dramatic in some Member States .
Again we have to be aware of diversity .
Luckily , there are some Member States where youth unemployment is low , but the European average is too high .
In some Member States , like Spain and the Baltics , it is at a tragic level .
The governments have been alerted and a complex set of policies , from education to employment services and other types of measures , is required .
But youth is not the only problem group .
It is true that we have to do more with regard to the employment of older workers .
That is why we designated 2012 the European Year for Active Ageing .
On the institutional questions concerning the Employment Guidelines - which I believe continue to be our focus and provide guidance and substance - there is a clear role for the European Parliament under Article 148 of the Treaty .
The Employment Guidelines are to be renewed .
This is confirmation that we want them to continue until 2014 ; they should neither be subject to major changes nor overruled by annual growth surveys .
The guidelines provide long-term orientation , while the growth survey is an annual exercise that concerns its substance .
But it is obviously true that the NRP exercise is crucial and that the Commission is pursuing it very seriously in the context of Europe 2020 .
Parliament will be involved in the discussions in various ways .
I should refer here to the multiannual financial framework negotiations .
The EU budget also has to reflect 2020 priorities and we will keep Parliament informed about the preparation of the national reform programme as the country-specific recommendations develop .
It is clear that there is concern at this early stage about the future of Europe 2020 .
In a way , a spectre is haunting Europe 2020 : that of the Lisbon Strategy .
I have had many opportunities in this House to discuss why we believe there is a much better chance , through a more focused system of targets and also a more focused system of reporting and implementation , of success with Europe 2020 .
Only the Commission can ensure that there is consistency between these initiatives .
We have a number of balls in the air and we have to make sure that none of them falls while conducting economic policies : Europe 2020 , economic governance , the single market and cohesion policy .
None of them must be damaged in this exercise .
All of them need to be pursued in a very robust way , ensuring that all 27 Member States are involved .
The Commission is obviously against the concept of a two-speed Europe .
We have to ensure that the divided recovery which we are experiencing does not turn into political divisions in the coming period .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , first and foremost I would like to thank you all for the very constructive and useful debate .
I also would like to extend my special thanks to Mrs Perez for her excellent report and the very important observations and criticisms that she made .
We may have a different reading of the reality , as referred to by Mrs Danuta Hübner , both for a crisis and for the recovery , but I believe that we all agree on one point , and that is that nobody is interested in a jobless recovery .
We are all striving for a balance between fiscal consolidation and growth and job creation .
Indeed , fiscal discipline and the raising of employment levels should go hand in hand .
On a more general note , on economic issues , we all know that now we have a comprehensive approach , a comprehensive ' package ' or ' Gesamtpaket ' , as some people say , most of the elements of which have just been referred to by Commissioner Andor .
As far as the Presidency is concerned , I would just like to underline again that we have to focus upon two of all the elements of the package .
One is certainly the implementation and the application of the European Semester .
This is the first time , it is the first exercise .
It will have a major impact on the subsequent development of the whole European integration process .
Just to mention two things briefly .
One is that we have a very tight schedule , so the deadlines must be respected by all , and the headline targets will have to be achieved .
We have to make all possible efforts to ensure that the overall deadlines are met through the contributions of the individual Member States , in the fields both of employment and innovation , and of energy .
Let me just mention , about energy , that there was a very successful meeting of the European Council on 4 February .
For many of us it represented a kind of breakthrough , both for the establishment of the integrated energy market and for energy efficiency .
Important decisions were also made with respect to the external aspects of the common energy policy .
Last but not least , I would just like to mention the fight against poverty , the fight for social inclusion .
In this respect , I would like to congratulate you on the resolution you have just adopted on Roma integration .
I would like to extend my very special congratulations and thanks to Lívia Járóka , who played a decisive role in the preparation of the report , and also in the adoption of this extremely important resolution , which will be very helpful for us when we work on and finalise the European framework strategy for Roma integration .
The other element we want to concentrate upon is the six legislative texts .
Here I would like to assure Sylvie Goulard that we do not only want to listen to Parliament .
We indeed would like to have , and we have to make , an agreement with Parliament under the terms of the ordinary legislative process .
We will have to do everything possible so that this process is accelerated and can be successfully concluded by the end of the Hungarian Presidency .
I do not want to get into the other elements of the comprehensive package .
I would just like to underline one thing .
The Council wants to fully respect the Community method .
We have no reservations whatsoever in this regard .
As we said many times before , the Treaty of Lisbon changed many things .
There were major shifts in competences .
We all know about them .
But the Treaty of Lisbon did not change the heart of the European architecture and this is the Community method .
We will strictly abide by that .
Of course , we always have to be in line with the Treaty .
I would just like to refer to the fact that if you read carefully the conclusions of the European Council of 4 February , you will find there that everything must be in line with the Treaty .
Now my last remark is very short .
It is about the money .
As was pointed out by Lena Ek , policies need money and policies need financing .
I could not agree more .
But we know very well that there are divergences in the approaches of the Member States .
At this point in time I would just like to underline one thing from the point of view of the Presidency : we warmly suggest that first we discuss the substance and thereafter discuss the figures and the monies and the resources .
There will be a long debate .
We will have very useful orientation debates on cohesion policy , on energy policy , on agriculture and so on , but , as is said sometimes ,
( FR ) You should not put the cart before the horse .
So , all in all , we would really like to help all these debates and then come to the real debate , the final debate about the resources .
Again , I would like to congratulate you all and thank you very much for the guidance we have received .
I have received six motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure on Europe 2020 and one motion for a resolution in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure on the employment policies of the Member States .

The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 : 00 tomorrow , Thursday , 17 February .
( FR ) Madam President , the Minister quite rightly referred to respect for the Treaty , and he pointed out that there had been a meeting of the European Council on 4 February .
Pursuant to Article 15 of the Treaty on European Union , I would like to know when the President of the European Council will come and give an account of the European Council of 4 February to the European Parliament , because I do not believe he is coming to this part-session .
( FR ) We have taken note of your point . Thank you very much .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( RO ) I reaffirm the importance of developing as soon as possible all the technical aspects for the ' Youth on the Move ' initiative .
It is crucial that the more than 100 million young people in the European Union have the necessary resources and appropriate tools to enable them to make their contribution to achieving the targets set for 2020 .
I welcome that the lifelong learning scheme and the inclusion of young people in such a scheme are basically coordinated to promote smart , sustainable growth and ensure a healthy life for the adults of the future .
The provision of high-quality higher education and support for the involvement of young people in research and development activities can ensure the success of the effort to boost economic competitiveness .
New activities can be developed , bearing in mind the creative potential offered by young people .
Furthermore , I think that offering employment opportunities , in addition to high-quality training , can provide much greater chances for integration on the labour market .
Therefore , we need to have the technical details of this initiative as soon as possible to be able to launch the activities required to take full advantage of this year , which is the European Year of Volunteering .
in writing . - ( PL ) The quality of human capital is of decisive importance for the success of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The principle of gender mainstreaming is key to the professional education and training system .
It is an essential requirement if women are to benefit from long-term professional development which is adapted to labour market demands , if better use is to be made of their potential and if employment levels among women are to rise , particularly in traditionally male professions , low carbon sectors of the economy and senior decision-making positions .
I would call for professional education and training to be adapted to women 's needs , and for more women to participate in such education and training .
At present , it does not take account of the different needs of women and their economic and social conditions .
This means that women find it much harder than men to return to work or enter the labour market .
If it is to function effectively , the professional education and training system for women must be comprehensive , or in other words it must encompass experience , life stage and women 's multi-dimensional needs as regards education , including the specific needs of disabled women , elderly women , women living in poverty and female immigrants , for example .
Flexible , affordable access to high-quality training should be a priority .
A significant role should also be played by incentives for employers , which would facilitate the organisation of training courses for women working in small and medium-sized enterprises and at home .
In order to achieve the aims of the Europe 2020 Strategy , it will be necessary to link professional training more closely to the demands of the labour market , in order to create new training opportunities for women in the fields of science , mathematics and technology .
in writing . - The Europe 2020 Strategy should help Europe recover from the crisis and come out stronger , through jobs and smart , sustainable and inclusive growth based on five EU headline targets as regards promoting employment .
A strong social protection system , investment in active labour market policies and education and training opportunities for all are essential to reduce unemployment and prevent long term exclusion .
The flexicurity is not applicable in Member States with low possibilities of strengthening social protection systems due to budget restrictions and macroeconomic imbalances , as in Romania , and I consider that reducing labour market segmentation has to be achieved by providing adequate security for workers under all forms of contracts .
Any labour market reforms must be introduced by reaching a high degree of social consensus through agreements with the social partners at national and EU level .
A legislative agenda is essential to eradicate the existing pay gap between women and men by 1 % every year in order to achieve the target of 10 % reduction by 2020 .
The Europe 2020 Strategy should include a target of reducing poverty amongst women in the EU as 17 % of the women are classed as living in poverty , mostly single mothers , immigrants and older women .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Europe 2020 Strategy must be supported by the 2014-2020 financial framework .
Transport , energy and communications form the backbone of the European economy .
Investments in these areas will create jobs and ensure economic and social development .
The Union 's industrial policy is a key element of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
Industrial growth and job creation across the EU will ensure that the European Union is globally competitive .
In recent decades industrial production has relocated to third countries with low production costs , as a result of European companies being in hot pursuit of profits , and at the cost of job losses in the EU .
A strong cohesion policy , which is financed appropriately and covers every European region , must be a supplementary key element in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
This horizontal approach is a prerequisite for successfully achieving the targets proposed within the Europe 2020 framework , as well as for achieving social , economic and territorial cohesion .
One example of this is the EU Strategy for the Danube Region , which will contribute to its prosperity , economic and social development , as well as ensure security in the region .
Given that European citizens ' main concern is still linked to job security , I think that the Europe 2020 Strategy will only succeed if social Europe becomes a reality .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Europe 2020 Strategy is ambitious , particularly in the field of employment , and the implementation of the Employment Guidelines is a factor in its achievement .
Its objectives are fundamental , especially when it comes to enabling us to fund pensions and construct a European social model based on well-being .
The elements that could constitute the foundations of this social model have been brought into question by Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy 's proposals .
Indeed , the proposals contained in the competitiveness pact include the abolition of the automatic indexing of wages to inflation .
The argument is that such a move would increase competitiveness and consequently employment .
There is nothing to show that this will automatically be the case .
The abolition of automatic indexing could even cause , in certain circumstances , developments which increase inflation , something that nobody wants .
There are still many other means by which to strive to create employment , such as strategic investment or training in sectors of the future .
The indexing of pay and social benefits is an instrument which some countries have embraced in order to reduce the risk of poverty among workers , which is a growing phenomenon in Europe .
This provides an opportunity , therefore , to meet another objective of the Union for 2020 : 20 million fewer poor .
The Europe 2020 Strategy is revealing its true agenda .
The last European Council confirmed it .
It is driven by greater liberalisation ; moving the market into new areas ; labour market flexibility ; and unrivalled attacks on wages and social rights .
The instruments for implementing this agenda have been set out : so-called ' economic governance ' and the recent Franco-German ' competitiveness pact ' .
In practice , they want what the European Union and the International Monetary Fund are applying in various Member States under the umbrella of the ' assistance plans ' , as they are perversely known , with catastrophic consequences in economic and social terms , to be more widespread and imposed as a rule .
The implementation of the proposed measures conceals the real causes of the difficult economic and social situation in countries like Portugal .
Worse still , it would have particularly serious consequences for these countries and for the living conditions of their citizens .
We are facing an extremely serious threat to the rights of European workers and citizens , which is bordering on a revanchist crusade against employment and social rights .
It seeks to degrade these rights by attacking wages , raising the retirement age and removing restrictions on the free movement of workers within the EU .
This could lead to the devaluation of the EU labour force and even greater flexibility in terms of employment laws .
One year has passed since the new Europe 2020 Strategy was adopted , and the time has come to draw the first conclusions .
The strategy was greeted with some scepticism , which was reasonable considering the complete failure of the Lisbon Strategy .
Many commentators forecast that it too would remain nothing more than an empty document , full of goals that were as noble as they were unrealistic .
There can be no one among us who has forgotten the fundamental goal of the Lisbon Strategy , namely that by 2010 the Union would become the most competitive economy in the world .
Where are we now ?
The great economic crisis and budgetary crises in the euro area have forced the Union to fight for survival , rather than for a position as a global economic leader .
Is the Europe 2020 Strategy also doomed to failure ?
There is good reason to believe so .
Instead of thinking about how to create a knowledge- and innovation-based economy , or how to reduce social exclusion , we are discussing the extent to which funding will be limited in the Community budget .
It is becoming increasingly evident that there is a lack of political will actually to address the strategy proposed by the Commission .
It seems that once again the problem of a long-term vision for the Union 's development has been obscured by current problems .
In order to enable the Community to retain its place in the global economy , to compete not only with the US and China , but also Brazil and India , it has to set long-term goals for itself and work towards them consistently .
We already have a plan ; now we just need to ensure that it is implemented consistently .
in writing . - ( HU ) The Europe 2020 Strategy not only pointed beyond the Lisbon Strategy at the time of its formulation , but had to be expressly adjusted to the new period of crisis ; what is more , it now also has to reflect upon the period of economic governance and the rescue of the euro .
The new Member States must also make sure that they maintain sufficient freedom of movement and competitiveness in order to resolve the deepening structural and employment problems they have retained after the Eastern European changes of regime .
Wrong decisions and serious governmental negligence in the past also require us to pay attention to the situation of families : the labour market does not only consist of employers and employees , but also of multi-generation families maintaining more or less close relations .
These not only represent the foundation of society but also the key to its future .
Closer cooperation between generations could in itself give a considerable boost to employment ( e.g. employment of young mothers , support to people with disabilities in finding work , maintaining the activity of the elderly , even in the civil sector ) , and common planning ( e.g. housing situation ) could also help avoid individual and family debt crises and bankruptcies , which are sufficient to force families into the grey economy due to high repayment instalments .
This previous way is no longer feasible .
New approaches will also be required , as the old formulas are no longer sufficient , and the European Union , too , must come to realise this .
The EU must also support solutions which may seem unconventional at the moment .
in writing . - The Europe 2020 Strategy is one of the most important projects we 've created , yet , there is no guarantee of its success .
We should include gender equality in all targets , flagship initiatives and national reforms - and women should be considered in all policy areas .
The open method of coordination is a weak means to carry out common goals , therefore results will only come if there is real commitment !
The Europe 2020 Strategy 's employment targets call for an increase in women 's employment .
This , the reconciliation of work and family life and the elimination of gender stereotypes in the labour market are a must .
We need to involve more women in vocational training , the sciences and educational fields that have been until now considered as ' masculine ' .
We have to end the gender-based segregation of the labour market , especially when it comes to the new green jobs .
Fully including women to the labour market is a way to put an end to the demographic crisis .
If we provide secure and decent work , the means to reconcile work and family life and if we manage to include men more intensively in household duties , then all studies show that women would be more willing to bear children .
in writing . - The Euro 2020 Strategy is about economic growth and employment .
We must remember that a smart energy system is the future both in terms of the environment and these jobs .
Such a system would allow us to decouple economic growth from energy consumption .
If this will be the case , we will be able to produce more for the same or less energy consumption and create thousands of jobs which can not be outsourced .
We have to make sure that smart energy does not remain a dream .
We are building today a whole new energy infrastructure in Europe .
We have to ensure this lessens the divide between Western and Central Europe in terms of sustainable jobs .
A two-speed Europe on energy will not solve energy poverty or inefficiency .
We should give a helping hand to those regions which are behind , even if it is not easy in today 's economic realities .
We need a smart energy system for all European citizens at the same time .
We must prevent a piecemeal system where some citizens only see the future 50 years after the others .
Simply put , we need smart energy jobs for all Europeans , not just for those who would have received them even without Europe .
in writing . - Straight away after the entry of Latvia to the EU , the Latvian government decided that for the allocation of resources from EU funds it was enough to declare Latvia to be one region .
( Poland is divided into 16 regions ) .
As a result , one of the 4 regions of Latvia - Latgale - remains one of the most unprotected .
Application of funds in Latgale is many times less efficient than in Latvia as a whole .
This situation is reflected on the labour market of Latgale .
While the unemployment rate in the capital city of Latvia ( Riga ) is 8-9 % , in Latgale it is 20-25 % .
European employment programs are inaccessible to the population of such towns as Livani , Preili , Kraslava , Ludza , Aglona and Dagda .
Instead of solving the issue of organisation and stimulation of production in Latgale , the Latvian government is continuously increasing taxes , which leads to widespread bankruptcy of small and medium-sized companies .
To avoid social tension the inhabitants of Latgale are given LVL 100 per month as a sop .
The common policy of the Latvian government has resulted in the emigration of more than 150 000 workers .
I appeal to the European Commission for urgent intervention in the situation .
It is necessary to work out an Employment Framework for outlying regions of the EU such as Latgale .
The next item is the vote .
( For the results of the vote : see Minutes )
1 .
Falsified medicinal products (
2 .
Practical aspects regarding the revision of EU instruments to support SME finance in the next programming period (
3 .
Adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems (
4 .
2010 progress report on Croatia (
Mr President , in relation to the next two amendments , I am withdrawing our Amendment No 8 .


In return , as discussed with Mr Swoboda , the rapporteur , and his shadows , we have an oral amendment to Amendment 7 which reads , ' in order to address remaining shortcomings with regard to the domestic prosecution of war crimes ... ' the text would then continue with that in Amendment 7 by Mr Swoboda .

Voting time
The next item is the report by Marisa Matias , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2001 / 83 / EC as regards the prevention of the entry into the legal supply chain of medicinal products which are falsified in relation to their identity , history or source - C6-0513 / 2008 - .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Mr President , I support the compromise reached on the proposal for a directive because , despite some sticking points , I think it is a good text which protects patients from the great dangers arising from taking falsified medicinal products .
Over the years we have seen a huge increase in the number of these products , and the most recent estimates indicate that about one and a half million medicines are sold illegally in Europe , particularly via the Internet .
These data constitute a serious threat not only to patients but also to European producers .
At stake here are the protection of public health and the safeguarding of consumers , who must be given an assurance that strict safety measures and effective sanctions will be employed by Member States .
With today 's vote , effective and flexible rules will be introduced , and we will also fight against organised crime .
To understand the safety requirement affecting the sector , one need only think that , in 2008 , approximately 34 million illegal medicines were seized .
We could perhaps have been a little bolder with regard to the traceability of medicines and active ingredients from third countries .
Nevertheless , the step we have taken today is still important .
( IT ) Mr President , the Commission proposal on preventing the entry of falsified medicines into the supply chain highlights a concern that is becoming a priority for all Europeans : the quality and safety of the medicines we use every day .
It is therefore necessary to introduce a new European strategy to combat the rampant phenomenon of the spread of falsified medicines , with the dual purpose of being able to respond to this growing threat to public health and of being able to ensure the safety of all patients .
The latest reports on the subject have indeed recorded a truly sharp increase in seizures of falsified medicines by customs , as well as a growing , and therefore extremely dangerous , trend for falsifying not only ' lifestyle ' medicines but also life-saving medicines , including medicines to treat cancer , heart disease , psychiatric disorders and infections .
( IT ) Mr President , the number of falsified medicines seized along the border of the European Union in 2007 was 384 % higher than in 2005 .
We also saw an increase in the trend for falsifying even life-saving medicines , including medicines to treat cancer and heart disease , psychiatric disorders and infections .
These figures reflect an alarming scenario , in which patients are likely to encounter situations such as treatment failure , thus endangering their health and , in some cases , their lives .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal .
Mrs Matias 's report rightly points out , however , the negative aspects and points on which we are bound to reassure our citizens .
In particular , I would stress that the Commission 's proposal fails to provide exhaustive answers concerning the nature and characteristics of a falsified medicinal product , active ingredient or excipient , or any definitions of the various parties involved in the supply chain , whose roles and responsibilities should be clarified .
The sanctions in the Commission proposal are inadequate , but above all the proposal takes no account of the sale of medicines on the Internet , one of the main channels through which falsified medicines enter the European market .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the report by Mrs Matias since the entry of falsified medicinal products into the legal supply chain poses a threat to the entire European pharmaceutical system , as it undermines the confidence citizens have in the quality of medicines sold in pharmacies and other places of legal distribution .
It is important to curb the steadily growing phenomenon of falsified medicines in all European countries in order to protect and ensure the health of our citizens .
The active ingredients contained in a falsified medicine may in fact be sub-standard , completely absent , or present in an incorrect dose .

( IT ) Mr President , the official figures say it all : 1 % of the medicines sold legally in the European Union are falsified .
What is more , the latest surveys show that the phenomenon is steadily growing and that its proportions have now exceeded the warning stage .
As Mr Antoniozzi has already emphasised , the falsification of life-saving medicines is particularly profitable when those medicines are produced in India or China and then passed off as European products .
These substances pose an unprecedented risk , and they could threaten the lives of those who use them for therapeutic purposes .
I voted for the report to say No to cowboy sales via the Internet , the preferred channel for placing these poisons on to the European Union pharmaceutical market .
With the adoption of this document , Parliament will finally be able to make its voice heard , acquiring the means necessary to find and punish these people who are no better than drug dealers , unscrupulous criminals who have been getting rich for too long at the expense of sick people .
( IT ) Mr President , the problem of falsified medicinal products is one that is having an ever greater impact at international and EU level , in terms of the increased number of cases as well as the advances in the development of these products .
These are the challenges to which Mrs Matias 's report - the outcome of long and painstaking negotiations - sets out to respond .
The report , for which we expressed our support , has established a regulatory framework which , taking as its basis more precise and detailed definitions , took into account all the actors , stages and aspects of the pharmaceutical supply chain - safety , traceability and obligations of the distribution chain - in order to achieve a good compromise .
These are some of the issues on which we must try to work in order to achieve the main goal of establishing more stringent standards and to prevent the entry of falsified medicinal products , thus achieving a positive and more comprehensive regulatory framework that safeguards the health of citizens , protecting them from the risk of serious consequences .
( SK ) Mr President , according to estimates , about 1 % of the overall volume of medicines supplied to patients legally through the pharmacy network in the EU today are fake .
That percentage is constantly rising .
This is about people 's health .
Fake medicines may have effects other than those of the tablets prescribed by the doctor .
They may also be a risk to health .
Counterfeiting is a crime and must carry specific penalties .
The new legislation , which I support , introduces more safety elements , as well as penalties for counterfeiters .
It defines a monitoring system improving the identification of medicines , so that in future the flow of medicines can be traced all the way from the producer to the consumer .
The sale of medicines via the Internet is also included within the framework of the new rules .
This represents one of the most common ways for fake products to get onto EU markets .
( HU ) Mr President , I too gladly supported this report , because , as my fellow Members have mentioned several times , WHO estimates indicate that falsified medicinal products are circulated in large quantities in EU Member States .
Their number is continuously increasing , and we must therefore do everything in our power to prevent falsified medicines from entering the supply chain .
Even though this does not threaten the entire pharmaceutical industry , it still undermines people 's confidence in pharmacies , not to mention the fact that falsified medicinal products may contain sub-standard active ingredients .
Estimates indicate that the number of boxes of falsified medicines could reach 42 million by 2020 , exposing the European economy to significant risk .
The European pharmaceutical sector realises a total annual turnover of more than EUR 170 billion .
We must prevent unfair competition from foreign producers that place medicinal products on the market , the manufacturing process of which cannot be checked .
Furthermore , I believe it is important that we discuss matters such as the sale of medicinal products over the Internet .
Through virtual pharmacies , products which are clearly subject to medical prescription are available over the worldwide web .
Not to mention that this is the easiest way for counterfeiters to introduce their products into the supply chain .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the motion for a resolution on the progress of Croatia 's accession to the European Union within the framework of the enlargement process , because I attach great importance to starting this process and to the progress made by Croatia .
In essence , we hope that the enlargement will extend beyond Croatia and end up encompassing the whole of the Western Balkans .
This is one of the key points of Europe 's neighbourhood and enlargement policies .
My vote is therefore , without doubt , in favour of the Swoboda report .
( FR ) Mr President , we have been obliged to adopt a report today on the protection of patients from falsified medicines , partly because the market liberalism advocated by the European Commission has opened the door to the market in falsified products .
Deregulated competition leads to medicines being falsified for the benefit of companies .
The victims are consumers .
I voted for this report even though I am not entirely convinced that the definition of a falsified product is correct .
Furthermore , it is not entirely clear who should be punished when a falsified medicine is found .
However , it is an initial step in the right direction , and we shall see in a year 's time if our action was effective .
( IT ) Mr President , the resolution adopted today has established important principles for the protection of consumers , increasing safeguards against the spread of falsified medicinal products .
This is an extremely dangerous phenomenon , and one of the most significant remedies has been to stem the online sale of medicines of dubious origin .
Moreover , through the adoption of a number of guarantees , we will establish strict regulations that require permits and inspections .
This does not , however , mean that forms of health protection and medical prescriptions are cancelled out .
It must be remembered that the legislative power of Member States is unaffected in this respect and that they may retain or limit the ban on the online sales of drugs within their territory .
This is an opportunity for Member States to better regulate the matter , but we must remember , Mr President , that citizens can order medicines from another Member State and that this regulation should not be seen as another opportunity to benefit the pharmaceutical industry .
Instead we must continue to progress along the trail of liberalisation that the EU is currently blazing by adopting measures such as this .
- ( SK ) Mr President , we are debating a law on counterfeit medicines .
We know that , after weapons and drugs , the pharmaceutical industry makes the largest profits , and it is no accident therefore that criminals are focusing on counterfeit medicines , in order to deceive those of our fellow citizens who are patients .
Frequently a medicine that is supposed to treat cancer or the heart does not contain any of the effective ingredient , or only a small percentage of it , and this crime puts at risk the health and often even the life of the patient .
It is good that we have also adopted principles in this text , new principles , which tighten up the penalties for those who engage in criminal activity in this area , and I am pleased that Europe has taken a step in the right direction .
Sales on the Internet will be better monitored , of course , as well as sales through the standard supply system , which often sells fake medicines .
( IT ) Mr President , in recent years the number of falsified medicinal products has increased exponentially , and it is regrettable that , despite a 384 % increase in the sale of these products between 2005 and 2007 , the Commission has been so late in taking action .
We are absolutely convinced by the stance taken by the rapporteur , who has sought to improve the Commission 's text by also considering the sale of medicines via the Internet .
In recent years I have repeatedly questioned the Commission on this topic and highlighted the dangers involved , but no answers have ever been given or any concrete action taken .
Today we therefore welcome the rapporteur 's efforts to improve the text , and hope that from now on Europeans ' health will actually be a matter of primary concern to our institutions .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the report by Mrs Matias , as it is vitally important to increase safety standards and establish effective , efficient and tough rules to prevent falsified medicinal products from entering the European Union .
This is a requirement and a duty that we must fulfil on behalf of all European citizens , who are often unaware that they are buying a falsified medicine .
I agree with the thrust of the report , which introduces obligations to be met not only by distributors but also by all those involved in the supply chain .
Indeed , it is often in the intricacies of the various steps in the distribution chain that high-risk products are introduced .
Monitoring must not , however , only be carried out when products are placed on the market .
Rather , inspections should take place at the sites where medicinal products and active ingredients are produced , including in third countries .
I do have one concern , however , which I must voice : I would have preferred the regulation to have regulated matters more effectively , by harmonising the various national laws , including online sales , in order to fully protect European consumers .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for this report because the regulatory framework that emerges from it is much better than the one laid down by the 2001 Directive .
The latter placed the sole responsibility for compliance with wholesale distributors , thus failing to guarantee the reliability of the pharmaceutical supply chain in any way .
The report we voted on today introduced measures to further ensure the safety of pharmaceutical products such as , for example , the stepping up of inspections of manufacturers outside the European Union on the basis of a risk analysis .
The proposed amendment also includes the need to publish in an EU database a list of certified wholesale distributors , in other words distributors for which compliance with EU legislation has not been established through inspection by the Member State alone .
We could nevertheless have hoped for a more ambitious outcome .
I refer particularly to the introduction of mandatory inspections of active-ingredient production sites in third countries .
These were omitted on the grounds that implementation costs would have been too high .
If they had been introduced , we could have avoided the oft repeated situation of European companies having to meet very high quality standards , while companies that produce in other parts of the world benefit from regulatory frameworks that are undoubtedly less stringent .
I therefore hope that improvements can be made in the future .
( IT ) Mr President , more than 100 million workers depend directly or indirectly on small and medium-sized enterprises today in Europe .
Yet small and medium-sized enterprises are experiencing an unprecedented crisis : lack of liquidity , bureaucratic obstacles and constraints and administrative barriers .
Herein lies the crux of this motion for a resolution : Parliament is calling for credit and loan guarantee programmes for small and medium-sized enterprises and a vigorous European drive that is more than just a pipe dream to combat the new - and for many prohibitive - business-banking requirements , particularly with regard to higher collateral guarantees and risk premiums .
Lastly , I agree with the need to significantly increase funding within the framework of the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme , and to revive the issue of simplification with strength and determination : streamline and simplify , so that firms wishing to access funds are able do so without having to resort to very expensive outside consultants .
These are the reasons why I voted for this resolution : the SMEs and the 100 million European workers employed in the sector expect it of us .
( SK ) Mr President , of all the practical aspects relating to the revision of EU instruments supporting the funding of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , I would like to highlight in particular the problems of external funding .
It is clear that a large number of SMEs will continue to depend mainly on credit and loans .
It is disturbing that the banking sector is demanding ever greater securities and higher risk premiums , which reduces the chances of funding and of these businesses making use of entrepreneurial and job opportunities .
I therefore consider it necessary to strengthen individual programmes at the Member State level , and also to boost the resources of the EU and the European Investment Bank focused on innovative financial instruments .
It is necessary to support the further implementation of guarantee instruments in connection with revolving loans - and I would emphasise this - and the exploitation of financial instruments involving risk spreading , as well as the expansion of microfinancing institutions .
( PL ) Mr President , this is an important motion for a resolution on the mechanism of financial support for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Occasionally , we face criticism that on one hand we talk about the important role of this business sector - in manufacturing , in the creation of one third of the GDP in the European Union and in the creation of secure jobs - but without good instruments providing financial support to these companies .
Most of the EU funds for development and innovation go primarily to large companies due to their requirements .
This should be changed , since small and medium-sized enterprises are unable to meet the demands made of them .
The crisis has severely limited small and medium-sized enterprises ' access to credit and loans , and new regulations that are targeted at the banking sector may make matters even worse .
Let me mention here the Basel III package , which has already been approved , with regard to its precautionary standards .
I believe that access to funding for business development , particularly in the field of innovation , is especially important .
We emphasise the role of small and medium-sized enterprises , particularly as a group of ' sleeping innovators ' .
These small and medium-sized enterprises need to enter the European market on a wider scale .
This will help to revive the economy , create jobs and achieve the objectives established in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
( IT ) Mr President , it is necessary to evaluate and review existing instruments to support the financing of small and medium-sized enterprises in view of the next multiannual financial framework if we wish to focus on promoting the recovery of the real economy in this and other sectors in order to overcome the crisis once and for all .
This need is also imposed by the protection of small and medium-sized enterprises ' interests if - as Basel III proposes - higher equity capital requirements are established for banks .
It is also required by the situation of many financial intermediaries , who are deterred by the administrative burdens created by complex European financial regulations , and it is influenced by the difficulties created by different tax and support systems .
It is prompted by a requirement to make European Union support programmes consistent in order to provide better guarantees and a good balance between national and EU schemes .
I therefore support the proposal to establish a one-stop shop for the various EU financing instruments aimed at SMEs .
Simplifying bidding and procedures for access to markets is an important means of support even if it proves necessary to increase funding .
Massive sums have been spent to save careless banks : I feel that spending on 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises can only be an asset .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the motion for a resolution because I believe that we need a European strategy for SMEs which , as we all know , are the backbone of our economy and need support and help .
The next European Union financial programming cannot therefore ignore these considerations and must increase and diversify the resources available .
However , this is only one measure and inadequate at that : more are needed .
It is important to act with the aid of a long-term strategy to avoid stopgap or one-off measures - I refer to the new financial rules that the EU is preparing to implement .
We need to ensure that these new regulations do not make it tougher to lend to businesses - I am also referring to Basel III .
This is the real new challenge : to reconcile and regulate the banking system while preventing costs from being passed on to companies , citizens and SMEs .
We need growth to help rehabilitate and support the sector , putting our ideas into practice .
Mr President , I am happy to support this resolution , but of course one of the main problems faced by SMEs is access to credit .
This is a major impediment to job creation and indeed growth .
In countries undergoing severe austerity measures - like my own country , Ireland - this issue is particularly severe and I believe it needs to be dealt with immediately .
We need to act at EU level to ensure that banks are willing and able to finance SMEs .
Recapitalisation of banks is important , but recapitalised banks with the SME sector on its knees is a recipe for disaster .
My real fear is that we are going to end up with a highly capitalised banking system , while the real economy is on floor .
We all talk about growth , and that is the only way that many of the peripheral economies can climb out of the abyss that they are already in .
Yes , it is a balancing act , but we have a situation where the health of our financial institutions is improving day by day but SMEs still remain in intensive care .
( IT ) Mr President , demographic trends recorded in recent years lead us to consider the need to implement a strategy for fresh cohesion and coherence in the pensions field , to promote solidarity between generations and between people , while helping to ensure a safe and adequate income after retirement .
I agree with the rapporteur when she notes that there are major differences between pension systems in Europe .
They have been greatly affected by the severe financial and economic crisis with rising unemployment , declining growth , lower investment returns and growth in public debt .
Pension funds find it more difficult to ensure adequate pensions and , in some cases , to honour their commitments .
During the reform of their pension systems , many Member States have made swingeing cuts .
Financial sustainability is important , but we should also take into account the need to ensure an adequate income .
Budget sustainability and adequacy of pension systems are not conflicting goals but two sides of the same coin : true sustainability cannot be achieved without an adequate retirement income .
By virtue of my experience as Minister for Employment in Italy , Mr President , I can confirm that if there is no compliance by the Member States , it will be very difficult for individual States to adapt to this type of legislation .
( DA ) Mr President , not so long ago , the European Court of Justice ruled that Germany must have greater transparency with regard to its occupational pensions and that it must put these pensions out to public tender .
I had great expectations that this would be a ruling that would have a knock-on effect on other countries in Europe .
This , unfortunately , did not happen , and the Commission has not been willing to put pressure on other countries that tie their people to certain pensions .
Therefore , it is also important that the European Parliament has now determined that pension systems shall have an earning capacity for citizens .
There is to be transparency with regard to costs and returns and we must remove the barriers to mobility across borders .
All of these are good and sound liberal principles , but if we take this to its logical conclusion , people should also be able to move their pensions from one fund to another if the unemployment or pension fund that they have been assigned to by their trade union or employer does not do its job properly .
We did not achieve that much this time round , but we have nevertheless taken a step in the right direction today , and I think this is good for the internal market and for citizens ' chances of getting a decent return on their pensions .
( IT ) Mr President , given the pressure it exerts on budgets , efficiency in social spending currently plays a key role in the economic systems of Member States .
This has been illustrated in recent years , when we have seen a rise in unemployment , poverty and social exclusion , resulting in worsening budget deficits in many Member States , followed by pension funding problems .
I welcome the report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , which aims to provide new impetus at national and European Union level , helping to create solid pension systems that are adequate in the long term , sustainable and safe .
However , I take this opportunity to recall that we still lack a common set of criteria , definitions and an in-depth analysis which would thoroughly explain the various pension systems and their capacity to meet the needs of citizens .
I wonder how we can tackle such a sensitive issue in the absence of such a study .
I therefore call on the Commission to remedy this shortcoming by taking appropriate action to come up with a typology of pension systems in Member States as well as with a common set of definitions in order to make systems comparable .
( NL ) Mr President , I would just like to make a suggestion .
I notice that an awful lot of speakers have run way over their allotted speaking time , sometimes by as much as 30 seconds .
I would ask you to be stricter about ensuring adherence to the set speaking time .
You can , of course , be strict with me in this respect , as well .
Having concluded the vote so quickly , I thought I would be more flexible with fellow Members who have run over their allotted time .
If you ask me to be strict , I will be strict , but always in moderation of course .
( IT ) Mr President , I , on the contrary , appreciate your generosity , because during the discussions we never have an opportunity to go over one minute and this is therefore another chance to speak and debate , on the explanations of vote in this case , which after all go to the root of the reports that we vote on .
European pension systems are in an increasingly alarming state .
We must act now to ensure that men and women have equal opportunities , protecting those who decide to retire today and , at the same time , protecting those who are only now taking their first steps in the labour market .
In Europe , women still earn on average 18 % less than men .
The main effect of this wage disparity is apparent at retirement age : because they have earned less throughout their working lives , women also have lower pensions .
As a result , women are more affected than men by persistent poverty .
Especially in times of crisis , we need to include a gender perspective in all policies , adopting national measures that are agreed on and coordinated at European level .
( PL ) Mr President , the purpose of the Green Paper is to gather the views of the Member States on how to achieve the intended goal of adequate , stable and secure pensions , given that the report adopted by the Commission rightly concludes firstly that there is no reason to harmonise pension systems , and secondly that Member States should provide various forms for the development of future pensions , and above all that they should recognise a minimum pension in order to protect people from poverty .
Thirdly , Member States such as Poland which implemented a difficult pension reform , resulting in a deficit increase and public debt , should not be penalised by the excessive deficit procedure .
Fourthly , the pension system should encourage longer working lives , which is consistent with the trend in the labour market .
In my opinion , the conclusions are fully in line with the EU 's Europe 2020 economic strategy , and in particular with the employment strategy and the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for this resolution because I believe that the compromise reached with such difficulty within our committee is essentially positive , insofar as it is a tool to remind Member States to ensure that pensions are adequate , sustainable and portable throughout Europe , in the context of a significantly ageing population .
I would however like to make three criticisms , which I hope the European Commission will implement in the coming White Paper .
The first is the lack of recognition of the importance of the third pillar in pension systems .
Second , although the difference in retirement income between men and women resulting from the pay gap , breaks for periods of care and greater unemployment among women has been acknowledged , there are no flexibility criteria for women of retirement age who cease to be employed , and there is no adequate recognition of periods of care for the purpose of defining retirement age .
This would , however , be desirable .
Thirdly , European citizens ' right to a common programme of welfare education and information about their pension and insurance situation should be affirmed , in particular for young people and workers throughout the course of their working lives .
( FI ) Mr President , it is very important at European level to try to move towards adequate , sustainable and safe pension systems .
We obviously have to remember that there are 27 different Member States in the EU .
Their economic circumstances still vary in many respects , and pensions differ greatly in terms of size .
We basically have to ensure , however , that pension income is adequate in the different Member States .
I am mainly concerned about the pensions of those young people who work in the different countries , the different Member States of the European Union .
How can we make sure that pensions can be transferred more satisfactorily from one country to another , and not just from pension fund to pension fund , as there are big problems with those too ?
I would hope for flexibility in this .
In this we perhaps need Europeanwide coordination .
I know that the pensions debate will continue , as recently I read that in 2010 , for example , the life expectancy of children born in Finland is 100 years .
If we consider that 30 years are spent studying and 30 years are spent at work , then they will be on a pension for 40 years .
We will therefore definitely have to think about systems in a new way , so that this situation can be dealt with in a manner that is sustainable for everyone .
- ( SK ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report , even though the Green Paper drawn up by the European Commission has its shortcomings .
The 2020 Strategy presents a dream future to us .
The Green Paper launches a discussion on the actual future , but ignores reality .
One motif runs through the entire Green Paper : let old people work .
The authors of the Green Paper do not even try to look for a solution at the point where life begins .
They use the word ' woman ' only six times .
They use the word ' family ' three times and ' child ' only once .
I therefore think that the Commission should draw up its White Paper in a substantially more comprehensive way , emphasise the importance of motherhood and the informal work of women , listen to the Confederation of Families from all over Europe and incorporate a new imperative into all of its policies and strategies : family mainstreaming .
- ( SK ) Mr President , the differences between the various Member State pension systems are enormous , which results from the fact that this area belongs within , and should continue to belong within , the direct powers of the Member States .
Of course , a certain consultancy is essential , in my opinion , because the European Union and the Member States must look for a solution immediately to economic and demographic challenges such as , for example , forecasts that the ratio of inhabitants over 65 to the population of productive age will rise to 53 % in 2060 .
At the same time , there are only two workers to every pensioner .
In this context it is natural that average public expenditure on pensions and expenditure related to ageing will increase , and it will become ever more difficult to provide adequate pensions .
It is therefore necessary to encourage people to enter the labour market , increasing employment levels and economic growth .
The importance of the family is also not sufficiently emphasised , as my colleague Mrs Záborská has said .
Nobody talks about the need to have children to improve our pension system .
( BG ) I voted for this report , because I believe that the development of adequate and sustainable European pension systems is very important , especially when you consider the demographic processes which Europe is undergoing and that we have a continent , which continues to an increasingly ageing population and an increasing number of people will have to be supported on less and less .
I would also like to say that the changes , which I also support , and which involve the Commission setting up groups of experts to draft projects with which to help the national systems , should not extend their authority too much .
Pension policy is a policy of the Member States and the Commission must not exceed its authority , even though its advice will be useful in all cases .
( PL ) Mr President , we have adopted an extremely important report on pension systems in Europe .
We are in fact facing serious demographic challenges .
The birth rate is very low , life expectancy is increasing , and public spending is growing due to ageing societies .
Debates on raising the retirement age are being held in many countries .
The current economic and demographic situation forces us to give serious thought to this issue .
As I said , life expectancy is increasing .
We are working under better conditions , which allows us to work for longer .
Pension systems fall under the competence of the Member States .
However , the time has come for them to be coordinated at EU level , for example in relation to the functioning of the internal market and the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Expenditure on pensions and medical treatment significantly affects the state of public finances in the individual Member States .
We need to encourage people to extend their careers by means of improved working conditions and higher wages .
Mr President , I welcome this report .
Hopefully it will put the issue of pensions centre stage in EU matters .
I think the core issue is : how are Member States going to finance adequate pensions for their citizens ?
What systems will they put in place using some combination of the three pillars to ensure that their pension systems are sustainable ?
There is a yawning gap between current pension provision and what will be needed to provide pensions at current levels for the next 40 years .
Indeed , an estimate from a major insurance company states that the gap between what we are currently providing , both public and private , and what will be needed to ensure that pension provision remains at the same level in 40 years ' time for the EU 27 , is EUR 1.9 trillion per year .
That is a staggering figure and , while measures such as , perhaps , longer working lives or other initiatives will help to bridge that gap , there is still an enormous fiscal black hole .
I hope that this debate and the subsequent White Paper from the Commission will ensure that we begin to deal with this matter in a realistic way .
( GA ) Mr President , I was pleased to vote for this report , because I feel that it is more than time for us to discuss this issue in Parliament .
Without a doubt the pensions problem at this point is a ' bomb ready to explode ' , and it will be worse in the future .
But certain practices must be eliminated ; for example , in my own country , there will be politicians resigning now who will receive more on pension than if they continued working .
There is no sense whatever in that .
In addition , there are people on pension who are getting more on pension than they were getting twenty years ago when they had young children and a large mortgage .
These issues must be discussed , and in particular a huge reserve must be established to provide pensions in the future .
Mr President , we now see what is meant by European economic governance , by fiscal federalism .
Whatever else we say about the leaders of the EU , no-one can fault their lack of ambition .
We see here their sheer hunger for power .
Awesome .
Inexorable .
Rude and incontinent .
Not only are we talking about tax harmonisation , about a European debt union , about automatic fiscal transfers , but we are also talking about the harmonisation of pensions .
We are talking about the harmonisation of public sector salaries .
We are talking about the full machinery of single EU economic governance .
I am sure you can spot the logical flaw here .
This is being done as a result of the failure of monetary union .
European monetary union has not worked , so let us have European economic and fiscal union .
Closer integration has failed to deliver , so let us have more integration .
In the process , what we are doing is condemning the peoples of several of the Member States to preventable poverty and preventable emigration , in order to sustain our own conceit .
Mr President , it is quite clear that across the political spectrum we all want adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems .
If we confined ourselves to the idea of making sure that a worker in one State can move to another Member State and take their pension with them , that might be a valid idea to pursue .
We should , however , be careful about the different structures of pension systems in different Member States .
Some are more private-oriented and some are very much State-funded .
As we move towards more harmonised European pension systems , the concern I hear from my constituents is whether they will have to bail out underfunded or badly managed State pension funds in other countries , just as we have had to bail out badly managed countries and their national debt .
We talk about sustainable pensions , yet at the same time we bring about policies in this place such as the Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive , which will reduce the returns on savings and investments for tomorrow 's pensioners .
We must make sure we have a consistent message .
( DE ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the Oomen-Ruijten report and would like to emphasise two points .
Firstly , when we see that in some countries in Europe too many pensions are being paid out too early , but these countries are getting into difficulties and the others are having to bail them out , that is unfair .
This unfairness cannot , of course , be refinanced via the EU .
We need European coordination in this regard .
The second point that I am very pleased with in this report is the fact that it makes it very clear , according to the principle of subsidiarity , that the Member States themselves are responsible for pension provision .
That is indeed the case .
I therefore consider this report to be a step in the right direction in that , on the one hand , we in Europe are recognising that our citizens want more coordination in the social sphere because they feel unfairly treated and , on the other , we are making it clear where the main responsibility lies , namely with the Member States .
This report represents a step in this direction .
We will do everything possible to ensure that the White Paper continues to push ahead with this .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this proposal , though I want to remind everyone that pension policy , like social policy , is a national matter and the power of decision must also remain national .
Nevertheless , European cooperation is needed in cases where people who have been working in other EU countries and who then possibly return to their country of origin receive their pension from those countries where they have been working .
Today that is difficult and there are flaws in the system .
This is something that the Member States of the European Union should put right .
If there is free movement of labour , pensions must also always move from one country to another .
( ET ) I am very glad that we have dealt with this report and that we are adopting it today .
I voted for it as well .
I am glad that this report does not infringe on Member States , but that it takes into account the principle of subsidiarity : it provides guidelines rather than mandatory rules .
It is clear that the aim of the report is to give a new momentum to the consolidation of the pension system while keeping its sustainability in mind .
The report provides Member States with new ideas for dealing with their own pension systems in order to make them more satisfactory .
Several points in the report have been tackled positively , including mobility and transferability , retirement age , the framework for pension systems , and their relevance to the 2020 Strategy .
Another positive point is that the report stipulates the reviewal of European Union legislation .
I also supported the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Supervisory Office , because the economic crisis has shown us that there is a need for an institution such as this .
( IT ) Mr President , I visited Croatia several times in the early 1990s , during the war , precisely in order to take humanitarian aid , and this is one of the reasons why I care about Croatia 's entry into the European Union .

Croatia has done a lot : it has reformed the judiciary and public administration , it has combated corruption and organised crime , and it has protected minority rights .
I am convinced that Croatia 's accession will encourage the other Western Balkan countries to launch and implement new democratic and transparent reforms , and also an excellent neighbourhood policy .
However , there is still much to do in memory of the extensive ethnic cleansing campaign conducted against the Italian population between 1945 and 1948 by the militias of the Croatian authorities of the former Yugoslav communist regime .
During that campaign , more than 20 000 innocent victims were slaughtered .
On 10 February , the Day of Remembrance , Italy commemorates the Foibe Massacres and the Istrian and Dalmatian exiles in order not only to remember those who were brutally killed , but also to reaffirm the rights of those exiled , starting with rights to property confiscated during those years , and the right of repatriation .
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to return here to points I raised in some of the amendments tabled along with Bernd Posselt , which successfully passed through the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
First of all , I would like to repeat the hope that the accession negotiations with Croatia will be concluded in the first half of 2011 , as announced in the Hungarian Presidency 's programme .
From this perspective , it would be a symbolic act because it would take place 20 years after the declaration of independence from the former Yugoslav Republic .
On the other hand , concluding the negotiations in this manner would send out a very strong signal to the other candidate countries in the Balkans at a time when , as we are aware , the Union 's power of attraction seems to be waning .
Finally , I would like to highlight the Croatian authorities ' determination to combat corruption and organised crime .
This is an indication , as we have noticed on other occasions too , that corruption is not fatal if political will exists .
( NL ) Mr President , I have voted against this report , despite the fact that I am in favour of Croatia joining the European Union .
My problem with this report is that , even though it reads like one long list of the current corruption problems in Croatia , we still seem to be insisting that the negotiations be concluded in the next few months .
We should actually be learning from our past mistakes .
In 2007 , we admitted Romania and Bulgaria , even though we knew that they had not met the conditions and that corruption was a major problem .
Knowing , as we do , that there are still so many major problems , I think that it is totally inappropriate and unacceptable that we should now be pinned down to a specific date .

( PL ) Mr President , unlike Mr Claeys I gladly voted in favour of this report on enlargement and the conclusion of negotiations with Croatia .
This is a key objective of the Hungarian Presidency , which will also be a great success for Croatia and send out an important message to the other countries in the region hoping to join the European Union .
The few chapters that are left until negotiations can be concluded should be closed before the middle of the year .
The most important factor here is the political will demonstrated by Croatia , which has declared its determination to implement all the provisions and criteria for membership .
This political will also relates to the resolution of difficult relations with its neighbours .
All of the countries that have recently become EU members know that final negotiations are the toughest , because they include many provisions that apply to large social groups .
The example of the shipyards in Croatia is also a good example of this .
I wish Croatia much determination , and I would be very glad if the Treaty of Accession could be signed during the Polish Presidency .
( FR ) Mr President , Croatia is one of those states which should have joined the European Union a long time ago .
I voted for this report and I congratulate the rapporteur .
I would like to thank Commissioner Füle for having voiced the central concern of European integration policy : reciprocal loyalty .
Nevertheless , I regret that the section on freedom of religion was not examined in sufficient depth .
Croatia 's accession to the European Union does not signify the abandonment of the Croatian people 's long-standing traditions .
Religion is one of these and I would stress that , in future , respect must also be shown for aspect 's relating to the Croatian people 's freedom of religion .
This too is an example of reciprocal loyalty and richness of diversity , which should , in theory , characterise the European Union .
- ( SK ) Mr President , the accession talks with Croatia are entering the final phase .
Over the past year , Croatia has shown the will to continue with the necessary reforms , particularly with the adoption of substantial amendments and supplements to the constitution , but also with the harmonisation of legislation with the Community acquis , and I would like the Hungarian Presidency now to complete the accession talks with Croatia .
I applaud the significant progress achieved in the area of public administration , the economy and the judiciary , and I am pleased that Croatia is actively cooperating over the prosecution of war criminals .
On the other hand , widespread corruption remains a significant social and economic problem , which it is perhaps also necessary to resolve with the assistance of the EU , so that this negative feature is not then transferred into European structures , and I believe that in the popular vote , in the referendum in Croatia , the citizens will confirm the decision of the Croatian state to become a new Member State of the EU .
( PL ) Mr President , the integration of the Western Balkans into the European Union guarantees that the region will be stabilised and that its development will be accelerated .
The country farthest along in its efforts is Croatia .
Its progress in many areas is encouraging , including in the fight against corruption , yet at the same time further efforts are needed , including with regard to the independence of the judiciary and greater efficiency of the latter , the public administration reforms and competition policy .
We are encouraging Croatia to persist in its actions to defend the rights of minorities and to support returning refugees .
One of the problems which must be resolved by Croatia is improved cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
It should also adopt and accelerate the restructuring and privatisation plan for the shipyards which are experiencing difficulties .
The biggest challenge , however , may prove to be the scepticism of Croatian society towards accession to the EU .
I am pleased with the active role played by Croatia in regional cooperation and in improved cooperation with neighbouring countries , and with its efforts towards reconciliation in the region .
Mr President , I look forward to the accession of Croatia to the European Union , particularly as an Irish MEP .
Croatia and Ireland are very similar in terms of population - 4.5 million - and will have the exact same number of MEPs - 12 .
Also , at a time when many Eurosceptics are talking about the implosion and the disintegration of the European Union , it is rather paradoxical that countries are queuing up to join the European Union - Croatia being a case in point .
They are not joining willy-nilly : they are joining as a result of a very rigorous accession process and Croatia has made much progress in that regard .
Granted , there are problems , particularly regarding the judiciary , but I am sure in due course these matters will be dealt with .
Of course , no country is without its faults .
As Our Lord himself said : ' Let he who is without sin cast the first stone ' .
I look forward to Croatia joining the European Union and think it will be a very good member .
Mr President , the history of Croatia is in some ways the story of a series of political unions contracted by a ruling elite without the consent of the people : first the union with Hungary , then that with the Habsburg monarchy , then the short-lived Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes , and then of course the Yugoslav Federation .
So it is progress of a kind that at least the ordinary people of Croatia will have the final word over EU accession .
Under the current constitutional arrangements , a referendum must be held within 30 days of the contraction of the accession treaty .
I think there are real losses potentially to Croatia .
It is a country with an educated and industrious workforce that could do extremely well pricing itself into the market and exploiting the advantages of relatively cheap exports ; but I am a democrat , and of course , if the people of Croatia vote in favour of EU accession , if that is their considered will , then I will support their bid when it comes before this Chamber .
I just raise the question of why some of the existing Member States should not also consult their people on the issue of continued membership .
On a major constitutional issue of this sort , it seems quite proper that the existing politicians should not be allowed to make permanent derogations of sovereignty without first asking the permission of those they represent .
Our parliamentarians are not the owners of our freedoms .
They are their temporary and contingent custodians and , if they want to alienate power from Westminster , they should have the courtesy to ask our permission .
Mr President , when I discuss the issue of enlargement with my constituents , many of them raise concerns about some of the previous enlargements .
They worry about certain Member States that were let in which , they feel , had not addressed issues such as corruption and property rights .
I get many letters from constituents from Member States who joined many years ago , in particular the rights of property holders in Spain , as many of my constituents see their property rights undermined and often lose their life savings .
I get similar letters from people in Cyprus and from property-owners in Bulgaria .
Leaving that aside , let us look at the picture in Croatia at the moment .
The issues that people write to me about quite often are those of press freedom , corruption and property rights .
It is important that we do not just brush these under the carpet and say ' do not worry about it ; it will all be sorted out in due course ' .
These countries and new Member States which apply for membership of the EU need to reassure us over these concerns so that they are not problems we inherit when the EU enlarges and they do not cause problems for the citizens of existing EU Member States .
Mr President , I have spent some considerable time in Croatia and also taken pains to follow developments there .
Croatia is a country which is characterised by endemic bribery , corruption , crony capitalism and unexplained wealth amongst the political classes .
It lacks the basic infrastructure of a free society .
The rule of law , the rights of property and enforceable contracts are all seriously challenged in Croatia .
The judicial system is completely log-jammed , so the citizens and companies operating in Croatia cannot effectively appeal for justice .
The Croatian media are subject to censorship and intimidation .
If this country , Croatia , is considered a suitable country for joining the European Union , then heaven help all of us .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) In light of the alarming increase in falsified medicines , I am voting for this report .
The compromise reached in the series of trialogues during the Belgian Presidency demonstrated the importance of harmonising safety issues , especially as regards non-prescription medicines , and the conditions surrounding the removal and replacement of medicines by packagers , which will thus lead to increased transparency in the sector .
The implementation of penalties has also enhanced these measures , which are considered vital in the fight against falsified medicines in legal supply networks .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution , in which the European Parliament expresses its position on the directive on the prevention of the entry into the legal supply chain of medicinal products which are falsified .
We must take into account the concern expressed by EU citizens over the quality and safety of the medicinal products they are consuming . All the more so given that experts are observing alarming tendencies : a sharp increase in seizures of falsified medicines by customs ( an increase of up to 384 % since 2005 ) ; a trend towards the falsification of life-saving medicines , which can have fatal consequences ; counterfeit medicines are increasingly being found in legal supply chains .
EU citizens must be very careful when purchasing medicines online , because here the chances of acquiring falsified medicines increases by up to 50 % .
Patients need to be absolutely sure that the medicines they consume really are the medicines they expect them to be .
The EU must therefore react swiftly and constructively to the dangerous tendencies mentioned .
This directive is a first step towards ensuring that only high quality medicines are distributed in the EU .
To achieve this objective I feel that it is very important to establish strict controls and determine responsibility at all levels of manufacturing , distribution and sales .
Then EU citizens will feel safe when using genuinely high quality medicines .
I support the statement by Mrs Grossetête , who regretted that , ' we are not as demanding about medicines as we are about food ' .
Figures released by the WHO and also quoted in European studies are alarming .
Falsifying of medicines is steadily increasing : in 2008 alone , 34 million falsified medicines were seized in the EU , and that is without mentioning the online market for these products , in which it is estimated that 50-90 % of the medicinal products available are falsified .
We are talking about traffic not only in anabolic steroids , stimulants , diuretics and hormones , but also in medicines used to treat a number of dangerous illnesses , which in this case are sold freely and at a lower price , even though they require a prescription .
I believe that strict regulation to protect public health is essential not only in the legal pharmaceutical supply chain , through the implementation of devices to detect tampering with packages and to track active ingredients in order to establish the source , or through inspections of third-country production sites , but also on the Internet .
Provisions should also be laid down for online sales , including the introduction of an EU certification logo , a centralised database at national level listing all authorised retailers and severe penalties for traffickers in illegal products .
Falsified medicines are a global danger .
Representatives of the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) warn that falsified products are far from containing the active ingredients mentioned in the package leaflet .
On the contrary , they are based on substances which are highly toxic for the body .
I think that European citizens should be informed at both European and national level about the risks posed to their health by products ordered from various uncontrolled websites or from the illegal supply chain , given that the Internet is one of the main routes by which falsified medicines enter the EU market .
I support the new legislative proposal because it will update the regulations in force and introduce safety features which will guarantee the identification , authentication and traceability of medicines from the factory to the consumer .
This is the reason why I voted for this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this important document .
The report presented by the Commission notes that seizures of falsified medicines are increasing , and that life-saving medicines intended to treat cancer and heart disease are being falsified .
Falsified medicines are also increasingly finding their way into the licensed distribution chain .
This poses a major threat to the health of EU citizens .
Falsifying of medicinal products must be viewed as a criminal act that denies patients the necessary medical treatment and is harmful to their health , sometimes even leading to their death .
Therefore the objective of the directive should be the protection of public health , ensuring a high level of quality control of the import of medicinal products , since this is one of the key entry doors of falsified medicines to the European market .
Furthermore , it is crucial to create an inspections system and an efficient falsification detection system .
I believe that it is essential to properly regulate and control the sale of medicines on the Internet , because this is one of the main routes for falsified medicinal products to enter the European market .
I voted for this report as European citizens are becoming increasingly concerned about the quality and safety of medicines .
Patients must be absolutely certain that the medicines they are taking are actually the medicines they expect to take .
The use of falsified medicines may cause the treatment to fail and jeopardise lives .
I think , as the rapporteur also does , that falsifying medicines is a criminal act which deprives patients of the medical treatment they require and harms their health , even resulting in death in some cases .
For this reason , the directive 's first and most important objective should be to protect public health against falsified medicines .
The level of public awareness also needs to be raised about the risks of buying medicines via the Internet .
We must guarantee patients that they can recognise websites which comply with the relevant legislation .
A directive intended to combat the falsification of medicines without targeting the Internet , which is the largest distribution channel , cannot be justified to the public .
Now that population ageing is the long-term demographic trend throughout our European continent , it is certain that expenditure on medicines will increase further in our countries .
While , on the one hand , we must gauge the impact of this and reflect on consumption , it is also essential to fight against the increasing falsification of medicines .
Leaving aside the detrimental financial impact on European research , this is an urgent public health issue for Europe today .
The European Parliament was right to take things in hand .
The report in question on the prevention of the entry into the supply chain of medicinal products which are falsified highlights an important element of concern for the European public , namely the quality and safety of the medicines they use .
Therefore , I welcome the provisions that will make it possible to combat the phenomenon of falsified medicines and which represent a necessary step towards responding to this rising public health threat and ensuring patients ' safety .
After some six months of negotiations , the agreement reached between Parliament and the Council is certainly an improvement on the existing regulatory system .
More specifically , it regulates the sale of medicines over the Internet , which is one of the main channels through which falsified medicines enter the EU market .
In fact , in order to operate , online pharmacies in Member States must obtain special permits to supply products to the public over the Internet .
Lastly , because I believe that the falsification of medicines should not be viewed as a minor offence - we need only think of the implications of falsifying life-saving drugs - but rather as criminal activity that endangers human lives , I fully support the strengthening of sanctions .
Health is the most important asset in everyone 's life .
The commercial availability of a variety of falsified medicines , especially life-saving medicines , has therefore rightly aroused the fears of citizens .
The vast and steadily growing number of counterfeit products seized in the EU every year may be reason for concern .
It is therefore necessary for us to respond decisively to this phenomenon , which is nothing other than organised criminal activity .
Patients must be absolutely sure that the medicines they take are authentic .
This is why I support the rapporteur 's position that protection against counterfeit drugs should be the overriding aim of the directive , from which we must not be diverted .
I fully agree too with the proposal to include the online distribution of drugs in the directive .
In such cases patients are mainly reliant on themselves , and their medical knowledge does not necessarily enable them to identify a fake product .
The rules must be clear when it comes to such an important issue as health .
We should eliminate any risks .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report because we must take into account a concern which is getting higher and higher on the agenda of the European citizens : the quality and safety of the medicinal products they are consuming .
There is data indicating a sharp increase in seizures of falsified medicines by customs .
For instance , 2.7 million medicinal products were confiscated at EU custom borders in 2006 and 2.5 million in 2007 , hence seizures of medicines are up 384 % compared to 2005 .
The report observes a trend from the falsification of ' lifestyle ' medicines to life-saving medicines , including medicines to treat cancer and heart disease , psychiatric disorders and infections .
Treatment with such falsified medicines can have fatal consequences .
Furthermore , there is a trend towards targeting the classical supply chain .
Besides the Internet , the licensed distribution chain is increasingly targeted .
Out of the 13 Member States that had data , seven reported incidences of counterfeit medicinal products in the legal supply chain .
Patients need to be absolutely sure that the medicines they consume really are the medicines they expect them to be .
The use of falsified medicines can result in therapeutic failure and can put lives at risk .
I therefore believe that the protection of public health against falsified medicines should be the main focus of the directive .
This focus should not be troubled by other additional objectives .
The counterfeiting of medicines has become a profitable business , with minimal risk of accountability before the law .
This situation is highlighted by the fact that , in 2008 alone , the customs authorities announced that more than 34 million counterfeit medicinal products were confiscated in Europe .
Admittedly , the EU has not yet reached the situation of other geographical areas where up to 30 % of the medicines available on the market are counterfeit .
However , the EU must not allow this situation to be reached .
It is currently estimated that 1 % of medicinal products sold are counterfeit , but there are warnings indicating that this proportion is on the rise .
The new safety regulations adopted by Parliament , the penalties imposed on the manufacturers of counterfeit medicines and the control system between manufacturers and consumers are intended to halt the growth of the pharmaceutical black market in the EU .
Therefore , the introduction of new , mandatory safety regulations governing the trading of medicinal products , including those sold via the Internet , is a welcome step .
Selling counterfeit medicines is a criminal activity with serious repercussions which can affect a huge number of consumers who very often choose the easy route of the Internet to order medicines which they would otherwise not be able to access without a medical recommendation .
The number of falsified medicinal products is rising sharply in all European countries .
This is confirmed by recent findings indicating that 1.5 million falsified boxes are sold each year in Europe by the legal pharmaceutical supply chain .
New estimates also suggest a worrying increase in this phenomenon , which also includes online medicine sales and , even more seriously , increasingly involves novel ' life-saving ' drugs .
A new European strategy must therefore be implemented as soon as possible so as to combat this phenomenon and to better protect public health and European consumers .
I therefore voted in favour of this report , because I think it has the merit of having achieved a good compromise , the main aim of which is to protect patients so that they do not take falsified medicines .
We must act as a matter of urgency in response to the alarming increase in medicinal products which are falsified in relation to their identity , history or source .
These products normally contain low-quality or falsified substances , representing a serious threat to public health , and also leading to a loss of patient trust in the legal supply chain .
The verification requirements pharmaceutical manufacturers are subject to should be stepped up in order to avoid these risks .
Safety features for medicines should also be harmonised within the EU , and should enable each individual pack to be identified and its authenticity verified .
They should also identify any falsified products , while ensuring the functioning of the internal market for medicines .
The risk-assessment process should take account of criteria such as the cost of medicines and the history of falsified medicines in the EU and in third countries , as well as the effects these falsified products have on public health , in terms of the specific nature of the products in question and of the severity of the conditions they are intended to treat .
The safety features should enable the verification of every pack of medicine that is supplied , regardless of the method of supply used , including those available via distance-selling channels .
The marketing of falsified medicinal products has increased public health risks over recent years .
There are worrying data that , apart from the Internet , more and more falsified medicinal products are entering the legal supply chain .
I voted in favour of the Matias report because :
1 .
It puts patient protection at the heart of the legislative proposal , by adopting measures to provide access to a high standard of safe and appropriate treatment and information .
2 .
It includes and regulates online sales of medicinal products , which were missing from the Commission proposal , despite the fact that over 50 % of medicinal products purchased online are falsified .
3 .
It establishes safety features for prescription and non-prescription ( black-listed ) medicinal products , in the aim of preventing falsified medicinal products from entering the legal supply chain .
4 .
It demands full traceability of medicinal products and , at the same time , establishes an early warning system in all the Member States , so that medicinal products which are suspected of being dangerous can be withdrawn .
5 .
It sees falsification of medicinal products as an organised criminal activity and imposes strict penalties on the offenders .
6 .
Exports of medicinal products from the EU to third countries must satisfy the same safety criteria as those which apply to imports .
The falsification of medicines is an organised crime that endangers peoples ' lives just like narcotics trafficking .
Nevertheless , this type of crime is neither regulated in the same way nor subject to the same level of penalties as narcotics-related crimes .
Illegally producing medicines by copying , or quite simply omitting , their active ingredients does not require large-scale facilities or investment .
It is easy to make a large profit .
Estimated figures have revealed that proceeds from the sale of falsified medicines in 2010 exceeded EUR 50.6 million , which therefore represents a 95 % increase as compared to the estimated figures five years ago .
This increase is largely due to the lack of detailed legislation in some countries because of either a lack of resources or the unwillingness to implement it , and to the fact that the level of penalty set out does not have a truly deterrent effect .
I support the compromise reached by the rapporteur : it is balanced and its primary objective is to protect patients .
This is a step in the right direction , even though it excludes important issues such as , for example , the fact that generic medicines and non-prescription medicines are not covered by the implementation of safety features .
in writing . - ( RO ) Given the ever-growing risks to patients from counterfeit medicines , I think that interim measures to strengthen patient safety need to be introduced urgently .
These measures must stipulate that manufacturing authorisation holders who remove or cover up overt safety features applied on a voluntary basis by manufacturers be held strictly liable in the event of counterfeits entering the supply chain as a result of their actions .
I voted in favour of this report , as it aims to combat at EU level falsified medicines within the legal supply chain without hampering the functioning of the internal market in medicines .
It aims to do so , for example , by introducing obligations for operators in the distribution chain , by prohibiting those operators situated between the original manufacturer and the final operator in the distribution chain ( generally the pharmacist ) or the end user ( doctor / patient ) from manipulating ( that is removing , modifying or covering ) the safety features on the packaging , and by establishing stricter criteria governing the importation of active pharmaceutical ingredients from third countries and product inspections .
in writing . - The quality of medicinal products is crucial to ensure safety , and to give peace of mind to consumers .
It is clear that there is a rising threat to the health of our constituents as a result of these products flooding the market , especially with falsifications becoming more sophisticated year on year .
This is a public health crisis on a global scale .
It is currently estimated that perhaps 15 % of the global medicine supply is counterfeit , while it is estimated that in some developing countries over 30 % of medicines on sale may be counterfeit .
The public needs to be 100 % sure that the products they consume are safe and fit for purpose .
The use of falsified medicines can have a serious detrimental impact on a patient 's health , in some cases leading to death .
It is clear that a comprehensive strategy on tackling this issue is vital , both at national and international level , in order to ensure that high standards of public health and safety are maintained .
I voted in favour of the report on falsified medicinal products , which includes measures for combatting the alarming rise in falsified medicinal products in the EU , such as safety features for verifying the authenticity of the product throughout the supply chain , with a view to patient safety and protecting public health .
I am delighted that the European Parliament has decided to enforce these safety features not only on the conventional supply chain but also on sales via the Internet , which is the main gateway for falsified products .
I also welcome the fact that the European Parliament advocates the need for controls on medicines entering and leaving the EU and plans to implement heavy penalties , as these crimes are endangering lives .
I believe that consumer safety is a matter of vital importance , particularly when the consumers involved are also patients who are seeking a cure from the medicines they take , or at least a significant improvement in their health .
Consumer safety is of even greater importance when it aims to safeguard the authenticity of medicinal products sold on the open market , whether through traditional channels or over the Internet .
For this very reason , I consider it vital that very clear regulations be adopted on the falsification of medicinal products , as this is a growing phenomenon throughout Europe and the rest of the world which has devastating effects on consumer confidence , on companies and , even more importantly , on the health of those who take these falsified medicines .
I therefore support this report and would congratulate Mrs Matias on the work she has carried out and on all the compromises that she has negotiated .
in writing . - ( PT ) The clandestine trade in medicinal products has already been compared with the illegal trade in weapons of war and drug trafficking .
It is a scourge that affects millions of people around the world , and which is a nightmare for those whose duty it is to look after public health : someone who is ill , often with chronic or terminal diseases could take something that is harmless and has no effect , or even take something that could even be harmful .
We know that there are increasing amounts of counterfeit or falsified medicinal products in circulation , with the figures running into the millions .
It is essential that we fight organised crime and cross-border traffickers and put an end to parallel marketing circuits , for example on the Internet .
I therefore welcome the adoption of tamper-evident packaging and the creation of an early warning system .
I welcome the adoption of this directive of Parliament and the Council which , by tracking the entire product cycle , will prevent falsified and / or counterfeit medicinal products from being brought into the European Union and will reinforce the protection of public health by improving the quality and safety of the medicinal products consumed .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , my compatriot , Mrs Matias , on the work she has done .
in writing . - ( PT ) This is a problem with serious effects on public health and on the economies of the Member States .
The falsification of medicinal products and the alarming quantities entering the legal supply chain are worrying issues that need to be duly addressed and combated .
It should not be forgotten that medicinal products are only falsified and sold illegally because there are economic reasons that encourage this phenomenon , as the existence of generic medicinal products at prices that people can afford makes falsification less profitable .
The report tackles the relevant issue of sales via the Internet , which is part of the legal supply chain .
It refers to the importance of raising public awareness to the risks associated with purchasing medicinal products in this manner .
We would highlight the importance of strengthening cooperation and coordination between competent national authorities , the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) and other international bodies , with a view to exchanging information , enabling increased knowledge and understanding of the phenomenon and , in this way , improving the fight .
It should be remembered that such cooperation must also work in other areas , such as pharmacovigilance .
Greater transparency is demanded from existing European structures , such as the EMA , with regard to the studies they carry out and their operations .
We believe that the compromise reached is a positive step in the essential fight against this problem .
The quality and safety of the medical products being sold to the people of Ireland is a matter of great concern .
I welcome this proposal , which aims to curb falsified medical products .
This is an important and necessary measure .
We voted for the Matias report on falsified medicines .
This is indeed a public health and safety issue in a Europe without borders where the worst counterfeit or simply poor-quality rubbish can circulate freely .
However , there is no guarantee that , in matters of health , medicine or pharmacovigilance , the European Union is best placed to resolve any problems that may arise .
It may even be the cause of them , for example with the 2004 Directive on traditional herbal medicinal products , coupled with the 2006 Regulation on health claims .
The former includes the requirement for products to be registered with the European Medicines Agency , a procedure so complex and so costly that only 200 herbal medicinal products had been registered by the end of 2010 .
The other gives the European Food Safety Authority the power to authorise or not health claims for food supplements , including plants , an authorisation which it gives so rarely and refuses on such arbitrary grounds that it has even upset the Commission .
The upshot is that European legislation will end up favouring chemical medicines and pharmaceutical laboratories .
Is there a desire to eradicate the natural medicines sector ?
Who or what will benefit from this ?
Not necessarily the health of the people of Europe .
Falsified medicines now account for 10 % of pharmaceutical products sold worldwide , and Europe is by no means safe from this scourge , which is , moreover , developing in a worrying fashion .
I am therefore pleased that this text has been approved by Parliament , since we MEPs have fought to improve the European Commission 's initial proposal in which the competitiveness of the pharmaceutical industries took precedence over the health and safety of the European people .
Thus this new text also takes account of online sales of medicines , which are to be better regulated and controlled , for the good of all .
I agree with the Matias report 's assertion that patients must have absolute certainty as to the quality of the medicines they take .
From studies it is clear that the use of falsified medicines is so dangerous for patients that it puts lives at risk : it is therefore right to consider falsification to be a criminal act warranting the adoption of a strong stance by the European Union .
Hence my support for the points contained in the report , namely : that there should be clear definitions relating not only to the scope , but also to the different actors in the supply chain , in order to clarify their roles and responsibilities ; that sanctions should be equivalent to those applied for illegal acts involving narcotics ; and that there should be enhanced transparency and regulation of medicine sales on the Internet , thereby enabling consumers to distinguish between illegal operators and online pharmacies .
Today , more than ever , active collaboration between different national and international agencies is emerging as a key factor in a more effective system to combat pharmaceutical falsification .
Such a system can ensure appropriate monitoring not only of pharmaceutical falsification within the European Union but also of falsified medicines exported to third countries , the numbers of which continue to increase .
The guiding principle should be patient welfare in all cases .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report because we must take into account a concern which is getting higher and higher on the agenda of European citizens : the quality and safety of the medicinal products they are consuming .
It is estimated that 1 % of medicinal products currently sold to the European public through the legal supply chain are fake .
In other parts of the world more than 30 % of the medicines on sale can be fake .
More and more innovative and life-saving drugs are counterfeit .
It is well known that the Internet represents one of the main routes for falsified medicinal products to enter the European market .
Medicinal products purchased over the Internet from sites that conceal their actual physical address are estimated to be falsified in more than 50 % of cases .
People looking for cheaper medicines on the Internet are often hooked in by fraudsters selling counterfeit medicines with ingredients that pose a health risk .
A lot of fake medicine is getting into the legal supply chain during repackaging .
For too long we have lacked a proper response to dishonest repackagers and fraudsters rampant in the vastness of the Internet , while an ever increasing number of people buying medicines from untrustworthy websites have begun to put their health or even their lives at risk .
I am pleased that penalties for counterfeiters have been set , along with measures to ensure a more stringent review .
Registered pharmacies in countries where the sale of medicines over the Internet is permitted must obtain a special licence ; their websites must carry the European logo and be included in the European database .
Patients need to be absolutely sure that the medicines they consume really are the medicines they need to take .
The protection of public health against falsified medicines should be the main focus .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am very pleased that Parliament and the Council were able to agree on a compromise with regard to the problem of falsified medicinal products .
This is particularly important because the falsification of medicinal products has now become a very serious problem , which has widened to include life-saving preparations .
With the measures that have been adopted we have taken an important step in the right direction , without excessive bureaucracy .
First and foremost , new safety features are to be applied to the packaging and the monitoring of distribution channels is to be improved .
In this way , we will achieve greater safety for patients - which , in view of the extent of the falsification of medicinal products , was urgently needed - without imposing excessive burdens on the parties involved .
We take medicines to relieve pain , to alleviate the symptoms of diseases or to save our lives .
It happens frequently that we spend significant sums on them , which in many instances account for the majority of our income .
This is why dishonest people , devoid of moral principles , counterfeit medicinal products .
Unfortunately , it is sometimes the case that a patient dies as a result of taking these medicines .
It is therefore necessary to step up precautions with regard to imports of drugs from third countries , to limit the sale of medicines over the Internet to a minimum , to initiate a campaign to raise patients ' awareness of the risks of taking non-certified counterfeit medicines and a campaign that ensures that those buying medicines are aware that counterfeit medicinal products are in circulation .
I agree with the rapporteur that copyright protection is not a priority here .
The most important aspect is human health and life , and it is our duty to do everything in our power to protect them .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the directive on combating falsified medicines .
In light of the number of counterfeit medicines confiscated in the European Union ( more than 34 million counterfeit pills were confiscated in 2008 ) , it is high time for the European Union to set up an effective traceability system to guarantee the origin and the quality of medicines available in the European Union .
This is all the more necessary given that counterfeit medicines pose a real risk to European 's health in view of the substances - toxic substances at times - that they may contain .
The new measures introduced , that is , electronic serial numbers on the packaging of prescription medicines allowing them to be traced from the factory to the patient ; limitation on handling during repackaging stages ; and strengthening of inspections of manufacturers and wholesalers , represent a concrete step forward that will guarantee the people and patients of Europe a greater level of safety .
Finally , I should like to point to the progress made in this text in relation to online medicine sales .
Given that an estimated 50 % of medicines purchased on the Internet are counterfeit , this text establishes a common logo to allow for the identification of legal online pharmacies .
Nonetheless , it is up to the people of Europe to exercise vigilance when making purchases of this nature online .
in writing . - ( RO ) Falsified medicinal products pose a real threat to the entire pharmaceutical system in Europe since , apart from the danger patients are exposed to by taking such products , this results in a decline in the general public 's confidence in the quality of the medicinal products available in pharmacies .
The number of falsified medicinal products is rising extremely rapidly in the EU .
They may contain inferior or falsified ingredients , or they may not contain any at all or their doses may be incorrect .
Although the scale of this problem is still relatively minor in Europe , unlike in other regions , I voted for this report as I think that there are a number of factors indicating the need for measures to be adopted promptly at EU level .
The new directive will include penalties imposed on the manufacturers of counterfeit medicines , enhanced safety regulations and a verification system whose aim is to prevent dangerous medicinal products reaching the European market .
One encouraging aspect is that the European Parliament has successfully added to the European Commission 's proposal the regulation of the sale of these products via the Internet , which is the main channel for introducing counterfeit medicines into the EU market .
In today 's vote I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Matias on falsified medicinal products .
I believe that the document adopted today will reduce the growing problem of counterfeit medicines and introduce a well-functioning system for monitoring the European market , from the manufacturer to the patient .
I am convinced that coordination between the various national and international bodies is necessary , and we are taking a step forward towards strengthening this cooperation by approving the report .
I believe that the problem of counterfeit medicines in Europe is a serious one and the European Parliament , by adopting the report , is sending out a clear message to the Commission that only effective cooperation and the effective enforcement of sanctions will make it possible to reduce this practice . Thank you .
in writing . - Counterfeit medicines are already widespread in the developing world where 20-30 % of medicines on the market are fake .
They are now being found increasingly in the EU .
Around 1 % of medicines sold in Europe are estimated counterfeit .
This new agreement , which I welcome , will introduce mandatory safety features , such as seals and serial numbers for prescription medicines .
This will allow for their traceability .
Generics will not be included in the requirements unless a certain product is at exceptional risk of being counterfeited .
The draft report does a good job of continuing the work carried out in the previous parliamentary term .
The Commission proposal avoids giving specific definitions , despite the many recommendations .
This kind of approach may lead to incomplete or unenforceable protection for patients who are consumers of medicinal products .
That is why I welcome Amendment 120 , which makes the Commission 's proposal much less ambiguous .
Particularly useful is the definition of a ' falsified medicinal product ' .
The proposed text regarding ' supply chains ' is also excellent , and if approved would strengthen the right of patients to protection .
I consider the implementation of Recital 5c of Amendment 120 , enabling the enforcement and monitoring of compliance with EU rules , to be imperative .
The amendment brings EU regulations into line with the findings of the Court of Justice .
In this context , the proposed text also allows Member States to take their own action in support of greater consumer protection .
Parliament 's amendments do not call for the safety systems to be extended to over-the-counter medicines .
Nevertheless , our fellow citizens purchase larger numbers of these medicines .
Their health is therefore at risk .
Nor do they call for the obligation for the European Medicines Agency to exercise total transparency with regard to its research and to the collusion between its officials and the pharmaceutical companies .
This , however , is necessary .
The scandalous case of benfluorex , known by the name of Mediator in France , is proof positive of this .
However , the amendments tabled are along the right lines , particularly those concerning the public authentication of Internet sites and sanctions .
I am therefore voting for this report .
Since this is a very serious problem that puts public health in the EU at risk , I believe the implementation of new rules is key to protecting patients from falsified medicinal products .
That is why , on 23 April 2010 , I asked the European Commission a question about a joint operation involving the 27 Member States , called ' Medi-Fake ' , which at the time had confiscated 34 million counterfeit tablets in only two months .
For this reason , I have always supported severe measures to combat this situation , as a way of closing down a trade that represents EUR 45 billion of profit to some criminal networks .
That is why I voted as I did .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have voted in favour of the legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2001 / 83 / EC as regards the prevention of the entry into the legal supply chain of medicinal products which are falsified in relation to their identity , history or source , as I consider that it positively strengthens the measures against counterfeit medicines and their distribution and , therefore , improves the protection of citizens .
Furthermore , I think it is very positive that Parliament 's position reinforces the transparency and the right to information as a means to prevent this illegal activity .
I consider it important that it focuses on the improvement of preventative measures in regard to the supply of counterfeit medicines through the Internet .
I support stepping up the legal fight against the distribution of those medicines via the Internet since the majority of cases of counterfeit medicines entering the European market occur in this way .
I have voted in favour of the text as the amendments considerably improve the text put forward by the Commission as they strengthen control measures , increase transparency , improve access to information and , therefore , enable improved protection for citizens .
President Jacques Chirac said that the most intolerable inequality is inequality in health .
That is why I voted in favour of this report , which focuses on health and therefore the protection of consumers .
Falsified medicinal products are a scourge that has long been ignored .
While developing countries are an obvious target , because the cost of legal medicines is often beyond the reach of the majority and the controls are scarcely effective if not indeed non-existent , we are also seeing more and more falsified medicines entering the EU , particularly via the Internet .
This is a growing threat to public health and to safety in general , and it exists throughout the world .
The EU must remain vigilant and energetically pursue a purposeful policy against this unacceptable corruption .
At present , it is difficult to put a figure on its economic implications , as production has become more industrialised .
This is a moral and ethical problem that undermines the credibility and efficacy of health systems .
For this reason , the fight against falsified medicines should appeal to the conscience of political leaders around the world .
in writing . - I completely support the report of Marisa Matias .
However , I consider the measures featured in the report to be insufficient .
It is necessary to work out and make obligatory for all EU Member States a package of measures covering responsibility for distribution , assistance , production and realisation of counterfeit medicines .
Measures should include forfeiture of licence from suppliers and distributors of counterfeit medicine , maximum fines and criminal responsibility for all people related to illegal activity in the area of medicine trading .
The responsibility of the guilty should be no less than if they were drug dealers .
Only in that way we can stop the distribution of counterfeit products and eradicate the black market in medicines .
in writing . - ( DE ) People 's health is the greatest asset of our society and we should use appropriate means to promote and maintain it .
The increased occurrence of falsified medicinal products is exposing more and more patients , including in Europe , to incalculable risks that could even result in them paying with their lives .
However , I have voted against the report because the proposed measures , particularly the import controls , do not , in my opinion , go far enough .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution because the counterfeiting of medicinal products is a significant problem throughout the EU , and we therefore need to take radical measures to ensure that counterfeit medicines , which could have adverse effects on human health or even life , do not enter the market .
We must ensure that only safe and effective medicines reach consumers , and we must stop criminal gangs profiting from counterfeit medicines .
We must make every effort to ensure that a strict labelling system for prescription medicines is in force in the EU , including safety labels that establish the manufacturer and supplier .
I feel that there should be harsher penalties for medicine counterfeiters , and the control mechanism must operate effectively across the whole of the EU , including every link in the medicine supply chain .
Particular attention and safety measures must be devoted to the sale of medicines on the Internet , establishing strict licensing , monitoring and control systems .
Every Member State must take all the measures necessary to ensure the effective functioning of a system that warns the public about dangerous counterfeit or low quality medicines and even creates opportunities to remove such medicines from the market .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report is based on a Commission proposal aimed at preventing the introduction of falsified medicinal products to the supply chain , drawing attention to an issue that is of increasing concern to Europeans : the quality and safety of the medicinal products that they use .
We should highlight the positive effect of this proposal , which promotes debate on a crucial subject , with the ultimate aim of combating falsified medicinal products .
In fact , the falsification of medicinal products is a crime that deprives the patients of the medical treatment that they need and damages their health , possibly even causing death .
The main objective of the directive , as the rapporteur rightly points out , should be the protection of public health .
This objective must be reflected in the directive 's legal basis .
It also seems essential to me to safeguard the distribution network for medicinal products , establishing clear and precise definitions , not only with regard to the scope of the directive 's application , but also with regard to the roles and responsibilities of the various parties involved in the supply chain : retailers , distributors , brokers .
I voted in favour , as I believe it is essential to promote a legislative measure on this , in order to deal with this growing threat to health and to improve patient safety .
in writing . - There is an alarming increase in the EU of medicinal products which are falsified with regard to their identity , history or source .

The directive introduces obligatory safety features for all prescriptive medicinal products and a rapid alert system ; harmonised safety features to verify authenticity and identify individual packs , providing tampering evidence for medicinal products subject to prescription ( possible exclusion of certain products following a risk assessment ) ; no safety features for medicinal products not subject to prescription , unless a risk assessment demonstrates the risk of falsification and consequently a threat to public health ; traceability : there will be a unique identifier for the safety features ( e.g. a serialisation number ) which allows the authenticity of the product and individual packs to be verified throughout the supply chain up to pharmacy level ; in addition , Member States have to set up systems to prevent suspected medicinal products from reaching patients ; Internet sales : conditions for the supply of medicinal products to the public are determined by Member States ; increased transparency as regards wholesale distributors ; penalties applicable to infringements of national provisions must be applied .



After branded products and cigarettes , counterfeiting has spread to the medicine market , and the seven million medicinal products seized each year account for around 5 % of all counterfeits .
The challenge for the European authorities , judicial as well as customs , is enormous : they have to trace the sources and curb this trafficking , which is endangering millions of lives worldwide .
I therefore welcome the agreement reached between Parliament and the Council to establish a common legal framework in the 27 Member States to limit the risk of falsified medicines .
Of the main advances , I would mention : the principle of cascading accountability covering all actors in the chain - manufacturing authorisation holders , wholesale distributors , brokers , and so on ; the compulsory use of a security device ( serial number or seal ) on the packaging of prescription medicines ; the introduction of stricter rules on inspections carried out in cooperation with the European Medicines Agency ; and the drafting of a list of entities authorised to sell products remotely .
To conclude , this is an important piece of legislation .
However , more international cooperation and cyber controls are needed to eradicate falsified Viagra , slimming products , dermatological creams , and so on , which are available at the click of a mouse .
I should like to offer my congratulations on the excellent work carried out by Mrs Matias .
Falsified medicinal products are ' silent killers ' , even if they have no effect , because they contain toxic substances that can damage or even kill those who take them .
The absence of a framework law encourages falsification , which is an organised crime .
We have seen disproportionate growth of this criminal activity , with a 400 % increase in seizures of falsified medicinal products since 2005 .
It is estimated that 1 % of the medicinal products currently on sale to the European public through the legal supply chain are falsified and that this number is increasing .
In other parts of the world , more than 30 % of the medicines on sale may have been falsified .
In addition , increasing numbers of innovative and life-saving drugs are falsified .
We have therefore approved today a new law to prevent the entry of falsified medicines into the legal supply chain and to protect patient safety .
The legislation also covers Internet sales and introduces new safety devices and traceability measures , as well as penalties for counterfeiters , to prevent the sale of falsified medicines to European Union citizens .
in writing . - To be able to better safeguard the distribution network for medicinal products it is crucial to have clear definitions not only of the scope , but also of the different actors in the supply chain .
What is a falsified medicinal product ?
What is an active ingredient or an excipient ?
The Commission proposal does not provide the required clarity .
The same applies for the definitions of the different actors in the chain of supply , clarifying their roles and responsibilities .
It is essential to make a distinction between those actors who are already formally recognized - and which role is considered liable - and those who are outside that category , although being relevant to the liability of the distribution chain .
Therefore it is important to make the distinction between traders and brokers , as well as to clarify their roles and responsibilities .
The same applies for other actors , such as transporters or parallel traders .
The directive should prevent confusion and should not allow any room for ' grey ' areas .
It should clearly identify which actors are able to operate in this domain and under which conditions .
Clearer definitions will result in simpler implementation .
in writing . - The opportunities for selling falsified medicinal products have increased rapidly in recent years .
The ever-increasing risk of these medicines entering the supply chain means there is an urgent need to update the legislation .
In particular , regulation of sales on the Internet is notoriously difficult and can only be tackled effectively at international level .
This issue was not addressed in the Commission 's proposal , and the work of the ENVI committee has therefore substantially improved it by adding important safeguards for consumers who purchase medicines online .
But the nature of the Internet means that we cannot eliminate the risk .
Consumer awareness of this risk needs to be improved , and so I welcome the inclusion of awareness-raising campaigns for the public which has been agreed as part of the compromise .
The Commission is in a unique position to coordinate education campaigns for the public and must ensure that the Member States fulfil their obligations in this regard .
in writing . - ( NL ) There has been an alarming increase in counterfeit medicines in the EU .
They may contain inferior quality , counterfeit or inaccurately measured substances , whether active or not , or they may contain no active substances at all , and thus pose a serious danger to the patient .
For industry , the direct and indirect social costs of taking no action on this certainly amount to more than EUR 10 billion .
Together with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance in the European Parliament , I support this agreement .
It brings existing rules up to date and introduces safety features which ensure the identification , authentication and traceability of the product , whilst regulating the sale of medicines on the Internet .
That is one of the main routes by which counterfeit drugs end up on the European market .
It is estimated that more than 50 % of medicines purchased over the Internet on sites which do not specify their actual physical address are counterfeit .
We therefore have to distinguish between legitimate mail order or Internet pharmacies and the illegal distribution chain , which includes uncontrolled Internet purchases .
A legitimate mail order pharmacy must be connected to a legally registered pharmacy and we have to make sure that any legitimate mail order pharmacy complies with all the legal requirements which apply to pharmacies in the Member State where it is legally established .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which aims to prevent falsified medicinal products from entering the legal supply chain by increasing harmonisation , improving traceability and by ensuring that penalties are dissuasive and effective .
Patient safety has to be the priority when dealing with medications .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report because it provides new bases for combating falsified medicinal products .
There has been a gradual progression from , firstly , the sorts of medicinal products that are susceptible to falsification to later include other medicines in secure packaging .
The marketing of medicinal products is prevented by the procedure of enquiry and readability .
Increased protection is provided for consumers .
The costs for the industry are manageable .
in writing . - ( LT ) Ladies and gentlemen , the amount of falsified medicines entering the EU is growing at a terrific rate .
This is a particular worry for countries like Lithuania , which forms part of the EU 's eastern border .
Eastern Europe is the main route of the trade in falsified medicines worth billions .
This is a major problem - the Commission puts the number of boxes of falsified medicines sold within the legal supply chain each year in Europe at 1.5 million .
Even more alarming is the fact that volumes are increasing by up to 20 % .
Falsified medicines are silent killers .
The people distributing them are dangerous criminals and should be viewed as such .
Penalties for counterfeiting medicine should be the same as for drug trafficking .
This will require improved coordination between various national and international institutions .
We must clamp down on the sale of falsified medicines online , because the Internet is one of the main routes for falsified medicinal products to enter the European market .
According to the World Health Organisation , 50 % of the medicines sold online are falsified .
I believe that one of our priorities should be to draw the public 's attention to the risks involved in buying medicines online .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the legislative motion for a resolution of the European Parliament on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2001 / 83 / EC as regards the prevention of the entry into the legal supply chain of medicinal products which are falsified in relation to their identity , history or source .
There can be no doubt that the appearance of falsified medicines in official distribution channels represents a threat to the entire European pharmaceutical system , by undermining the trust of citizens in the quality of drugs purchased in pharmacies or other legal outlets .
In my opinion , the most disturbing aspect is the change in the risk profile .
To date , counterfeit products have mainly come under the heading of ' life-style ' drugs , whereas there is currently a dramatic increase in the number of counterfeit life-saving medicines .
It is therefore important to establish a clear and unambiguous definition of a ' falsified medicinal product ' . but also to define all the entities in the distribution chain , such as sellers and agents who must operate on the basis of permits and abide by the rules of good manufacturing practices , as do the manufacturers and distributors .
In view of the above , I consider that it is necessary and a matter of priority to support any measures aimed at minimising this problem .
in writing . - ( PT ) I only voted for this motion for a resolution because of the Commission 's strong commitment to improving the finance schemes currently being used to ensure that small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) have greater access to capital to fund their growth and innovation policies .
One thing that is relevant in the current context of the economic crisis is the removal of the ' red tape ' effect in the current EU support schemes .
Despite agreeing with the measures proposed in this resolution , I would draw the Commission 's attention to the need to make progress with a more ambitious measure , the ' Small Business Act ' , for the post-2013 programming period .
It should be remembered that in the current situation it is more important than ever to have strong institutional and financial support for SMEs , as they are the backbone of the European economy and will only manage to grow with adequate and sustainable finance istruments .
I voted in favour of this important motion for a resolution on practical aspects regarding the revision of EU instruments to support SME finance in the next programming period .
The 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the EU , which account for around 99 % of all businesses and provide over 100 million jobs , make a fundamental contribution to economic growth , social cohesion and job creation , are a major source of innovation and play a vital role in sustaining and increasing employment .
However , the limited ability of SMEs to access finance is a major impediment to their creation and growth , particularly faced with the current financial and economic crisis .
I therefore agree with the resolution 's call for a significant increase in funding for innovative financial instruments under the EU budget to cater for the financing needs of SMEs , and in light of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
However , it should be noted that the current EU financial regulations on the use of European funds and programmes are unduly complicated , and the expense in terms of time and money involved in complying with these regulations is out of all proportion to the benefits for the final recipient of the funding .
I therefore agree with the call for the Commission to propose simplified and less costly regulations and guidelines , especially for programmes intended to support low-volume SME finance .
Last October , the European Commission presented a policy paper entitled ' An integrated industrial policy for the globalisation era ' , which contains a number of specific initiatives intended to give a strong impetus to European industrial policy .
SMEs are , as Commissioner Tajani described them in Parliament yesterday , the ' lifeblood ' of economic development .
One job in four depends on the industrial sector , as do our global competitiveness , innovation and research .
Commitment and coordination between European and national institutions , banks and SMEs are required if we are to bring down bureaucratic barriers and simplify rules .
Many forward strides have been made in recent months with the adoption of the Late Payment Directive , the protection of trademarks and products , the opportunities for the development of the green economy and new policies focused on tourism , but much more remains to be done .
Many companies in the EU are dependent on EU funding and incentives , which is why access to credit must be guaranteed and improved .
This is in fact a priority objective that I hope will be thoroughly addressed in the review of the Small Business Act , which will be presented on 23 February in Rome by Commissioner Tajani himself .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the EU account for around 99 % of all businesses and provide over 100 million jobs .
They make a fundamental contribution to economic growth , social cohesion and job creation .
The limited ability of SMEs to access finance is a major impediment to their growth , and the continuing financial and economic crisis has restricted their access to funding even further .
The banking sector is asking for more collateral and higher risk premiums .
I believe that the availability of credit and loan guarantee schemes are crucial to ensuring this sector 's viability , growth and potential to create jobs .
Much attention must be paid to European Investment Bank SME loans , as EUR 15 billion was allocated to these in 2008 , but research shows that only a small proportion of this money reached SMEs , because the banks administering loans in the Member States tightened bank credits .
I believe that the European Commission must take the necessary measures to make sure that allocated funding reaches SMEs , ensuring the viability and growth of this very important sector .
I am impressed by the number of SMEs in the European Union , 23 million , and by the number of jobs they provide - 100 million .
These figures clearly highlight that we need to strengthen the scheme for financing this sector .
However the European financing scheme is both diverse and complicated .
I agree with the initiators of this motion for a resolution that the scheme needs to be as coherent as possible during the 2014-2020 financing period .
I support the initiators ' idea of asking the Commission to encourage Member States to carry out the necessary reforms .
These SMEs encounter each other on the single market , but receive different levels of support in their national environment .
I also believe in the benefit of a point of single contact for all EU financial instruments intended for SMEs as a solution for balancing national support systems with European systems .
The employment crisis is more than sufficient grounds for adopting a text in which the appeal to apply the principle of subsidiarity to the area of pensions finally recognises the fact that the governments must be the main players in the rebuilding of social Europe .
Only a brave decision in favour of grass-roots democracy , based on employment reforms that make work more attractive and on payslip federalism that takes account of the different costs of living in each region of Europe - against which both wages and pensions would be readjusted - would constitute a real change of direction towards renewal .
I would point out the central role of SMEs in all of this .
There are large numbers of them in Europe , which means that they create jobs and sustainability .
Lowering the cost of work by reducing taxes , and giving our small enterprises the chance to carry on working and investing in the region are essential moves to ensure equalisation of contributions for the older generations and a future of certainty and quality of life for the new ones .
in writing . - ( LT ) It should be noted that a large number of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) will continue to depend mainly on credits and loans when it comes to external financing .
We need to draw attention to the fact that an increasingly capital- and risk-sensitive banking sector is asking for more collateral and higher risk premiums , both requirements resulting in insufficient financing and missed business and employment opportunities in this very large sector of the economy .
Given this , I believe that the availability of credit and loan guarantee schemes are crucial to exploiting the growth and job potential offered by SMEs .
There is a need therefore to leverage existing programmes at national and EU levels .
It is very important to continue to implement guarantee instruments in the framework of the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme ( CIP ) , the Risk-Sharing and Financing Facility under the Seventh Framework Programme and the Structural Funds ( JEREMIE ) .
Their proper implementation is currently being hindered by overly complex administrative procedures , therefore the Commission should make it easier to use the Structural Funds in connection with SME finance instruments , particularly to finance revolving funds for guarantee schemes , whilst avoiding the creation of structures which duplicate existing schemes .
Given the fact that many small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) depend on credit and loans for external funding , there is a need to create credit and loan guarantee schemes , and to boost the role of the European Investment Bank in this area .
The Commission should also push for the removal of barriers to the development of European venture capital and bond markets , and should expand risk-sharing facilities for investments in equity .
There is a related need to increase awareness of the risks of many national taxation and support systems , which provide strong incentives for debt financing and disincentives for equity financing .
I think that the complexity of EU financial regulations and guidelines for European financial instruments is a serious problem , in particular when European funds and programmes are used to support individual enterprises through the provision of relatively small amounts of funding .
The expense in terms of time and money involved in complying with these regulations is out of all proportion to the benefits for the final recipient of the funding .
The fragmented nature of programmes supporting SMEs is also problematic .
The Commission should establish greater coherence between the CIP , FP7 and JEREMIE programmes and create a one-stop shop where SMEs would be able to obtain clear and comprehensive information about how to make use of these instruments .
in writing . - ( PT ) The 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the EU play a crucial role in economic growth , social cohesion and job creation .
I find the limited access that SMEs have to finance regrettable , and this is aggravated by the current financial and economic crisis .
It is crucial that credit lines and guarantee schemes be available , so that the potential for growth and employment offered by SMEs may be explored .
I welcome the creation of ' Progress ' , a new EU micro-finance facility for jobs .
I support the implementation of the guarantee instruments within the scope of the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme , the Risk-Sharing and Financing Facility under the Seventh Framework Programme and the Structural Funds , and the Joint Action to Support Micro-Finance Institutions in Europe initiative .
However , I call on the Commission to make using the Structural Funds easier and more flexible with regard to SME finance schemes .
I also call for increased funding for innovative financial instruments in the EU budget , for the development of simplified , less costly regulations and guidelines .
in writing . - ( RO ) I think that the European Commission 's specific strategies , measures and action plans for European SMEs need to be improved .
I support the creation of a new European instrument for providing micro-finance for employment and for improving the regulations and SMEs ' access to the single market and financing .
As the providers of some 100 million jobs in Europe , SMEs are the backbone of the European economy .
However , only 2 % of them have access to EU funding .
That is why I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution adopted by the European Parliament calling in particular for special attention to be paid to SME finance in the next EU programming period ( 2014-2020 ) , through the use of innovative financial instruments .
I welcome the clear message sent to the Commission and the Council by Parliament : it calls on them to remove the administrative obstacles that are particularly difficult for small businesses to overcome and which prevent them from gaining access to EU funding and support programmes .
in writing . - Small and medium-size enterprises will play a vital role in reinvigorating economies across Europe that are currently witnessing economic contraction or , at best , slight economic growth .
In my constituency of Northern Ireland , 98 % of all companies can be classified as SMEs .
It is essential that SMEs are given as much support as possible to play their part in the economic recovery , yet what do they currently face ?
They face a squeeze from banks when it comes to existing credit and the future credit that is necessary to their existence .
The EU must therefore look at ways of encouraging banks to lend whilst ensuring that the mechanisms put in place by the EU to support SMEs are accessible .
The current programmes must be streamlined and simplified , making application and access easier .
Already burdened by huge amounts of EU red tape , many SMEs with limited manpower simply do not have the capacity or time to go through the current application processes .
Some are not even designed with those who are in real need in mind .
The programmes in place have the potential to help , but that help must be easier to obtain .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution as I advocate changing the way that small and medium-sized enterprises access European finance , which constitutes an important means for their creation and growth , bearing in mind the effects of the current financial and economic crisis , which has exacerbated the problem of these companies ' access to public and private finance .
There are approximately 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the European Union .
Their importance to national economies and their growth potential for the labour market is undeniable .

Portugal is an example of this : approximately 300 000 SMEs represent more than 99 % of the total number of companies , and these are directly responsible for more than 2 million jobs and have a combined turnover of some EUR 170 billion .

As a result of the recent economic crisis , the financing capacity of these SMEs , which was already limited , became significantly worse , specifically because of even more restrictive credit conditions imposed by the banking sector .
The functioning of SME finance schemes therefore becomes all the more essential , specifically through a greater Union budget allocation for the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme of the Structural Funds and the Seventh Framework Programme .
It is also important to progressively correct market failures and remove administrative barriers .
The right measures should be taken at the right time so that the national economies of the Member States can achieve their potential for growth and contribute to the growth of the labour market ; this will enable the Member States to develop , which will result in social cohesion .
in writing . - ( PT ) This European Parliament motion for a resolution deals with practical aspects regarding the revision of EU instruments to support finance for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the next programming period .
The number of small companies has been increasing significantly in Europe in recent years .
They already represent 99 % of the total , are responsible for approximately 100 million jobs , and make a crucial contribution to economic growth and social cohesion .
Despite this situation , it has been very hard for them to access finance , and this has worsened with the current financial crisis , during which the banking sector has introduced tough requirements for accessing their finance mechanisms .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this resolution , and I hope that there will be a significant strengthening of SME finance schemes and a simplification of administrative procedures , specifically by reducing the number of programmes , and by making national and EU programmes complement each other better .
in writing . - ( PT ) This motion for a resolution is very contradictory given that , although it contains some positive references to the measures needed to support small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , it ascribes legitimacy to and calls for the same type of policies that form the basis of the problems currently affecting SMEs , specifically the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) , the liberalisation of the financial markets and so-called free competition .
This only serves to protect the economic and financial interest groups that charge high prices to make ever greater profits , whether by issuing credit or through the prices of energy and other commodities .
Right now , what is needed is an effective change in Union policy .
The time is right to abandon the SGP and its irrational criteria , and replace it with a genuine pact for employment and social progress that incentivises small-scale investments ; that gives micro-enterprises the opportunity to grow and , especially , to support groups - for example , young entrepreneurs - that are having problems finding borrowing opportunities for their business ideas ; and that promotes employment with rights and improved living conditions , so that the population 's purchasing power increases .
I believe that this motion for a resolution constitutes in some respects an overdue action for an economic sector - that of small and medium-sized enterprises - which plays a significant role in the EU economy .
A review of support tools is also appropriate in the context of an economic crisis that has had a particularly virulent effect on SMEs , as eloquently documented by the loss of 3 250 000 jobs between 2009 and 2010 alone ( more than a third of the new jobs that this sector had created ) .
In this context , I consider it important to stress the cooperation between the European Commission and the European Bank , giving particular support to investments that are able to maximise the effectiveness of SME finance programmes .
In particular , it is necessary to ensure the continuity of credit through action on liquidity and capital requirements and new initiatives in three strategic areas to boost the competitiveness of companies in a phase that is still difficult but certainly more development-oriented : internationalisation , innovation and growth in size .
With its directive against late payment by public authorities , Europe has already sent out an important signal to support SMEs , and it is right to continue in this direction if it wishes to stimulate economic growth in Europe .
in writing . - SMEs form an essential part of the backbone of the European economy and are the main drivers for job creation , economic growth , social cohesion and innovation in Europe .
The participation and active role of SMEs are imperative for the advancement of the competitiveness of the single market .
Following the financial crisis , it has become evident that the European financial markets are currently unable to provide SMEs with adequate finance mechanisms .
Innovative and growth-oriented small businesses need to raise equity capital from external sources , because they either do not have their own financial resources or cannot access bank credit facilities .
A more business-conducive environment for micro and craft enterprises should be supported through the promotion of high-quality support services , better legal and fiscal measures , and social protection for new entrepreneurs .
More adequate and sustainable financial instruments should guarantee that SMEs have better access to capital .
The Commission should redouble its efforts to remove red tape from existing EU support schemes and facilitate cross-border banking , by removing all existing obstacles to the usage of competing clearing and settlement systems and by applying common rules on trading .
The Commission should conduct a comparative analysis of what is actually being made available to SMEs in the equity investment market and what their actual needs are .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , which account for around 99 % of all businesses in the EU and provide over 100 million jobs , make a fundamental contribution to economic growth , social cohesion and job creation , are a major source of innovation and play a vital role in sustaining and increasing employment .
However , the limited ability of SMEs to access finance is a major impediment to their creation and growth , and the current financial and economic crisis has exacerbated this problem .
The banking sector is asking for more collateral and higher risk premiums , both requirements resulting in insufficient financing and missed business and employment opportunities in this particularly large sector of the economy .
The availability of credit and loan guarantee schemes are crucial to exploiting the growth and job potential offered by SMEs .
I agree that we must make every effort to ensure that existing financing facilities are effectively implemented both at national and EU levels , simplifying administrative procedures and making it easier to use the Structural Funds .
in writing . - I have voted in favour of this resolution , as it highlights one of the crucial problems we are currently facing .
The crisis in the financial sector has led to more collateral and higher-risk premiums , which means it has become much more difficult to get start-up credits and other financial resources .
We cannot afford to have SMEs suffering from greater burdens and higher administrative costs .
We cannot afford to have SMEs falling bankrupt because of bureaucracy and because of stricter rules in the financial sector .
SMEs are the driving force of our economies - they should not be punished for mismanagement in the financial sector .
It is important that we pass such resolutions frequently enough to remind ourselves , the Commission and the Member States of our obligations to ensure a sustainable economy .
This is only possible with sustainable SMEs .
in writing . - ( DE ) Support for small and medium-sized enterprises will safeguard numerous jobs and strengthen the innovation potential of the European economy .
It is therefore absolutely right to ensure the reasonable provision of loan capital for these enterprises , as only then can they make the necessary investments .
However , the increase in venture capital called for by the European Parliament is to be rejected on principle .
Instead of placing banks under an obligation to support the real economy by providing appropriate credit , Parliament is calling for it to be easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to get contributions from investment funds and private equity firms on the capital markets .
With a motto of ' locusts for everyone ' , the motion for a resolution calls in places for private equity firms to make it easier to do business with them .
This would turn smaller enterprises in particular into the pawns of investors to an even greater extent than they are now .
These investors are very often on the look-out for absurdly high two-figure profits , which they can usually only achieve by carving up the acquired enterprises and selling them off bit by bit .
Small and medium-sized European companies make a major contribution to economic growth in the European Union .
There are 23 million SMEs , which corresponds to 99 % of European companies .
These numbers alone explain why we wish to and must protect these companies , which are the true driving force behind our economy .
We have tried to send clear messages to the Commission with the motion for a resolution voted on today : these companies must not be abandoned .
For these reasons , my vote in favour is part of our call for an increase in funding for SMEs , of our demand for less red tape and an adjustment to the standards required to obtain funding so that SMEs can really benefit from it , and also of our call for more funds for research .
The economic crisis that has afflicted Europe in recent years must be overcome , and we can only hope to revitalise our economy by supporting these companies .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which strongly supports the continued implementation of guarantee instruments in the framework of the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme ( CIP ) , the Risk-Sharing and Financing Facility under FP7 and the Structural Funds ( JEREMIE ) , with the aim of enhancing SME lending , and under the JASMINE initiative to support micro-finance institutions ; points out that their proper implementation is currently being hindered by overly complex administrative procedures ; asks the Commission to make it easier to use the Structural Funds in connection with SME finance instruments , particularly to finance revolving funds for guarantee schemes , whilst avoiding the creation of structures which duplicate existing schemes , e.g. at national level .
In the EU we have 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , equivalent to 99 % of all companies and more than 100 million jobs .
These make a crucial contribution to economic growth , social cohesion and job creation , provide an important source of innovation , and are vital for maintaining and expanding employment .
However , they lack choice when it comes to accessing finance and this is a major obstacle to their creation and growth .
The current financial and economic crisis is exacerbating the problem .
In the light of the Europe 2020 Strategy , a significant increase in financing for innovative financial instruments in the EU budget is therefore crucial , in order to satisfy SMEs ' financial requirements .
Small and medium-sized enterprises make a fundamental contribution to growth and social cohesion and play a vital role in sustaining and increasing employment .
However , SMEs ' limited ability to access finance is a major impediment to their creation and growth , and the current financial crisis has exacerbated this problem .
Banks are increasingly reluctant to finance riskier business projects , innovative products or business transfers .
We therefore need to strengthen the functioning of SME finance schemes , support the continued implementation of guarantee instruments and increase funding for innovative financial instruments .
Enterprises must have better access to equity-based financial instruments .
The complexity of financial regulations and administrative burdens also restrict the development of SMEs , and it is therefore important to remove any administrative barriers and propose simplified and less costly regulations and guidelines .
in writing . - This is the most useful resolution for the whole period from 2009 to 2011 .
I very much hope that the authors of the resolution will move forward and consider questions regarding the alleviation of the tax burden on small and medium-sized enterprises , will make available credit financing at reduced rates and improve communication between EU funding structures and SMEs , and finally monitor the situation in outlying regions of the EU , e.g. Latgale ( Latvia ) .
The government is conducting the well-planned and calculated liquidation of SMEs in Latgale by closing access to information about stabilisation funds , and by increasing taxes and the number of controlling and repressively fiscal bodies .
All this leads to the elimination of the tax base , and as a result Latvia is on the edge of bankruptcy today .
in writing . - ( DE ) Small and medium-sized enterprises provide 100 million jobs in the EU .
Following the crisis , however , these enterprises are increasingly faced with the problem of financing , as most of them are externally financed .
Banks now only offer them credit under the strict conditions of a subsidised loan .
It would be good to be able to provide solutions in this regard that involve as little bureaucracy as possible and that would meet the requirements of both sides .
I voted in favour of the report , as SMEs should , in my view , be supported financially in order to keep the economy stable .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this draft motion for a resolution , because small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) make a fundamental contribution to economic growth , social cohesion , job creation and innovation .
It is very important to establish effective instruments to support SME finance , paying particular attention to mezzanine financial instruments in the next programming period , which would remove obstacles to financing and would promote the creation and growth of new innovative enterprises , providing greater access to European venture capital and bond markets , while at the same time removing the barriers to the development of these markets .
I agree with the proposal aiming to create better conditions for start-ups and innovative enterprises to have access to private equity .
We must make every effort to ensure that existing financing facilities are effectively implemented both at national and EU levels , simplifying administrative procedures and making it easier to use the Structural Funds .
It is very important for the Member States to implement fundamental reforms in SME taxation and support systems .
There also needs to be increased funding from the EU budget for innovative financial instruments , with more funding being allocated to the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme .
Furthermore , administrative obstacles must be reduced for SMEs , streamlining management in connection with innovative financial instruments , coordinating SME financing programmes and creating a one-stop shop .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution to support SME finance during the next programming period .
Small and medium-sized enterprises and family businesses form the backbone of most European economies .
They are the workshops which produce innovative ideas and original products .
They are also the undertakings that have always driven economic growth .
In Greece in particular , this category of undertaking , which accounts for the overwhelming majority of business activity in Greece , is in need of support in the current recession .
The European Parliament wishes to make clear in this motion for a resolution that the new generation of EU programmes for small and medium-sized enterprises must be predicated on the new situation in Europe , on facilitating access to borrowing by small and medium-sized enterprises and on creating flexible financing mechanisms , such as micro-finance .
This motion for a resolution on the practical aspects of the revision of EU instruments to support finance for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the next programming period is essential in the current situation .
In fact , the limited ability of SMEs to access finance is a major impediment to their creation and growth .
The current financial and economic crisis has exacerbated the problem of SMEs ' access to finance .
If we consider that SMEs contribute to economic growth , social cohesion and job creation ; are a major source of innovation and play a vital role in increasing employment , we can understand the importance of the proposed amendments to this legal framework , which aim to improve the functioning of the SME finance schemes .
For the above reasons , I voted for this resolution .
in writing . - The European Parliament notes that a large number of SMEs will continue to depend mainly on credits and loans when it comes to external financing ; it is concerned that an increasingly capital- and risk- sensitive banking sector is asking for more collateral and higher risk premiums , both requirements resulting in insufficient financing and missed business and employment opportunities in this very large sector of the economy ; it regards , therefore , the availability of credit and loan guarantee schemes as crucial to exploiting the growth and job potential offered by SMEs ; it sees a need to leverage existing programmes at national and EU level and it endorses the important role played by EIB SME loans .
I voted in favour of this text because I believe it can go some way to helping the more than 23 million European small and medium-sized enterprises , which make a crucial contribution to economic growth and social cohesion within the European Union through the 100 million jobs they provide .
All too often in recent years , banks have demanded ever greater guarantees from SMEs needing capital to expand or revitalise their businesses .
For this reason it is necessary to significantly increase the financial instruments that can help such businesses , and to encourage the implementation of instruments that allow , for example , risk sharing between the various stakeholders .
The complexity of European Union financial regulations , moreover , often involves an enormous expenditure of time and money on red tape alone .
Now we have agreed on the guidelines , it is up to Member States to adopt ad hoc measures to revitalise and support the specific situation of their own SMEs , fuelling growth in a sector that by itself represents over 90 % of all enterprises in the Union and constitutes the very lifeblood of our economy .
in writing . - ( ET ) Today I voted for the motion for a resolution supporting the financing of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
I believe that the situation of SMEs and the use of the European Union 's resources need to be made more effective so as to ensure that the liquidity crisis that occurred during the financial crisis , which had an impact on SMEs in particular , will not be repeated .
Both in Estonia and in the European Union as a whole , SMEs constitute 99 % of all businesses , which is why it is important that this particular majority should have access to financial backing , especially during difficult crisis years .
I sincerely hope that both the European Union and SMEs will bring the European economy to a new ascent , and that in the future , we will be better prepared to face any new crisis .
in writing . - ( HU ) I voted in favour of Amendment 6 of the proposal .
I believe that start-ups and innovative enterprises must be supported in order to give them better access to equity-based financial instruments .
The Commission should place stronger emphasis on programmes and financial instruments scheduled for the upcoming period , and on supporting these instruments with risk-sharing funds and facilities .
Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) are an essential element of economic growth and job creation in the European Union ( EU ) : they account for more than 100 million jobs , and play a crucial role in contributing to social cohesion .
However , these companies ' access to financial credit and loans is limited , and the economic crisis has been exacerbating this situation , already made very complicated because of administrative burdens .
I view an attempt to improve the way that SME finance systems work as broadly positive .
I believe that such an attempt must include increasing the role of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) in the loans scheme , as well as implementing the instruments that already exist within the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme , the Joint European Resources for Micro to Medium Enterprises ( Jeremie ) programme and the Joint Action to Support Microfinance Institutions in Europe ( Jasmine ) programme .
I also advocate simplifying SMEs ' access to the Structural Funds , particularly as regards guarantee schemes , so as to prevent their duplication .
It will also be advisable to consider new and effective financial instruments for the next multiannual financial framework , for example joint instruments with the EIB .
in writing . - ( LT ) Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) are the backbone of our society and the engine of our economy .
Both in Lithuania and the EU SMEs account for 99 % of all businesses .
SMEs create more than 70 % of jobs for Lithuanians .
SMEs make a fundamental contribution to implementing the objectives of the Treaty of Lisbon , which promote innovations , competitiveness , social cohesion and job creation .
It is therefore important to create an environment in which this can develop .
SMEs , as well as start-ups and innovative enterprises must be given better access to the EU 's financial instruments .
The availability of credit and loan guarantee schemes is crucial to exploiting the growth and job potential offered by SMEs .
Currently many investment plans risk not being implemented due to uncertainties and a lack of funding .
It is therefore important for banks to upgrade liquidity provision and support investment in the real economy .
It is also important to support equity markets for start-ups and innovative enterprises .
We must try harder to remove administrative obstacles .
This will require progressive management and economy linked to innovative financial instruments .
in writing . - Small and Medium Enterprises ( SMEs ) constitute around 99 % of all businesses within the European Union , contributing greatly to the European economy through innovation , economic growth and the creation of over 100 million jobs .
My vote in favour of this report reflects the importance of enabling SMEs to function in a manner not over-complicated by regulations , but one which encourages efficiency , flexibility and investment .
I recognise that advances have been made to ease the financial and administrative burden on SMEs , such as the 2010 establishment of the SMEs finance forum , but urge the Commission to do more in order to create a more competitive and accessible economy for the SMEs which are so vital to the success of Europe 's economy .
Incentives must encourage the necessary reforms to financial systems in Member States , investment must be made to nurture innovation in SMEs and administrative systems must work for , not against , these enterprises helping to create a more stable , more varied European economy .
I welcome the results of today 's vote .
It is planned that approximately 70 % of EU funds for entrepreneurs will be disbursed using the loan funds .
Non-repayable grants will be reserved primarily for high-risk projects , which find it difficult to obtain loans .
According to the experts , assistance provided in the form of a preferential loan or guarantee is better in the long term than non-reimbursable aid .
Entrepreneurs benefit less from preferential loans .
However , many more companies can benefit from these loans , and the money lending system , once supplied with money , should theoretically work indefinitely .
I therefore subscribe to the idea that after 2014 , 70-80 % of support for entrepreneurs should be disbursed in the form of loans and guarantees , and the rest in non-repayable grants .
The latter would be reserved for supporting innovative high-risk projects , or in other words those which would find it difficult to qualify for a loan .
The future of the European public 's pensions is one of the key challenges for the future of Europe and I acknowledge the difficulties that the Member States ' pension systems are encountering .
Nevertheless , I disagree that the only way to solve the problem is by paying more , working more and receiving less during retirement .
I would also stress that it is the Member States that are mainly responsible for pensions .
However , the European Union can add value by providing coordination between the various schemes and by sharing best practices , since it also has competence in the area of pension portability and supervising institutions for occupational retirement provision ( IORP Directive ) .
I am only voting for this report because of the compromise based on more than 450 amendments , which include some of the main concerns regarding the White Paper .
I would also caution that a decent and sustainable pensions system can only be achieved by combating an economy with jobs that are precarious , low paid and of a poor quality .
Financed pensions must be based on solidarity and this must be taken into account in EU regulations .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this very important resolution on European pension systems .
Europe is ageing and due to the worsening of the demographic situation and the declining birth rate , the number of people of retirement age is constantly rising .
The importance of social security and pension funds is therefore undoubtedly increasing , particularly given the current economic crisis .
People have to feel safe in their old age , and this can only be achieved with stable , well functioning pension systems .
There are currently 100 different pension systems in the European Union .
Due to major differences across the Member States , EU citizens feel unequal .
People who have worked hard all their lives , particularly in the new EU Member States , receive different sized pensions compared to citizens in the old EU Member States .
This makes them feel like second-class citizens .
Undoubtedly , the regulation of pension systems is a Member State issue , but it is clear that there needs to be more European Union coordination in this area .
The EU must care for those who need help most : the disabled , the unemployed and people of retirement age .
In the interests of the welfare of its citizens and through the Member States , the European Union must try to level out pension systems .
This would undoubtedly contribute to improving people 's living standards and the EU 's economic growth .
In the European Union the number of pensioners is rising due to the increase in life expectancy .
Pension systems come under Member States ' remit , with different rules about the retirement age and the money spent on social security .
The financial crisis has led to a rise in unemployment , poverty and social exclusion , as well as to an increase in budget deficits and to problems relating to the funding of pensions .
This has highlighted the fragility of certain financing schemes .
The predominance of temporary jobs has reduced the level of contributions to pension systems , thereby adversely affecting their stability .
The European Parliament 's report and the European Commission 's Green Paper seek to maintain pension systems which are adapted to citizens ' needs without questioning the states ' authority and suggesting that a single model would suit all .
I think that solidarity between states and generations is an important factor in EU policies ' success .
There is coordination at EU level of aspects of the pension systems relating to the operation of the internal market , such as compliance with the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact and the EU 2020 Strategy .
I voted for this report which encourages the efforts of Member States to meet the expectations of their citizens in terms of an adequate , sustainable and safe pension system .
in writing . - ( GA ) The European population is ageing and it will not be long now until the age group ' 55 years old or older ' will be the largest age group in the EU .
Although there are four people of working age for every person over 65 at present , the ratio will be half that by the year 2050 .
I voted in favour of this timely report .
Although it is the responsibility of the individual Member States to decide pension matters , the EU and the Member States must work together to develop a definite , sustainable and financially viable system .
The workforce of today is especially mobile ; therefore it is imperative that pensions can be transferred from one Member State to another .
The pension systems must be brought up to date so that they are flexible , transparent and accessible .
Information must be provided regarding the options available and the various aspects of different pension types .
I support what is in the report about placing more emphasis on financial education and about encouraging awareness of saving for a pension .
in writing . - ( LT ) The European Union faces enormous challenges , one of the most important of these being population ageing .
Due to changing demographic trends , life expectancy is increasing , and older people remain healthy and active and participate in society for longer .
At the same time due to the low birth rate , the number of people of working age will fall and therefore the Member States ' social security systems will face great difficulties .
The financial crisis has led to a growth in unemployment , poverty and social exclusion , and has demonstrated the fragility of certain pension fund systems .
There are rising budget deficits in many Member States and problems in the financing of pensions .
Some private pension funds were also no longer able to meet their obligations , and therefore in future it is very important to properly regulate the activities and monitoring of such funds .
I agreed with this report and believe that it is necessary to provide new incentives at national and EU levels to create strong , sustainable and safe European pension systems .
The issue of the sustainability of social security systems has become an unavoidable subject on Europe 's political agenda .
Increased life expectancy , an ageing population , weak economic growth and increased unemployment are factors that have been contributed to an imbalance in social security systems .
The current situation makes it necessary to take decisions that ensure the sustainability of social security regimes .
I am voting for this report because it advocates the need to build a system together that is sustainable , safe , and that provides adequate pensions at Member State level .
It recognises that freedom of movement in Europe is not confined to first-pillar provision , but that mobility is indispensable for an effective and efficient labour market .
It advocates the creation of a European pensions platform involving representatives of EU institutions , social partners and relevant stakeholders , in order to exchange information about best practices and help to prepare policy initiatives , all in compliance with the principle of subsidiarity .
It calls on the European Commission to consider setting up a special task force on pensions .
I voted for this report and concur with the rapporteur , who mentions in a clear and well-argued manner not only the need for intergenerational solidarity , but also the major differences between national pension systems in Europe .
I agree that coordination is required at EU level , with the best arguments for this provided to us by the effects of the crisis , which we hope we have emerged from .
The impact of public expenditure in a Member State is easy to pass on even to another Member State , whereas pension funds are part of the financial markets .
I welcome the idea of a flexible labour market for pensioners , in view of the demographic changes we are going through and the obvious trend for extending working life .
I agree with the idea that not only each Member State but also the Union as a whole must adapt their policies to the concept of active ageing .
in writing . - ( NL ) The sustainability of our pension systems is a problem which has been passed around like a hot potato in Europe for far too long .
The percentage of people who are retired is rising .
In an effort to keep pensions at a sustainable level , the Member States have no choice but to reform their pension systems .
This is directly linked to the sustainability of public finances and the rules for a healthy eurozone , the Stability and Growth Pact .
I wholeheartedly support rapporteur Oomen-Ruijten when she highlights the importance of pension build-up via the employer ( what is known as the second pillar ) and individual pension build-up ( the third pillar ) .
Unfortunately , we can no longer assume that the state pension ( the first pillar ) will be enough to sustain the level of lifestyle which workers have worked to achieve .
The aspect of subsidiarity requires further elaboration .
At the eurozone level , we need agreements by which Member States will guarantee that the reform of their pension systems will translate into sustainable public finances .
Which choices are made as part of that process should , in my view , remain a matter for Member States alone .
Questions such as women 's participation in the labour market should be a matter for their social and labour market policy .
Where people voluntarily choose part-time work , in order to better combine work , family and caring responsibilities , this should not be discouraged by Europe .
Although Member States remain fully responsible for the choice and organisation of their pension systems , the fact remains that European economies have become interdependent and that economic governance discussions also focus on the viability and sustainability of pension systems .
Therefore the EU has a coordinating role to play .
The rapporteur has gone to great lengths to obtain a compromise ; this text contained some good points , not least the idea that pension systems should guarantee all citizens a decent standard of living , that diversity should be respected , that inequalities between men and women are unacceptable and unjustifiable , that a life course approach should be taken and that older workers should be rehabilitated .
However , at the same time , by trying too hard to compromise , we have arrived at a text that is unclear in places and too open to interpretation .
In addition , there are still certain ideas that I cannot subscribe to , such as calling upon the Member States to improve citizens ' access to private savings schemes and encouraging work by older people through fiscal and social security exemption measures .
For these reasons I abstained from the final vote .
Demographic development , that is , the inverted population pyramid that we can expect in due course , and longer life expectancy , which means that older people remain in work and participate in society for longer , make it necessary to consider social welfare systems .
The financial and economic crisis , combined with demographic changes , has had an impact on pension systems .
Because of higher unemployment , slower growth , smaller returns on investments and larger public deficits , it is more difficult for pension systems to provide adequate pensions .
In particular , young people with a high level of education are entering the labour market later , and so they do not work long enough to claim a pension when they reach the legal retirement age .
It should also be borne in mind that inadequate pensions may lead to a decline in consumption and , because of reduced demand , to economic instability in a country .
As a result , I feel that steps really must be taken to redefine the future of young and old , thus contributing to secure and adequate income provision after retirement , while the need to give fresh impetus to the responsibilities of Member States , the two sides of industry and Europe must also be kept in mind .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because given the rapid ageing of Europe 's populations , it is necessary to devote particular attention to the age of retirement , to ensuring the security of pension saving funds and strengthening common minimum pension standards , in order to guarantee normal living conditions for all of Europe 's older people .
Although setting the retirement age and the size of pensions is the responsibility of the Member States themselves , the European Parliament and the Commission are proposing measures that would help to overcome the threats to pension systems .
Furthermore , a certain amount of coordination of the reforms of national pension systems is unavoidable as we establish the internal market and implement the Europe 2020 Strategy .
It is unfortunate that the Commission 's Green Paper scarcely pays any attention to gender equality .
Women have atypical contracts more often than men , or take precarious jobs , and therefore they earn less on average .
Furthermore , women interrupt their careers more often due to motherhood and to care for children and elderly or disabled family members , and they therefore lose insurance guarantees and ultimately receive smaller pensions .
It should be recognised that there is no such thing as a perfect pension system .
Economic and financial capabilities vary across the Member States , therefore more attention needs to be paid to the means of improving pension systems , such as timing the start of working life , ' flexible ' assessment of retirement age , better reconciliation of work and family life , and the general criteria for setting a minimum pension .
Public pay-as-you-go systems operating in some Member States are facing big increases in costs , which means growing pressure on solidarity and a heavier burden for the younger generation .
The year 2060 may seem far away , but this does not change the predictions at all : an increasingly ageing population , a low birth rate , and therefore huge pressure on budgets .
Each of the Member States is obviously directly responsible for establishing their own pension systems .
Indeed , this power is irrefutable and there is no suggestion that a single model would suit all .
However , it is important to call for adequate , sustainable and safe pensions at a time when Europe will be facing a demographic disaster in a few decades , the early signs of which have already started to show .
Raising the pension age is one of the relevant solutions when discussing the fact that states are no longer going to have a working population of sufficient size to pay for the pensions of those who have left the labour market .
Indeed , a gradual increase in the retirement age is a natural solution in these circumstances , which is supported by the fact that life expectancy is much higher than 40 years ago .
I congratulate the rapporteur on bringing such a relevant and sensitive subject to the attention of Parliament .
It is true that the financial and economic crisis and demographic change , with the increase in life expectancy , have prompted all Member States to strengthen their pension policies .
These measures therefore prompt a drive to modernise and coordinate national policies on the adjustment of pension systems , sustainability , balance between the duration of working life and pensions , greater transparency of pension systems and protection of solvency .
I agree , in particular , with the attention paid by the rapporteur to female workers , who are often discriminated against with regard to male workers where pensions are concerned .
I also agree with the need to prolong workers ' careers through a modern employment policy and improvement of working conditions , and I agree with the need to make pension systems and the information provided to citizens more transparent .
I am very concerned , however , about the serious impact that the measures called for in this document may have on the Member States ' coffers , many of which are already under great pressure as a result of the tough economic crisis .
I welcome the adoption by the European Parliament of this report inviting the EU Member States to establish adequate , sustainable and safe pension systems .
It reaffirms the main aim of pensions : to guarantee social cohesion in a spirit of equity between generations .
In a context of demographic change and economic crisis , pensions must remain a fundamental part of our social pact .
Nevertheless , I wish to make it clear that each Member State is free to organise its own pension system and that the European Union is there to simply facilitate coordination between the States .
The economic and financial crisis has greatly added to the demographic challenge facing the EU , and has led to a growth in unemployment , poverty and social exclusion .
The goal of a 75 % employment rate laid down in the Europe 2020 Strategy should help secure the sustainability of pension systems , as it is linked with higher levels of employment , greater productivity and economic growth .
The holistic approach adopted by the Green Paper intends to impart fresh impetus , both at national and EU level , with the objective of establishing pension systems that are robust , suitable for the long-term , sustainable and safe .
Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) are one of the main sources of employment in the EU and make a significant contribution to the sustainability and adequacy of pension systems in Member States .
I call for the development of sectoral , intersectoral and / or territorial funds to increase affiliation of workers in SMEs to pension systems .
I voted against the report on the Green Paper on European pension systems .
The report clearly promotes the harmonised , anti-social policies of the European Union and the reduction of social rights to the lowest common liberal denominator .
The text makes provision for an increase in the retirement age of European workers and for retirement ages to be linked to life expectancy .
European workers , having paid to rescue the banks and been subjected to exhausting austerity measures , are again being forced to pay for the consequences of the crisis , a crisis which they did not cause , by working longer years for a smaller pension .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left moved an alternative resolution , which was , unfortunately , not accepted , against the Green Paper on pensions and highlighted the potential for improving pensions and retirement ages for the benefit of the workers .
This can be done without increasing the age limit , through increased labour rights , especially for young people , better pay and , at the same time , higher taxation on financial capital and financial transactions .
Although the responsibility for paying pensions falls to the Member States , it is , nonetheless , important for there to be coordination at European level on certain issues .
I am aware of the disparities between pension systems in Europe .
However , there is a clear need for a strategy to be created that increases cohesion and coherence on pensions , with full respect for the subsidiarity and solidarity principles .
This strategy must take into consideration the current economic and demographic situation , but also the completion of the internal market .
We must therefore not forget that freedom of movement within Europe is a fundamental right of European citizens , which entails the mobility of individuals and namely of workers who must be able to benefit from an effective and efficient labour market , as well as from the guarantee that they will have access to a sustainable , secure and adequate income after retirement .
It is also important to provide the public with adequate and continuous information about their rights regarding the pension system , especially as regards systems relating to cross-border activities and mobility .
I voted for the resolution for which I was appointed rapporteur on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I find the final text of the resolution balanced , emphasising both the importance of the public pension pillar and the need for a proper second pillar in all Member States .
An idea which I tried to suggest was to define a minimum EU-level pension , which will guarantee a secure , decent income for European citizens .
Unfortunately , it did not receive sufficient positive feedback from among my fellow Members .
However , I hope that in future the Commission will come up with this kind of proposal .
in writing . - ( RO ) I feel it is beneficial that the Europe 2020 Strategy supports an active , focused labour market policy , which will help increase the employment rate of older workers , women , members of minority groups and the long-term unemployed .
By achieving this objective , I believe that Europe will see an increase in the number of people in work and , by extension , economic growth , which will have a positive impact on the viability of pension systems at EU level .
in writing . - ( NL ) I today voted in favour of the Oomen-Ruijten report on pensions .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection ( IMCO ) on this report , I have had the opportunity to work constructively with the rapporteur .
The IMCO opinion has largely been reproduced in Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report .
I believe that the report is measured and balanced and that at its heart is the notion that , for Member States , pensions should be subject to subsidiarity .
This will ensure adequate protection of the Dutch pillar system .
However , what I absolutely cannot support are elements in the report which appear to call for binding European agreements on Member States ' pension systems .
That is at odds with everything the Belgian Socialist Party stands for .
I voted in favour of the proposed text because pensions are one of the fundamental institutions of the system of worker 's rights and duties .
They are essential for the continuation of a decent standard of living for the people concerned and for their whole families , especially when it comes to receiving adequate support so as to attain a decent standard of personal and family life .
By setting this threshold as a long-term goal , it is obvious that sustainable pension systems are necessary to offer certain minimum prospects to workers .
While I respect the principle of bottom-up subsidiarity , with primary authority and responsibility for adequacy and opportunity for reform lying with the Member States , there is a need for convergence of pension systems in Europe , so as to ensure full and genuine freedom of movement for workers and enterprises and also full and mutual recognition and parity of the various pension systems within the Member States .
Indeed , while I acknowledge the differences in the cost of living and in wage levels between Member States , there is a need to establish long-term convergence both internally within each Member State and within the EU as a whole , so as to promote a decent and adequate level of life expectancy .
I voted for this report because I think that pension systems throughout the whole European Union are already facing major sustainability problems , which are likely to get even worse in the future , thereby requiring a rethink .
However , the review done by each Member State must be carried out in compliance with the fundamental scope of providing a decent income at a reasonable cost for elderly people after they have contributed for a lifetime .
Reducing pension levels below the subsistence limit , which has been done in some Member States , is inhumane and must be avoided .
The most glaring example of exploitation is Romania , where the current government has decided that all pensions should be cut drastically and taxed , along with a levy for health care insurance .
Under the guise of subsidiarity , the Romanian Government probably wants to create an ingenious pension system by making pensioners physically disappear through depriving them of minimum financial resources and medical assistance .
I think that one of the EU 's goals in this area must be to curb the excesses of governments in certain Member States against pensioners .
I voted for this report because I advocate the need for the EU and the Member States to coordinate their various policies on pensions in a more effective way , and to guarantee the adequacy , safety and sustainability of pension systems for women and men .
It is essential to separate pension entitlements according to gender , and to set specific criteria to be used in calculating women 's pensions in such a way as to guarantee the economic independence of both men and women .
With regard to paragraph 6 , we Swedish Social Democrats chose to vote in favour of the removal of the reference to the inclusion of direct pension liabilities in public debt and deficit calculations .
The reason for this is that we feel there a risk that a link like this between pension liabilities and debt deficit calculations could , in the short term , have a number of undesirable and disproportionate consequences in certain Member States .
However , in the longer term , we believe that each Member State should establish procedures that will result in public pension liabilities being accurately reflected in relevant debt and deficit forecasts .
Increased average life expectancy and the inversion of the population pyramid in Europe present significant challenges for a society that is ageing , and will have to ensure adequate living conditions for its older people and a role that , in many cases , can and should be active .
However , faced with the real threat of the collapse in traditional pension systems , the Member States must , bravely and head-on , adopt the necessary measures to save their social security systems , which do not just involve raising the retirement age .
However , emphasis must be placed immediately on modernisation , with the possibility of mixed models .
This will ensure that those entering the system now can freely choose which model they want to protect them in their old age .
The current crisis has highlighted a problem which , it became apparent , was serious : the bankruptcy of the social security systems .
In truth , the proximity of the reversal of the age pyramid - as a result of demographic changes caused by the population 's increased longevity - is threatening the financial sustainability of the pension schemes .
On the one hand , the number of unemployed is increasing ; on the other , more funds are being expended on pension payments .
Moreover , young people are entering the labour market increasingly later , and so are not taking part in the contributory system .
Since we do not want ' old age ' to become synonymous with poverty , we must create a guaranteed minimum pension that grants quality of life to the elderly .
Such a measure will help to eradicate poverty and enable older people to live in dignity .
All these problems are reflected in the European Commission 's Green Paper on pensions .
What is now needed is a series of policies coordinated at EU level .
I therefore express my full agreement with this report 's conclusions , and welcome the initiatives aimed at intergenerational solidarity that will allow all pensioners a sustainable and dignified income .
We find it regrettable that the alternative motion for a resolution that we tabled has not been adopted .
The majority of the Members of the European Parliament , including those of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , therefore took the side of the antisocial policies that the Commission and Council are implementing , so legitimising the neoliberal path that they are following and wish to develop .
In doing so , they have forgotten the workers in various European Union countries who have been struggling against the rise in the legal retirement age , fighting to safeguard a caring and universal social security system ; a system that values the smaller pensions , and respects the elderly , enabling them to live in dignity , whilst contributing to the eradication of poverty .
As the alternative resolution that we tabled says , it is possible to improve pensions without increasing the legal retirement age , provided that there are more jobs with rights , particularly for young people , better salaries and more taxation of financial transactions .
For example , recent studies show that a general tax of 0.1 % on financial transactions in European Union Member States could provide an increase in annual revenue of around 2.1 % of gross domestic product , or almost EUR 262 billion .

There are 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises in the EU at present .
Small and medium-sized enterprises comprise 99 % of all EU enterprises , and are responsible for 100 million jobs in the Union .
It is very clear that the issue of the cost and unavailability of credit is the biggest problem for the small and medium-sized enterprises sector at present .
Many viable enterprises still have difficulty accessing credit at a reasonable rate from the banks .
Considering the amount of support received by the banking sector from the Irish taxpayer , this is incredible and unacceptable .
Other costs such as rents , utility bills and local charges also hamper the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises in the present difficult times .
I voted in favour of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report on adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems .
The report is full of good intentions , but just like the Commission 's Green Paper , it leaves us with doubts about the true political goals of this debate .
I cannot help but think that the latter 's fundamental aim is to prepare public opinion for the gradual privatisation of pension schemes .
After seeing the losses recorded by private pension funds in Europe and the United States during the financial crisis , I prefer to stick with the intergenerational solidarity of pay-as-you-go schemes .
Despite the constant references to the principle of subsidiarity , it is very much a case here of laying the foundations for the harmonisation of pension systems in the European Union , if not in terms of the level of pensions , then at least in terms of their structure .
How can we believe , in your ultraliberal and internationalist Europe , that such harmonisation can be anything other than an encouragement to take out individual insurance with private companies ?
A potential market of hundreds of billions of euros .
At the same time , pensions paid under the first pillar - public , compulsory and pay-as-you-go pensions - will be whittled away as a result of the Stability and Growth Pact , and tomorrow as a result of Mrs Merkel 's pact .
The occupational pension funds that one would like to see developed are still pension funds , and we know what part they played in the global financial meltdown .
We also know what they are good for during a financial crisis : ruining savers .
One cannot but worry about the pathetic prudential regulations to which they are subject , even in Europe .
The social security system as a whole , and the pension system in particular , is the responsibility of the Member States alone .
The problem that needs to be resolved is not just financial , it is demographic , too .
The European Union , which has a serious responsibility where these matters are concerned , is by no means the appropriate level at which to address them .
With regard to the report on pension systems in Europe , this is a very sensitive subject .
Although some truly positive elements can be found in this text , it would be totally unacceptable for the mechanism of old-age insurance to be considered through the prism of budgetary constraints , with capital-based pensions encouraged as a result .
Being in favour of intergenerational solidarity , I could not vote in favour of a report that would be liable to promote the development of capital-based pension systems .
I abstained during the vote on this text .
It contains many very positive points , but unfortunately it also contains certain ideas to which I am opposed .
Removing the obstacles to workers ' mobility by making pensions portable , respecting the diversity of national pension systems , reducing gender inequalities and the unacceptable gaps that exist between men and women with regard to employment and retirement provision , including older workers in the labour market , providing greater redundancy protection for older workers , and so on , are all recommendations that are made in this report and which I very much welcome .
Nevertheless , other points have led me to abstain .
They include , for example , the fact that the report calls for private savings schemes to be encouraged .
in writing . - ( DE ) Demographic change towards an increasingly older society in conjunction with the setbacks in the areas of economic growth , state finances and the financial markets caused by the economic and financial crisis make it necessary to adapt our practices with regard to pensions .
This adaptation is in keeping with the completion of the European internal market and the Europe 2020 goals for employment and the long-term sustainability of public finances .
However , I welcome this proposal above all because it provides for more efficient pension provision that is to be both sustainable and safe .
I am firmly convinced that pension provision should not only enable older EU citizens to live in dignity , but it should also be a reward for their working life as a whole .
If we want the European citizens of tomorrow to be motivated in their work and to be open to cross-border activities , it is important , even today , to offer them the prospect of adequate and sustainable retirement pension provision , harmonised at European level .
Nonetheless , the responsibility for pension provision remains with the Member States , meaning that pension systems primarily fall within the competence of the Member States and therefore the only thing that should be provided by Europe is coordinated guidance for Member States .
In this regard , the principle of solidarity between the generations and that of national solidarity ought to be taken into consideration in particular .
In addition , with regard to subsidiarity , all pension systems should remain ' exportable ' for citizens .
in writing . - ( FR ) Although this text has positive aspects , particularly the importance given to promoting employment to ensure the sustainability of pensions systems or the position of the social partners , other aspects seemed to me difficult to support , which is why I abstained on this text .
The deletion of paragraph 24 on the link between life expectancy and the retirement age is , however , a major victory for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , who thus wished to defend the European social model , contrary to what this measure advocated .
In fact , the life expectancy of certain social categories is diminishing as a result of their working conditions and the difficulties they encounter when trying to access preventive and medical care .
We have to ensure that all European citizens can live out their retirement with dignity .
in writing . - Labour MEPs voted in favour of this non-binding report on pensions and the challenges of ageing societies and spending pressures being faced across the EU .
We welcome the fact that this report explicitly states that there is no ' one size fits all ' approach to pension provision across Member States but that the EU can clearly add value in sharing ideas and coordination .
We voted to remove from paragraph 8 the inclusion of private debt in the sustainability assessment of public finances , as we feel that current market conditions would not be supported by this kind of assessment .
We also maintain concerns over the issue of applying Solvency II-type capital requirements to pensions as this could potentially drive up costs without adding security for the UK 's employer-sponsored occupational pensions .
The UK 's system , including the Pension Protection Funds set up under the Labour Government , provides a high level of protection to pension scheme members and beneficiaries .
Labour MEPS will continue to work to ensure that people who save with the State , with their employer or privately are given the genuine pension protection they need to feel safe about their retirement .
in writing . - ( LT ) Demographic trends , in other words , the inverted population pyramid which we can expect in due course and the longer life expectancy , which we have the good fortune to enjoy , in which context older people remain healthy and active and participate in society for longer , make it necessary to consider a strategy for fresh cohesion and coherence in the field of pensions .
There are major disparities between pension systems in Europe , and new Member States and their citizens face extra problems because it is so desirable to establish a diversified pension system ( with several pillars ) , in order to spread risks .
The financial and economic crisis has shown that no pension system is immune to such events but that large budget deficits , high unemployment and very limited scope for increasing the burden of taxation and other levies particularly hit pay-as-you-go systems , and some Member States , such as Lithuania , even had to take drastic measures , that is , reduce pensions , which in my opinion is intolerable and unacceptable .
The Member States must make every possible effort and preclude such reduction measures , which are painful for the poorest people .
I abstained on this report , because many of the decisions proposed are socially sensitive and there is also insufficient evaluation of the benefits and risks in the report , particularly when we are talking about increasing the retirement age or Member States losing influence in pension policy .
in writing . - ( DE ) I abstained from voting on the European Parliament report on a European pension system .
Although it is , in principle , to be welcomed that the European Union is considering how it can support the efforts of Member States to provide adequate pensions , pensions policy is , and remains , the task of the relevant Member States , in respect of which the EU should only take action with the utmost sensitivity and with consideration for national circumstances .
However , the decisions in question are not favourable for the German occupational pension model in particular .
In my opinion , regulations jeopardising occupational pension systems that have been successfully implemented in many European countries should not be enacted at European level .
Considerable improvements are still needed in this regard .
in writing . - ( LV ) I supported the report on the creation of adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems , since I believe that changes to the existing pensions model are essential to secure its sustainability .
Currently , European countries run the risk that future generations will not be able to draw pensions capable of providing a decent old age .
We must admit that at present we are living at the expense of future generations .
We borrow in order to pay today 's pensions .
This must change .
The pensions system must be balanced in such a way that current revenues can cover current expenditure .
Any other solution would mean living beyond our means .
This can be done in various ways , but we must also admit that we can no longer rely on drawing a pension soon after we reach the age of 60 .
Retirement age must be raised in stages throughout Europe , and it must approach the 70 years of age threshold .
That is one of the ways to ensure that the social security budget does not become a burden on European countries ' economies .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report is based on the Commission Green Paper submitted in July 2010 and on the issues that this Institution has raised for debate with regard to the adequacy and sustainability of European pension systems .
This paper serves as a precursor to the future White Paper containing a general analysis of the 27 Member States and a projection of the guidelines that the EU is laying down for its members , from which an effective response is expected .
My reaction upon reading the report was positive , which is why I voted in favour of it .
This draft is certainly too conservative considering what needs to be done .
However , we can describe it as a good starting point , since it provides an overview of the pension system enlarged to 27 States .
The establishment of a European pensions platform could be a perfect opportunity to open a debate between the EU Institutions and social partners concerned .
The ultimate goal is to adapt pension systems and place them in the context of the demographic and economic variables our world is subject to .
I voted against this report , as it advocates capital-based pension schemes to the detriment of pay-as-you-go public pension schemes , and increasing the retirement age .
It also advocates an approach that would create further insecurity for older workers by encouraging ' flexible ' pensions , combining work with retirement .
It was with great satisfaction that I took note of the result of today 's vote on Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report on the subject of adequate , stable and secure pension systems in Europe .
I believe that pensions should be secure and stable , especially nowadays in the context of an ageing European population and the financial crisis .
Current statistics provide a clear signal that the problem is getting worse and that demographic changes in Europe are unequivocal .
Experts have shown that at present in the EU four people are working to support one pensioner , but in about 50 years ' time there will only be two .
It is clear therefore that further work on the pension system is needed and further reforms are essential .
This is why we must strive for increased international activity by the Member States to ensure that the coordination of pension systems will be effective and efficient .
In addition , in accepting the report , the European Parliament is stating clearly that there can be no room for discrimination on the grounds of age or gender , which is particularly significant in the context of the social debate on equality of men and women in the workplace .
To work for months on the sustainability of pension systems in Europe , to draw up an ambitious report , to negotiate compromises for hours without wishing to state the obvious , which is that many European Union governments have engaged in reforms of pension systems , giving priority to extending the contribution period , is , for me , an act of the utmost levity .
The denial of reality is an act of gross negligence .
The European Parliament is not tackling the core issue , because it is divisive !
I disapprove of this way of doing politics : instead of seeking unanimity at all costs , the European Parliament has fundamentally chosen the wrong method .
It has a duty to explore coherent and courageous courses of action .
That is what our citizens expect when pension systems , which are the real prizes of the European social model , are in danger .
I am therefore unable to support a report that has turned into a vain exercise , since it fails to take account of the reality of the situation .
in writing . - ( NL ) The delegation of the Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) in the European Parliament today voted against the initiative report on the Green Paper on European pensions , because it contained several ambiguities and inaccuracies .
We support a number of improvements , such as the encouragement of a good combination of state and occupational pension schemes in Member States and a European tracking system for increased job mobility , so that every citizen knows what they can expect from their pension and make their own choices .
However , rising unemployment , problems in the financial markets , high national debt and slow economic growth could lead to difficulties in terms of Member States ' pension payment obligations , with repercussions on the Stability and Growth Pact and therefore the stability of the euro .
In addition , the increasingly ageing population is having a major impact in many Member States , because they do not save as much as the Dutch .
We therefore need harmonised supervision of pension systems , and some Member States ought to organise their pension systems differently .
We do not , however , want any tampering whatsoever with the Dutch pension system .
In order to guard against this , despite voting in favour of a number of good points in the report , we remain against the report as a whole .
The VVD Group in the European Parliament : Hans van Baalen , Jan Mulder and Toine Manders .
in writing . - I voted for this Report which makes it clear at the beginning ( Paragraph 1 ) and the end ( Paragraph 61 ) that the main responsibility for pensions rests through the subsidiarity principle with the Member States , the EU contribution being to provide coordination where possible and the sharing of best practice .
This report irresponsibly advocates increasing the legal age of retirement while hypocritically suggesting that a ' social and civic dialogue ' on the subject takes place and that the result is duly taken into account .
The necessary referendum is , unfortunately , a long way off .
As expected , it is also an ode to the privatisation of the pay-as-you-go pension system , which we all know to be effective .
Retirement transformed into a financial product on the internal market of pension funds , with free and fair competition - that is what this report proposes .
I am voting against , and absolutely condemn , this text .
The serious problem of demographic trends , in other words , the reversal of the age pyramid which we can expect in due course , as well as longer life expectancy , in which context older people remain healthy and active and participate in society for longer , make it necessary to consider a strategy to increase cohesion and coherence in the field of pensions .
This new reality makes it necessary to take initiatives which redefine the future of young and old , as well as solidarity between generations and people , thus contributing to a sustainable , secure and adequate income after retirement .
in writing . - ( ES ) I have voted against this motion for a resolution as I consider it to be an unacceptable attack on workers ' rights , as it advocates an increase in pension contribution years , the raising of the retirement age and the progressive privatisation of the public pension systems .
I believe that these types of measures are aimed at establishing pension systems that benefit the interests of the financial sector and they do not represent a move towards public pensions systems that are more fair , sustainable , secure and beneficial to European citizens .
As such , I am opposed to the progressive construction of an anti-social Europe , governed by the markets and financial powers , which have submerged us in this crisis by their ambition and excessive greed , which will be incomprehensibly compensated through the privatisation of public pension systems .
Furthermore , I consider it unacceptable that the resolution which , while emphasising the importance of granting a relevant role to social dialogue in pension reforms , defends antisocial measures , such as the raising of the retirement age , which have been rejected by the majority of Europeans through massive general strikes .
According to László Andor , Commissioner for Employment , Social Affairs and Inclusion , the number of retired people will double by 2060 in relation to the active population able to finance pensions .
It is therefore urgent to give thought to the future of pension systems .
Although it falls within the competence of the Member States , this issue must not prevent the European Union from assisting Member States in their deliberations in order to guarantee European citizens an adequate , stable and sustainable pension system .
To be able to have an adequate and appropriate pension in a Member State of the EU is the necessary complement to the principle of the free movement of people .
The economic and monetary crisis demonstrates the need for an integrated approach , encompassing the demographic and social aspects as well as the economic and financial aspects .
in writing . - I hope that Parliament will not confine itself simply to producing reports and votes .
It is necessary to analyse all 27 pension systems in the EU .
I am confident that violations of the rules on a massive scale will be revealed in this sphere in Latvia , where the Government constantly tries to solve the budget deficit problem at the expense of pensions .
As a result , pensioners in Latvia have become hostages to the current Government 's risk-taking activities .
In the majority of cases , pensions in Latvia are below the official minimum subsistence level .
The situation is complicated by the Government 's decision to retain payments to the second pension tier .
This can have very sad consequences .
I voted in favour in the hope of an independent assessment of the situation in Latvia .
in writing . - ( DE ) Within the European Union we are still seeing a considerable decline in prosperity , which will certainly be evident with the loss of the periods of protection for the labour market .
Every country is having to grapple with the demographic changes and the associated lack of financial viability of its pension systems .
Private pensions , which were to provide additional support , have not brought the much talked about relief to the pension systems but have instead placed state pensions under even more pressure .
Against this background , the people in Hungary , for example , have almost been forced to go back to the state system .
In this regard , the unfulfillable promises of returns by pension funds are also problematic , as revealed during the course of the economic and financial crisis .
Interference like that at EU level often brings with it a whole series of problems , for example in connection with the compensatory allowance for pensions , which opened the floodgates to abuse .
The details of pensions are regulated differently in the individual States and they must also remain that way , which is why I strongly reject the report .
I wanted to express my support for the Oomen-Ruijten report on future pension systems in Europe , since it clearly illustrates a principle on which European actions and initiatives should always be based : the principle of subsidiarity .
In an effort to respond to a real need , that is , to a new assessment of European pension systems in the wake of changed demographic , economic and social conditions , it has been decided that individual Member States will be given the flexibility to act within the framework of a general European guide .
The situations and conditions in the various countries are too diverse for us to conceive of drawing up common binding rules , and so the decision to respect the essential principle of subsidiarity was a good one .
in writing . - ( DE ) Before long the population pyramid will be turned on its head in the EU : the over 55s will represent the largest proportion of the population , life expectancy will continue to increase , the birth rate will remain low and young people will start their working lives ever later .
We are all aware of the consequences of this : an overageing population and ever more bottlenecks when it comes to the financing of pensions .
What we actually need , in particular , is a more family-friendly policy in the Member States - I am thinking for example of the introduction of family tax splitting into income tax law .
The contribution of families to safeguarding the intergenerational contract should be taken into account in social legislation by means of a gradual reduction in social insurance contributions .
These aspects are not , or are insufficiently , taken into account in the report .
However , the much lauded mass immigration is the wrong way to go about safeguarding our pensions .
At the end of the day , pensions policy should remain within the sphere of competence of the Member States . Therefore , I have voted against this report .
in writing . - ( PL ) In today 's vote I supported the acceptance of the report on stable and secure pension systems in Europe .
The issue of pensions in the future is a problem not only in Poland but all over the European Union .
In the report , the European Parliament confirmed that in matters concerning pensions systems , the Member State is responsible for the organisation of its national pension system .
However , EU institutions will support the activities of the Member States on the basis of the principle of subsidiarity .
For me , a very important issue is that attention has been focussed on discrimination against women in the context of pension systems , and we need to overcome this .
At the same time , current demographic changes which are leading to an ageing population are causing problems in establishing a stable pension .
The number of pensioners continues to increase , while we have falling numbers of people active on the labour market .
Another important issue is the problem of young people who are unable to find employment due to the situation on the labour market .
In this regard it is essential that more people should be employed and should remain employed for as long as possible .
I voted for Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report because I believe that trying to lay the foundations for a goal as important as that of a common European pension system , while having due regard for the principle of subsidiarity , is a big step towards true socio-political integration .
The legislative framework is certainly complex , but the European Commission White Paper on pension systems already indicates which way the Union is heading .
The report specifically aims to establish adequate , sustainable and safe criteria , calling on Member States to debate the subject , to publicise the proposals formulated and to work together to produce a true joint plan through the Open Method of Coordination .
We are discussing the economic governance package at EU level in order to reform the Stability and Growth Pact and to establish common rules .
No State can get away from pension reform if it wishes to put its finances in order .
For this reason , I think it makes sense to have common rules in this area too , because it would make monitoring and implementation of the SGP much easier .
This report on adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems represents an important step in implementing a coordination policy in the European Union .
In fact , although this falls under the jurisdiction of the Member States , the pension system is directly linked to the financial market , as well as being one of the areas covered by the Stability and Growth Pact .
It is becoming necessary , for demographic reasons of which we are all aware , to consider a strategy that increases cohesion and coherence on pensions .
We must create initiatives which redefine the future of young and old , and solidarity between generations and people , thus contributing to a sustainable , secure and adequate income after retirement .
There are marked differences between the various pension schemes in Europe , but it is important to create a common platform by clearly defining the division of responsibilities .
In this way , it will be possible to create a sustainable and safe system together ; a modern system which recognises freedom of movement in Europe , which is based on the assumption that mobility is essential , particularly for the younger generations and , of course , for an effective and efficient labour market .
For all these reasons , I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( RO ) In November 2009 Romania had 5.54 million pensioners and 5.65 million contributors to the public pension system .
Providing EU citizens with an adequate , sustainable pension , now and in the future , is a priority for the European Union .
Achieving these objectives in an ageing Europe is a major challenge and Member States must prepare for this by reforming their pension systems .
Member States must improve the adequacy of pensions by combating gender discrimination on the labour market , especially through a 10 % reduction in the pay gap by 2020 .
The public pension system must be strengthened to the detriment of the private system .
We must not privatise the public pension system simply to ensure the stability of pension funds for current and future pensioners .
Although the trend at European level is to raise the retirement age , it should be applied flexibly according to the sector and the severity of the working conditions , while also taking into account the number of years ' service .
Active support is required for job creation .
The quality of work also needs to be improved in order to increase the number of people who will actively contribute to funding their future pensions .
Making pension systems sustainable is one of the major challenges facing the political class if it wishes to maintain the common good and social peace .
Although European competences are limited in this regard , it was also important or the European Parliament to give its opinion as a follow-up to the Green Paper issued by the Commission .
That has been done with the adoption of the very comprehensive Oomen-Ruijten report , which confirms the need to reform pension systems due to the unfavourable trend in the ratio of the number of people aged over 65 to the working population .
Moreover , the resolution is in line with the recent Eurobarometer survey , showing the wisdom and maturity of European citizens , 73 % of whom take the view ' that they will have to work longer or save more for their old age ' .
The predominant idea of prolonging working life beyond the age of 65 has , admittedly , met with mixed reactions among the general public .
However , this may be a blessing in disguise , as other levers will necessarily have to be activated .
In the case of my country , Belgium , alone , where the rate of employment among older workers is one of the lowest in the European Union , there is an urgent need to encourage Belgian workers to remain longer in the labour market .
Today Parliament voted on the report entitled ' Towards adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems ' .
The Commission , taking account of demographic trends and the effects of the economic and financial crisis , has decided that in order to modernise pension policies it is necessary to take coordinated action on : adjustment of pension systems , sustainability , balance between the duration of working life and duration of pensions , removal of obstacles to mobility , greater transparency of pension systems and protection of solvency .
In this report we wish to acknowledge and maintain individual responsibilities in order to create a sustainable and safe system that is capable of ensuring an adequate pension at Member State level .
A modern system that acknowledges , in particular , the new generation 's need for mobility and offers solutions not only for the present but also for the near future .
in writing . - ( ES ) Despite the fact that the vote has allowed the incorporation of some crucial elements of the social conscience , there remained some unfortunate aspects that led me to abstain in the final vote .
This is the case , for example , in the part of paragraph 21 where it is asked that Member States improve access for citizens to private saving schemes .
European pension systems are in an increasingly alarming state .
We must act now to ensure that men and women have equal opportunities , safeguarding those who decide to retire today and , at the same time , protecting those who are only now taking their first steps in the labour market .
In Europe , women still earn on average 18 % less than men .
The main effect of this wage disparity is apparent at retirement age : because they have earned less throughout their working lives , women also have lower pensions .
As a result , women are more affected than men by persistent poverty .
Especially in times of crisis , we need to include the gender perspective in all policies , adopting national measures that are agreed on and coordinated at European level .
I voted in favour of the Oomen-Ruijten report , because I think it is a good compromise that can support the dialogue between Member States and European Institutions on the modernisation of pension systems .
We support the report on the Green Paper ' Towards adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems ' , as the European Commission aims to assist Member States without taking away responsibility from individual countries , which must evaluate the connection between life expectancy and the compulsory retirement age .
It also aims to remove obstacles to cross-border mobility and establish a European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority with responsibility for setting up a system of coordination in emergencies and supporting Member States .
The European Union 's 27 Member States have different pension systems .
However , the inverted population pyramid and the increase in life expectancy require a European strategy to be devised for strengthening the cohesion and coherence of pensions in the European Union .
I would also like to mention , nevertheless , the inadequacies which are evident in the case of labour mobility between different Member States .
There are cases where pension rights are not transferred adequately between different European Union Member States .
In this respect , we must encourage cooperation between Member States .
On the other hand , we have a moral duty to safeguard our citizens ' right to enjoy pensions which provide them with a decent living .
in writing . - I can support the overall objectives of this report as its fundamental concerns are to create a sustainable approach to pension provision .
The regulatory exercise which will come about from the Green Paper will , I believe , bring supervisors up to speed with the necessary consistency to maintain a safe and sustainable pension system .
However , given the current diversity in pension systems in Member States as well as in scope and depth of pension provision , it is important that the Commission follows through on Parliament 's wish not to impose capital standards akin to insurance or banking standards .
It is my belief that pensions can and should be treated separately for their own capital adequacy requirements .
This all said , the need for a truly European approach is paramount , given the way in which demographic trends will force future generations into sustaining expensive schemes , overloaded , with past generations facing potential poverty .
in writing . - Mr President , there is much to like in this report .
However , I cannot , on balance , support it .
It is right that we in this house should have concern for the pension provisions of our Member State governments , and it is right that we should share best practice .
However , I was simply unable to support the report as a whole because I simply disagree that the EU should have anything beyond an information-sharing role for pensions .
The best authorities to deal with pensions , and indeed all social matters , are the national or local authorities , not us .
This initiative report calls for too much centralised control , which I am simply unconvinced will either work or add value .
in writing . - ( NL ) The problem of our increasingly ageing population is hitting us hard and the crisis is prompting Member States to make cuts .
However , we should not allow the ageing population problem to lure us into a new European debt crisis .
The Member States that are making savings should not go about it unthinkingly .
The resolution emphasises that the first pillar of the pension system is the main one .
This implies a healthy and balanced national budget .
Moreover , it goes without saying that a steady income is a safeguard against poverty .
I am also pleased with the recognition of pension rights for women and a greater emphasis on gender equality , along with the recognition that discrimination against older people in the labour market should not be allowed .
The resolution also pays due attention to the transferability of accrued pension entitlements .
No one these days works for the same company , or even in their own country , for their whole life .
It is fundamental , in a united Europe , that citizens are able to transfer such entitlements .
The European Parliament is therefore asking the European Commission to better coordinate the transferability of pensions at a European level .
in writing . - ( RO ) The report drafted by Ria Oomen-Ruijten on the Green Paper entitled ' Towards adequate , sustainable and safe European pension systems ' makes an important contribution to the debate on the future of European pension systems .
I think that Member States need to draft provisions for ensuring adequate pensions for their citizens .
We encourage Member States to set up the most adequate pension system to guarantee a decent standard of living for everyone , with particular attention being focused on the most vulnerable groups in society .
I voted for point 24 , which calls on Member States to encourage older people to continue working through fiscal and social security exemptions .
I also voted to encourage and facilitate combining work with retirement and to put in place dissuasive measures so that companies find it harder to make older people redundant .
I voted against raising the retirement age because I think that people who pass a certain age , but who will and can work , should be encouraged and not forced to work , especially at a time when the unemployment rate in the EU-27 is 10 % , and 20 % among young people .
The European Commission 's Green Paper on European pension systems adopted today under the report by the alliance of the political representatives of capital in the European Parliament ( social democrats , conservatives and liberals ) is an anti-grassroots monster .
It is intended to form the basic element of the new anti-grassroots EU Competitiveness Pact designed to demolish European social security systems and replace them with private , individualised insurance , a new cash cow being milked at the workers ' expense for the benefit of capital .
In practice , public spending on social security , pensions and welfare is being abolished .
The three pillar system reduces the State pension to a poorhouse benefit , thereby throwing the gates wide open to the so-called third pillar of private insurance .
There are calls for an increase in the retirement age , depending on life expectancy ; in other words , work to the grave .
The Greek Communist Party voted against the EU 's abortive anti-labour paper on European pension systems .
Faced with these developments , we would point out that the workers urgently need to rise up en masse and stop these new anti-insurance measures and the new savage attack being organised by capital and the bourgeois governments in the new EU Competitiveness Pact .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted in favour of the Oomen-Ruijten report on the Green Paper on pension systems .
The results of the negotiations are appropriate in the opinion of the Christian Democratic Union of Germany and provide the appropriate basis for the subsequent White Paper .
What is important going forward is retention of the German occupational pensions , the length of service and protection against the risk of bankruptcy for existing commitments .
Under no circumstances must occupational pensions be transferred to a compulsory European system .
in writing . - ( LT ) I am pleased that the rapporteur recognises that there are significant gaps in the pension systems in Europe and the fact that the citizens of some Member States - for instance , Lithuanians - face additional problems .
Life for pensioners in my country is not the easiest .
Recently it has become even harder - last year Lithuanian pensioners ' monthly pension was reduced by 5 % .
The time has come to stop applying double standards .
In some European countries , such as Lithuania , the government maintains that the crisis is over and that the economy is gradually beginning to recover .
However , when we need to take practical measures , our leaders state that they cannot find the required resources to return pensions to their former level .
Suddenly they declare that the crisis is not yet over .
In reforming our pension systems financial sustainability is important , but so too is providing an adequate income .
Genuine sustainability cannot be achieved without ensuring that pensions are adequate .
Ageing society and financial pressures show that our labour market is changing .
It is necessary to take this into account when reforming pension systems .
A balance between flexibility and security on the labour market supports the adaptability of the economy and thus contributes to sustainable , secure and fair pensions .
in writing . - ( NL ) Europe and pensions , now that is a sensitive issue .
Various Member States are considering arrangements to shrink their national debts by tying pension funds to their debts .
Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy have already directly mentioned the centralisation of pensions in their plans for a single , centrally-ruled Europe .
I am against any regulation of pensions at a European level .
Pension systems are structured differently in the various Member States .
They are almost incomparable .
In addition , the pension systems in the various individual Member States vary considerably , in terms of size , reliability and supervision .
I do not want to see the robust Dutch pension system suffer because of the chaos in some other Member States .
What I do find sensible , however , is that Member States should share information about their pension systems with each other and that they should make efforts to address specific problems by that means .
I refer here , for example , to university researchers who move to other Member States , whose tax authorities then collect additional levies on the pensions they have built up elsewhere .
An immediate halt should be put to such excesses , but that does not mean that we need to revamp the entire system on a European model .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report urging Member States to ensure pensions are sustainable in light of the challenges of ageing societies and the spending pressures being faced across the EU .
I welcome that this report recognises that there is no ' one size fits all ' approach to pension provision across Member States , but that the EU can clearly add value in sharing ideas and coordination .
The inclusion of private debt in any assessment of sustainability of public finances should not be included in this report , as current market conditions would not support this kind of assessment .
Furthermore , applying capital requirements to pensions could potentially drive up costs without adding security for employer-funded occupational pensions .
This should not be made compulsory where there is an existing protection scheme ; for example the UK 's Pension Protection Fund , set up by the previous Labour Government , already provides a high level of protection to pension scheme members and beneficiaries .
I , and my Labour colleagues , will continue to work to ensure that people who save with the State , with their employer or privately are given the genuine pension protection they need to feel safe about their retirement .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , although I feel that the text adopted is overcautious in repeatedly indicating the importance of the principle of subsidiarity .
I nevertheless believe that this report , pending the imminent publication of the Commission White Paper , can allow the continuation of an effective working relationship between the Member States and EU institutions on the difficult issue of the modernisation of European pension systems .
I am voting for this motion for a resolution , as I believe that the accession negotiations with Croatia may be concluded in the first half of 2011 , provided that the necessary reforms continue to be pursued .
To achieve this , during this last stage Croatia will need to mobilise all its efforts to strengthen public administration and the judiciary , to make progress on combating corruption , to ensure full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , to continue with the privatisation process , and to adopt restructuring plans .
I am also voting for this resolution because it recommends the implementation of an arbitrary border agreement between Croatia and Slovenia , and because of the progress made in resolving other bilateral disputes , such as border issues with Serbia , Montenegro , and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Although Croatia still has to conclude negotiations on six political chapters of the acquis communautaire , I believe that the good results achieved in 2010 will serve as a basis for the Croatian authorities to make final efforts to complete the negotiations .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on the 2010 progress report on Croatia .
With this document the European Parliament confirmed that Croatia has made significant progress in the talks on integration into the European Union .
I agree with the resolution 's provision that the accession negotiations with Croatia can be completed in the first half of 2011 provided that the necessary reforms continue to be pursued resolutely by , in particular , strengthening public administration and the judiciary , continuing to combat corruption , ensuring the sustainability of refugee return , full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , the continuation of the privatisation process and the adoption of restructuring plans for the shipyards in difficulty .
These are very important conditions , and their proper implementation or at least significant progress in the areas mentioned will show Croatia 's commitment and willingness to become an EU Member State .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this motion for a resolution , through which the European Parliament supports Croatia 's accession to the European Union .
The accession of Croatia entails both a European and a regional dimension , and would encourage the rest of the countries of the Western Balkans to launch and implement accession-related reforms .
The accession negotiations with Croatia have progressed significantly , but fundamental reforms in the areas of public administration and the judiciary , corruption , refugee return and so on , have yet to be completed .
Croatia must make significant progress in the resolution of bilateral disputes with neighbouring countries , such as the border issues with Serbia , Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina , so as to prevent these disputes from becoming an obstacle to further enlargement of the EU once Croatia has joined .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of adopting the progress report on Croatia because I think that the EU accession process highlights the significant improvement in the situation in this area .
Indeed , respect for fundamental rights , the situation of refugees and the privatisation of the shipping sector are the most advanced chapters .
I would also like to welcome at this point the implementation of the peace agreement and everything that this entails .
Cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is crucial to the successful conclusion of the negotiations .
I hope in the future that the Croatian authorities will allow investigators to have access to the necessary documents .
One of the issues mentioned in the document is war crime trials .
Those who have been brought to justice are either not convicted or receive token punishments .
I wish to stress the importance of administering a fair justice system for any candidate country .
The legacy of conflict in the 1990s and a lack of respect for minorities ' rights are unacceptable from a future Member State .
Legislative intervention is desired in this area .
The Hungarian Presidency 's intention to complete the negotiations by the end of the first six months in 2011 is commendable and Croatia can potentially cross the finishing line on time .
Its accession will send out a positive signal in the region , reaffirming the EU 's credibility with regard to the conditionality of this process .
I wish to end by confirming Romania 's unreserved support for Croatia 's accession to the EU .
The country report on the progress made by Croatia in 2010 indicates the determination of the government in Zagreb to meet the European Union 's accession criteria .
However , the European Union is confronted with a first-time situation in that the majority of Croatia 's citizens do not think that accession to the EU will benefit the country , which is in contrast to the significant wave of optimism seen among the population of the Central and Eastern Europe states which joined in the last two rounds .
The 2010 country report on Croatia highlights the EU institutions ' concern about this situation .
This is why an appeal has also been made to authorities and civil society to get involved in convincing Croatians that EU membership will have a positive impact on their country .
I welcome the efforts of the Croatian authorities and their ambition to conclude the accession negotiations this spring .
Croatia also deserves to be congratulated on the fact that a state ravaged by conflict for so long has managed to make remarkable progress to implement the acquis communitaire .
Furthermore , any kind of mention about Croatia 's accession possibly being deferred can only be treated as a throwaway remark made without too much thought .
I voted decisively in favour of this report because I believe that Croatia is correctly continuing with its implementation of the reforms necessary for EU membership .
At an economic level , I think that Croatia is ready to deal with other EU countries .
In fact , despite the global crisis , it has managed to maintain a certain macroeconomic stability , particularly through the development of service and tourism infrastructures .
I think the country should be encouraged to take full advantage of its resources , particularly its geographic position as a strategic transport link between Western Europe and the Balkans , between Central Europe , the Adriatic and the Mediterranean .
Further development of its infrastructure could provide enormous potential to the country .
With this in mind , its cooperation with the European Union on the implementation of sections of the TEN-T , TEN-E and e-TEN , which also affect Croatian territory and could be developed into a PPP system in full cooperation with the EU , is proving very fruitful .
The negotiations will close in the first half of 2011 , when the accession process will be concluded .
I am confident that this deadline will be met .
I would commend Croatia for the substantial progress achieved in attaining the benchmarks needed to conclude the accession negotiations .
I strongly believe that Croatia 's swift accession will contribute to encouraging the rest of the countries in the Western Balkans to implement accession-related reforms .
I welcome the efforts of the Croatian Government to take a strong stance against all forms of corruption , but call on the Croatian authorities to further strengthen the administrative capacities of anti-corruption bodies and to foster a culture of political accountability .
I welcome the progress made in the area of women 's rights and gender equality , as some 25 % of parliamentary seats and almost half of administrative positions in the public sector are held by women , demonstrating the progress towards gender equality .
However , the percentage of women occupying positions of business leadership remains low and gender wage differences persist .
I call for further active promotion of the participation of women in economic and political decision-making bodies , and for swift implementation of the Gender Equality Law , including the principle of equal pay .
in writing . - ( DE ) We expressly support Croatia 's swift accession to the European Union .
The people of Croatia have great expectations of this membership .
However , these can only be fulfilled if Croatia is truly ready for accession and all accession criteria are met .
Croatia has already come further in this process than many current EU Member States had come on accession .
The Commission 's progress report clearly shows , however , that there is still work to be done in some areas .
This gives reason to hope for a swift conclusion to the accession negotiations - expectations must not be raised by today 's decision , however .
Thoroughness is more important to us than speed and reliable implementation is more important than promises .
We must not repeat previous mistakes .
Anything else will not be in the interests of the European Union or Croatia and its people .
We have therefore abstained from voting today .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on the 2010 progress report on Croatia , as I believe that the negotiations on Croatia 's accession to the EU will be completed by June 2011 , provided that the necessary efforts toward reform continue to be made .
I am in favour of expansion , provided that candidate countries meet the pre-established criteria .
The more countries there are in the European project , the better it is for the EU and for its citizens , who will enjoy a single area of peace , freedom , democracy , progress and well-being .
Croatia has been meeting the accession criteria with undeniable success , and has been making an effort to continue down this path , despite the additional difficulties it faces in the current international situation .
It is a good example for any country intending to become part of the European Union .
I cannot fail to notice that the most recent surveys show Croatians to be suspicious of their country 's future entry into the Union and critical of the EU 's actions .
Instead of questioning the opinion of the Croatian people , I believe that their doubts merit serious reflection on how the European Union has been run .
I find it regrettable that , in her motion for a resolution , the rapporteur has chosen to give opinions about issues such as sexual orientation and its constitutional protection , which not only have nothing to do with the real issues in question , but should also be the exclusive competence of the Member States .
This motion for a resolution is on the 2010 progress report on the process of Croatia 's accession to the EU ; a commitment by the European Parliament , for which no diplomatic efforts have been spared .
I welcome the progress made in the accession negotiations , which should be completed by the end of the first half of 2011 , as well as all the efforts made by the European Commission towards the other countries of the Western Balkans joining the EU .
I find it regrettable that the Croatian Parliament and government have not made the desired progress on constitutional amendments , namely as regards decentralisation and reform of public administration , particularly by depoliticising it , combating corruption and freedom of the press .
I hope that all the problems mentioned in the report will be resolved or , at least reduced , so that accession is quick and can act as a catalyst for membership by neighbouring countries .
Regarding this report , it is important to point out that the majority of Members of the European Parliament are not happy about the fact that , according to Eurobarometer , the majority of the Croatian population believe that accession to the EU ' would not benefit them ' .
What can be done to counter this perception ?
The answer , as always , is to increase the propaganda , seeking to manipulate the reality of what the EU is .
The same old neoliberal dogmas are being wheeled out : the reduction of state intervention in the economy , and the creation of an open and competitive market , by destroying public services , by changing labour relations in capital 's favour under the pretext of their ' rigidity ' , and by doing away with sovereignty and with an independent project for Croatia 's development .
Lastly , the report makes it very clear who the beneficiary of NATO 's aggression and the breakup of Yugoslavia was .
Croatia is in a privileged location : it is a transport corridor of great importance for the import and export markets of the East and Far East .
It is clear that accession to the EU is not to promote the right to development of Croatia and its people , but above all to benefit the great powers and their economic groups .
Recently , Croatia has made considerable progress towards EU accession and will probably soon become the twenty-eighth Member State of the EU .
In 2010 , negotiators for the EU and Croatia closed 11 chapters , achieving a total of 28 ( from the required 35 ) .
Last year 's achievement emphatically shows Croatia 's determination to continue with its reforms and will soon allow its citizens to benefit from EU membership .
During the last meeting of EU and Croatian ministers which took place on 22 December 2010 in Brussels , the negotiators closed three important chapters , namely those concerning justice , freedom and security , foreign , security and defence policy , and the environment .
The closure of these chapters indicates that Croatia 's legal system has been strengthened and that progress has been made in several areas simultaneously , such as wider cooperation between Croatia and the international community concerning military missions and civil affairs ( " foreign , security and defence policy ) , and the guarantee of better air and water quality for the population of Croatia ( environment ) .
Negotiations on the accession of Croatia to the European Union began in October 2005 .
In spite of some logistical problems , Croatia 's accession is strongly supported by EU Member States and many of them expect a rapid progress towards the closure of the seven remaining chapters by the end of 2011 .
I voted for the motion for a resolution .
Croatia clearly has a place in the European Union .
However , I will not vote for further membership unless the budget of the Union is substantially increased .
Further enlargement cannot be achieved without additional funds for the Union .
My vote on the motion for a resolution of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of this Parliament on the progress of Croatia towards membership is a sign of no confidence in the benefits of the European Union which , according to the opinion polls , is shared by the majority of Croatians .
It is regrettable that the authorities of a country which has become independent and sovereign in the wake of a terrible conflict have not wished to rest until they have placed the country under a foreign yoke , against public opinion .
I voted against the Treaty of Maastricht .
I voted against the European Constitution .
I would have voted against the Treaty of Lisbon if my Government had had the courage to put it to the French people .
I hope that the Croatians will be consulted directly on the accession of their country to the Union and that their will , unlike that of the French , the Irish and the Dutch , will be respected .
To vote in favour of a resolution which regrets that the fate of minorities practicing this or that sexual deviance is not a central preoccupation , which advocates intensive propaganda to reverse negative opinion polls , which encourages the same economic errors as those committed in our countries , was really not possible .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the progress made by Croatia , which confirms the efforts made by the latter with regard to its forthcoming accession to the European Union .
Indeed , Croatia 's membership has several advantages , such as consolidating peace and stability in the Balkan region and strengthening the position of the EU in that region .
The text we have adopted also raises issues that remain problematic and on which Croatia must continue to work , such as combating corruption , which remains one of the major scourges in the country , and giving support to returnees , which is still inadequate .
I hope that Croatia will continue further along this positive route .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on the 2010 Progress report on Croatia , because with this document the European Parliament confirmed the fact that Croatia has made progress in the talks on integration into the European Union .
Accession negotiations with Croatia can be completed rather quickly , provided that the necessary reforms continue to be pursued and implemented resolutely .
It is necessary to continue to strengthen public administration and the judiciary , combat corruption , ensure the sustainability of refugee return , and fully cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , and so on .
Furthermore , the Croatian Government urgently has to address the structural weaknesses of the economy and devote greater attention to regional cooperation , in order to tackle bilateral issues with neighbouring countries .
Proper implementation or at least significant progress in these areas will demonstrate and strengthen Croatia 's willingness and opportunities to become an EU Member State .
I believe that the accession of Croatia would also encourage the rest of the countries of the Western Balkans to move closer and more quickly towards EU Membership .
With its motion for a resolution on the 2010 progress report on Croatia , Parliament 's aim was to applaud the improvements made by Croatia in several respects , which are bringing the country ever closer to the European Union .
That country 's achievements over the last year deserve to be mentioned , as substantial changes have been made to the Constitution in order to adapt it to the founding charters of the other 27 Member States .
With regard to the judiciary , efforts have been made to make that power impartial and independent .
Trials have also been organised for war crimes , and considerable progress has been made on women 's rights and gender equality .
I fully agree with this motion because I strongly believe that Croatia deserves to become a Member State .
There is no doubt that even more must be done , especially as regards the fight against corruption , but the fact remains that the country is making significant headway in its path to membership of the European Union .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this report because what we all want is a stable , prosperous neighbourhood .
Indeed , these aspirations can only be fulfilled by integrating the Western Balkans into the EU and Euro-Atlantic structures .
Croatia is the state in this region which is at the most advanced stage in the EU integration process , highlighting that it has and wants to use robust mechanisms to combat corruption in the public sector .
Zagreb has already made progress on this matter through its parliament 's approval of a law allowing the confiscation of assets obtained illegally , as well as by the actions taken against senior officials .
I welcome these measures , but Zagreb needs to demonstrate convincingly that it has left behind its widespread culture of corruption and impunity .
Croatia can continue to count on Romania 's support in the European Union accession process by sharing common experiences regarding both the pre-accession process and the aspects after the country 's EU accession .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution in order to acknowledge Croatia 's progress towards EU accession and highlight the remaining goals to be achieved for the benefit of its people .
I voted against Amendments 1 and 4 because they were intended to delete references to government efforts in Croatia to combat discrimination based on sexual orientation and race , which are required for EU accession .
When the resolution was in the AFET Committee , I contributed amendments concerning the efficiency and predictability of the justice system .
They called for increased funding for courts to work fast and efficiently , unification of jurisprudence , and timely publication of all judgments .
Corruption cases have to come to court and not remain at the prosecution / investigation stage , and sentences must have deterrent effects .
The efficiency of the pre-accession funds spent in the area of justice reform and the combating of corruption must be assessed .
in writing . - I voted for this report but retain serious doubts about Croatia 's suitability for membership .
Significant progress needs to be made in a number of areas , not least in tackling corruption .
Croatia 's accession to the European Union is a significant incentive for the Balkan countries to pursue their own efforts and reforms with a view to their future accession to the Union .
Croatia 's accession to the Union will extend the area of peace and stability in Europe , and it therefore entails a dual European and regional dimension , which should encourage the Western Balkan countries to achieve greater cohesion at regional level .
I welcome the positive progress made by Croatia with regard to respect for and protection of minorities , though the country should also take appropriate measures to ensure greater protection of the Roma minority and its participation in civil society .
The Roma are still discriminated against and do not have adequate representation in Croatian central and local political authorities .
Synergies must be developed and implemented at regional level , particularly within the framework of the Danube Strategy , as more social interchange and economic trade would benefit the entire Danube macro-region .
I refer in particular to cooperation in the areas of transport , the environment and economic development .
Greater cohesion at regional level will facilitate the future access of the entire Western Balkans region to the European Union .
It is not surprising that the Eurobarometer has indicated that the Croatians think that the European Union is not beneficial to them , as that is indeed the case .
I am voting against this motion for a resolution and its antisocial injunctions .
Negotiations with Croatia on its accession to the EU may be concluded shortly .
However , the necessary reforms need to be pursued with determination .
The most important reforms are the strengthening of public administration and the judiciary , combating corruption , supporting the return of refugees , fully cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , and restructuring the shipyards .
We must applaud the enormous progress already made .
However , at this final stage it is necessary to continue resolutely with the reforms needed to be able to conclude the negotiations regarding EU accession on time .
The fact that that the majority of Croatian citizens believe that accession to the EU would not benefit the country is worrying , so we need to work to ensure that Croatians see the European project as being theirs as well .
It is therefore crucial to give the citizens clear and factual information on the implications of Croatia 's accession to the EU .
in writing . - ( ES ) While I consider the accession of Croatia to the EU to be positive , provided that the Croatian people see it as so , I have not supported this motion for a resolution since they are various points that I reject , above all those related to the EU 's economic requirements .
I think the request that the Croatian authorities adopt measures that define and improve the participation of civil society players in the process of policy formulation and supervising the activities of the public authorities activities is both appropriate and valuable .
However , I cannot support the resolution given that I am totally against the neoliberal economic focus it contains and the measures that it asks to be implemented in this area .
Thus , I think it unacceptable that the EU demands that the Croatian Government reduces the redistributive role of the state and public spending and I reject the call to apply ' profitability ' as a principal criterion to evaluate the public health and social systems .
I am delighted with the progress made by Croatia in its accession into the European Union , including the amendment of the Constitution , the reform of the judiciary , freedom of the press , the protection of minorities , and closer cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
I therefore fully support the 2010 progress report on Croatia .
The prospect of joining the European Union is a powerful incentive for the other countries of the Western Balkans moving towards European integration to carry out the necessary political , economic and legislative reforms , to strengthen stability , and to promote coexistence and reconciliation in the region .
However , the Croatian authorities still have obstacles to overcome and challenges to address , such as combating corruption , getting the economy back on track , resolving bilateral disputes with neighbouring countries , and very low employment .
It is therefore necessary to urge Croatia to press ahead with the necessary reforms so as to meet the final criteria and to complete the negotiations .
in writing . - ( DE ) By supporting the motion for a resolution on the 2010 progress report on Croatia I would like to express my support for the swift acceptance of this country into the EU .
It is not only culturally and historically rooted in Central Europe , it also meets the accession criteria .
Although work still needs to be done in many areas , such as the fight against corruption , in light of the prosecution of the former prime minister , Ivo Sanader , there is no lack of positive will .
Croatia also seems to be prepared to deal with its past , as evidenced , for example , by the support for returning war refugees .
This has also been described in detail in the resolution .
However , by supporting several amendments , I have also expressed my rejection of the politically correct language of the resolution .
In several paragraphs it is absolutely intolerable .
However , so as not to block the Croatian people 's path to the EU and to demonstrate our good will , I finally voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) Among the candidate countries , Croatia is the country that has made the greatest amount of progress .
Thus , Croatia has proven its readiness to join the EU many times , for example with the settlement of the fishing dispute .
Progress has also been recorded with regard to the fight against corruption , as can be seen by the arrest of the former prime minister , Ivo Sanader .
When it comes to addressing the issue of war crimes , Croatia seems to be moving away from its past , for example by providing support for returning war refugees .
The motion for a resolution contains a few superfluous , overly politically correct platitudes , for example with regard to the protection of transsexuals in paragraph 5 .
However , the report is , by and large , acceptable .
It refers to the progress that has been made and seeks a swift accession process .
That is to be welcomed , as , from a cultural and historical point of view , Croatia is firmly rooted in Central Europe .
I therefore voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
Croatia is one of those countries which are drawing nearer to accession to the European Union .
During the last few years , Croatia has shown great initiative and has made progress in many areas , from the judiciary , to human rights .
Progress in these areas has given me great satisfaction , as a year ago I called on the Croatian Government to increase its efforts in amending its legislation in exactly these areas .
Croatia is currently struggling with the same problems as the majority of previous and current candidates for accession to the European Union , namely corruption , settling historical differences with neighbouring countries , and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
Solving problems of this type requires a huge effort not only from the authorities , but also from society .
One cannot change the situation of sexual or ethnic minorities without exerting some influence on the citizens ' outlook .
However , as the example of new Member States has shown , belonging to the European Union gradually helps to foster acceptance of persons of foreign descent or differing sexual orientation .
The message that the European Union is ready to accept a new member into its community should be conveyed to Croatia .
I hope this will happen soon .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because Croatia has made huge progress in attaining the criteria necessary for the conclusion of the accession negotiations .
Furthermore , it should be taken into account that the accession of Croatia would also encourage the rest of the countries of the Western Balkans to move towards EU Membership more quickly .
I welcome the Croatian Government 's efforts to combat various forms of corruption and the reforms of the public administration , and the judiciary being implemented .
However , in order to properly implement the principles of the rule of law and gain citizens ' confidence in the judiciary , the number of unresolved cases must be significantly reduced and the length of court procedures shortened .
Furthermore , we must ensure that war crimes trials are unbiased and impartial .
I agree with the proposal that greater attention must be paid to the safety of the Danube power plants due to be built .
Furthermore , the Croatian Government urgently has to address the structural weaknesses of the economy and devote greater attention to regional cooperation , in order to tackle bilateral issues with neighbouring countries .
I believe that negotiations with Croatia should only be completed once all the necessary reforms and other obligations have been implemented and without setting a specific time limit .
The Balkans region is crucial to the future geopolitical configuration of the European Union and , in this regard , Croatia is the country that has made the greatest progress in the accession process .
Europe could make a real difference in that region by acting as a real driving force through economic and political reforms .
That is why I voted for the motion for a resolution , given the policy of integration and expansion toward the democracy and market economy of south-west Europe .
It is my opinion that disrupting and / or impeding enlargement to embrace the Balkans will certainly not save the fate of the European economy .
It is important , then , to see Croatia as a nation that will help the entire Union to open its doors to other countries in the region .
It will thus play a strategic role as a forerunner of this new process of integration and development .
Croatia 's path to accession of the European Union has progressed significantly ; progress has been noted particularly in attaining the benchmarks set in the negotiating chapters .
It should be stressed that , according to Eurobarometer , the majority of the Croatian population believed very recently that accession to the EU would not benefit them .
It is important to give consideration to whether or not the Croatian people want to join the EU and to allow them a free choice .
The expansion of the European project is desirable , and beneficial to the creation of a single area of peace , freedom , democracy , progress and well-being .
However , it is crucial that this project is and continues to be based solely and fundamentally on the will of the people .
Croatia 's accession is important in geopolitical terms in order to encourage the rest of the countries of the Western Balkans to launch and resolutely implement reforms related to accession to the European project .
Following these benchmarks , I voted for this resolution .
in writing . - ( RO ) I welcome the progress made by Croatia in fulfilling the criteria required to conclude the accession negotiations .
However , the Croatian Government needs to improve the coordination of central administrative institutions responsible for environmental management , in particular those for spatial planning , as well as waste , water and air quality management , in order to be able to preserve sufficiently a unique environment and maintain a high level of biodiversity .
I think that the region 's economic development could be accelerated through close cooperation between Croatia and the other countries as part of the Strategy for the Danube Region , using various forms of cooperation in the field of transport , the environment and economic development within the Danube macro-region .
I abstained from this vote .
I am not opposed in principle to any country 's entry to a Union that I do not wish to see as a club closed to countries that respect minimum values of democracy and human rights , and whose people freely choose accession .
However , I cannot accept the pressures being applied to Croatia to speed up processes of privatising public companies .
Nor can I accept the Commission 's political interference in the internal decision-making process by supporting organisations that advocate accession in a country where , as the latest Eurobarometer shows , the majority of citizens believe that it would not be beneficial ; this is not surprising if we consider the antisocial nature of current EU policy .
Accession negotiations with Croatia can be completed in the first half of 2011 provided that the necessary reforms continue to be pursued resolutely by , in particular , continuing to combat corruption , ensuring refugee return , restructuring shipyards , as well as reforming the Constitution and the judiciary .
Regarding corruption , although I acknowledge the commitment of the Croatian Government , which is evident for example in the trials involving two former ministers and a former prime minister , this is nevertheless a phenomenon that continues to be a serious and widespread problem .
Judicial system reforms must also continue , notably by continuing the prosecution of war crimes and improving witness protection programmes .
The biggest challenge , however , could be that of explaining the benefits of EU membership to a somewhat sceptical population .
Indeed , a recent Eurobarometer survey indicated that the majority of Croatian citizens believe that EU membership would not benefit the country , which is a concern .
I therefore call on the government and civil society to work to ensure that the Croatians see the European project as being theirs as well .
EU membership will in any case be subject to a referendum .
in writing . - With this resolution , the European Parliament commends Croatia for the substantial progress achieved in attaining the benchmarks necessary for the conclusion of the accession negotiations ; it asks Croatia to pursue resolutely the necessary reforms in order to be able to attain the final benchmarks and to conclude the negotiations ; and it calls on the Commission to use all its capacities to support Croatia 's efforts to attain the benchmarks .
I voted in favour of this report because it sheds light on Croatia 's progress in terms of completing the procedures for accession to the European Union .
If Zagreb continues on the path of reform as it has done in recent years , there is a very good chance that negotiations will already be completed by June .
Now , however , the greatest challenge seems to be to convince local people that EU membership will bring real benefits to their country , since a recent official Eurobarometer poll seems to suggest that they believe otherwise .
In view of the fact that membership will still be subject to a referendum , we must work to ensure that the Croatians see the major European project as belonging to their history and their future .
in writing . - ( NL ) By June 2011 , candidate country Croatia will have completed its negotiations for accession to the European Union .
I am pleased with the progress of the negotiations , but I want to see action before then .
I do not want us to regret Croatia 's accession later : let Bulgaria 's and Romania 's accession be a hard lesson to us .
On paper , combating corruption is clearly one of the priorities of the Croatian Government , but we have seen very few corruption cases actually come to court .
The vast majority of cases remain stuck at the investigation stage .
This is remarkably often the case where senior officials are under investigation .
I want to see Zagreb take action .
After all , Croatia will receive some EUR 4 billion euros after it joins the EU .
We must be able to trust the Croatian politicians who will be responsible for spending that money .
We must learn from our experience with Bulgaria and Romania .
These countries joined the EU too quickly and , as a result , European money has found its way into all the wrong kinds of pockets .
Thus , as long as the fight against corruption remains stuck at the current level , we will be unable to complete the negotiation process with Croatia : it is as simple as that .
in writing . - The ECR Group is very much in favour of EU enlargement .
We believe it is one of the more successful aspects of EU policy , provided it is carried out according to rigorous criteria and that lessons are learned from other recent accessions .
For this reason , we voted in favour of this resolution .
However , we believe there are serious issues which still need to be resolved before Croatia accedes to the EU .
Corruption and judicial reform have not been properly addressed .
We are also concerned about media freedom , the prevalence of organised crime and the massive backlog of court cases .
Furthermore , there are still unresolved border issues with Croatia 's neighbours and we do not wish to see these imported into the EU .
We do not wish to see Croatia then blocking the aspirations of other candidates .
We already suffer from examples of this elsewhere .
in writing . - ( DE ) The motion for a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs is a very balanced one .
It mentions all of the remaining weak areas that are currently preventing the closure of the last remaining open negotiating chapter .
In its recommendations to the Croatian authorities , the report is mindful of sustainability , including with regard to the reforms of the judiciary and the fight against corruption , the guaranteed independence of which will be the key to Croatia 's future democratic development .
Moreover , the report does not forget to make the important point that the good work of the Croatian Government must continue with the same level of ambition after accession to the EU .
Recent months have shown that Croatia 's efforts to accede to the European Union as quickly as possible have had tangible results .
Reforms which began in previous years have contributed significantly to the development of many areas of life .
It is particularly heartening to see increased cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague and also progress achieved in the field of women 's rights and protection of ethnic minorities .
Regional initiatives , such as an understanding between Croatia , Serbia and Slovenia for a joint railway undertaking are indications of a desire for peaceful cooperation , and contribute to increased economic development in the Balkans .
European Union Member States should continue to support Croatia 's reform programme , paying particular attention to its most pressing problems , namely corruption , high levels of unemployment and the difficult situation the fragmented agricultural sector finds itself in .
I hope that , in accordance with assurances from the Hungarian Presidency , we will complete negotiations with Croatia in June , and that in the second half of 2011 during the Polish Presidency , Croatia will become a Member State of the European Union .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure
Colleagues , we shall start with the signing of the Lex Citizens ' initiative .
Dear Minister Martonyi , President-in-Office , dear Chairs , rapporteurs , today we are considering legal matters : the very important signing into law of a very important piece of European legislation .
It is important because we are giving another check to balance the powers of our institutions .
This regulation on the European Citizens ' initiative , which has been adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure , aims at providing our citizens with the same political initiative that the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament already enjoy .
One million signatures are needed - only 0.2 % of our citizens - to invite the European Commission to act in matters that concern them directly .
It allows them to be heard .
I will indeed establish a direct link between the citizens and the Union 's institutions , bridging the gap between them , between all of us in the European Union .
The European Parliament and the Council worked hard to achieve a rapid adoption of this citizen-friendly regulation at first reading .
I would like to thank all those who contributed to this success : the various Presidencies - in particular the Belgian and Hungarian Presidencies - , the Commission and the Members of this House .
I would like to give particular thanks to the Chairs of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs ( AFCO ) and the Committee on Petitions ( PETI ) , Carlo Casini and Erminia Mazzoni .
I will ask you to come forward for the signing of the procedure .
The four rapporteurs , Alain Lamassoure , Zita Gurmai , Diana Wallis and Gerald Häfner - I hope you are present and we can go through the procedure together - as well as the many other Members involved as shadow rapporteurs .
You can be proud of the work done for our citizens .
With the Council we shall now sign this act into law but , before that , I will ask our guest , who will often be present in the European Parliament this half-year , Minister Martonyi , to say a few words .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , in this unique and solemn moment , I recall the early days of the European Convention when we were discussing how what used to be called the ' democratic deficit of the European integration process ' could be eliminated , or at least reduced .
There was a common goal which we all shared , and that was to enhance the democratic functioning of the European Union .
One way of doing that has just been found , and that is to foster the participation of the citizens themselves in the democratic life of the Union .
That is how , and that is why , the right of the citizens ' initiative was included in the Treaty , and now citizens can approach the European Commission directly and invite it to submit a proposal for a legislative act of the European Union .
I firmly believe that this is a milestone on the path towards more democracy in the Union .
It is also the first element of direct democracy .
It establishes direct contact and dialogue between the institutions and citizens and encourages cross-border direct dialogue and cooperation .
It also encourages a sense of ownership : Europe is not them - Europe is us , and Europe will develop as we shape it ourselves , all of us together .
Yes , our motto , ' A strong Europe with a human touch ' depends upon all of us .
To achieve these goals and to implement the Treaty , clear , simple and user-friendly rules of procedure had to be established .
This has now been done and was the result of the good cooperation between all the institutions - the Commission , the Council and first and foremost , the European Parliament .
I would like to extend my special thanks to Mr Maroš Šefčovič of the Commission ; I would like to express my thanks to the Spanish and the Belgian Presidencies , both of them members of our trio ; and very special thanks and congratulations also have to be extended to the European Parliament , to all those who were involved in this extremely important job : the chairs of the committees , and also the rapporteurs Alain Lamassoure , Zita Gurmai , Diana Wallis and Gerald Häfner , and all the other Members who participated in this extremely important work .
This is a demonstration of the excellent cooperation and understanding not only between the European institutions , but also among the different political families or groups .
I can only express my hope that this cooperation and this understanding will have set a model for the future , both for the institutions and for the political groups .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Rising food prices ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on rising food prices .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , thank you for inviting the Hungarian Presidency to participate in this debate on rising food prices .
For a second time in three years , the issue is on the agenda .
Once again , rising food prices are causing social unrest and political instability in several countries .
Families in the poorest regions of the world are in difficulty .
Moreover , the Food and Agriculture Organisation tells us that the outlook is not good , with prices set to rise further this year as a result of adverse climatic conditions .
This is a pressing issue .
It was discussed between Agriculture Ministers and WTO Director-General Lamy in Berlin on 22 January 2011 , and once again in the Agriculture Council on 24 January this year .
The reasons for this latest rise in prices are complex and are a mixture of structural and temporary factors .
On the demand side , we have more people to feed than ever before .
On the supply side , droughts and floods have played their part in wrecking harvests , input costs have risen and this has all been compounded by financial speculation in the commodity markets .
So what can the European Union do to address this problem ?
We need to get our internal policies right , we need to improve global governance in this area and we need to make a real contribution to the most vulnerable .
Now is not the time for complacency , but we did make some important progress in all three aspects as a result of the last food prices crisis .
The Council , along with Parliament , is engaged in an intensive debate on the future development of the common agricultural policy .
This is highly relevant with regard to global food security .
Recent Council debates put food security at the centre of the discussion , asking the question how best to ensure that agricultural production in the EU will be both economically viable and environmentally sustainable in the future .
Let me also say that we have read with great interest Parliament 's resolution on the recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security , based on the report by the honourable Member , Daciana Sârbu .
There are ongoing discussions in the Council concerning the Commission 's Communication of 18 November 2010 on the future of the CAP , and the Hungarian Presidency plans to adopt Council conclusions at the Council meeting of 17 March .
We hope that the discussions concerning the legislative proposals scheduled to come out in the second semester of 2011 will lead to concrete progress .
We have made important progress towards a more coordinated and long-term international response to world food security .
We are a long way from reaching the Millennium Development Goal to halve the world 's hungry people by 2015 .
Hunger and food insecurity remain a reality for a billion people , but one of the UN 's recent achievements , following much work by the EU , has been the creation of the global partnership for agriculture , food security and nutrition .
This is being implemented by the revitalised Committee on World Food Security in the FAO .
The EU has also been spearheading the renewal and modernisation of the Food Aid Convention in order to better contribute to world food security and to improve the ability of the international community to deliver food assistance to the most vulnerable populations .
This is the way forward in order to enhance global governance in this area .
From a food security perspective , I would like to remind you of the Commission 's Communication on humanitarian food assistance , adopted at the end of March 2010 , and the subsequent Council Conclusions in mid-May 2010 , thus outlining a new policy framework for EU humanitarian action to strengthen efforts to tackle food insecurity in humanitarian crises .
The Commission 's Communication on assisting developing countries in addressing food security challenges , also adopted last year , called at the same time for a new common food security policy framework , further strengthening EU leadership in the global food security agenda and improving the effectiveness of EU assistance .
To this end , the Commission and Member States are jointly developing an implementation plan to translate this policy framework into concrete actions on the ground .
Let me also mention the EU 's EUR 1 billion food facility , which was agreed by Parliament and the Council .
We are in the third year of operation of this instrument which helps farmers in the developing world to increase agricultural production capacity .
This is a tangible sign of our determination to bring real assistance to the most vulnerable .
Decisions are about to commence on the future orientation of the EU development policy based on the Green Paper on EU development policy in support of inclusive growth and sustainable development .
With the Green Paper process , the Commission takes the initiative of attributing priority to economic growth generation , agriculture and food security in development cooperation in order to achieve inclusive and sustainable development in developing countries on the grounds of pro-poor solutions .
Given the rising food prices and rapid population growth , enhancing developing countries ' own food production capacities is of paramount importance .
We also welcome the new impetus given by the G20 Seoul summit to the WTO Doha development agenda .
The EU would give full backing to a deal which would make a significant contribution to providing stability by getting rid of export subsidies and prohibiting export restrictions .
The latter only serve to exacerbate price volatility and have exactly the opposite effect of the one desired .
Let me now come back to the issue of financial speculation .
The extent to which it contributes to price volatility is unclear , but there is a good reason to enhance transparency on the commodity markets .
The French Presidency of the G20 has identified this as a priority for the coming year .
The Hungarian Presidency of the EU is ready to work shoulder to shoulder with the French Presidency of the G20 to achieve concrete results .
The Hungarian Presidency is fully committed to working with you towards a first reading agreement on the Commission proposal on over-the-counter derivatives .
The world 's poor and hungry deserve an adequate and lasting response to their worries about rising food prices .
The European Union has been at the forefront in efforts to tackle the issue since the first crisis three years ago , but more needs to be done .
The Council remains fully committed to a collective and coherent response , both at EU and international level .
I am sure we can count on your support in all our efforts .
Thank you very much for your attention .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a statement on behalf of the Commission on rising food prices .
It was at my request that this issue was debated at the Agriculture Council of 24 January .
I therefore also welcome the opportunity given to me to have this dialogue with the European Parliament on a subject of such vital importance .
On this point , I would like to address two topics , which I think are interconnected : firstly , the situation on the world 's agricultural markets , where prices have been rising for several weeks , and , secondly , the G20 process on issues of food security and the volatility of agricultural prices .
Let us begin with the situation on the world 's agricultural markets .
Different reports produced by several international institutions , including that of the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations ( FAO ) , on rising agricultural and food prices have once again placed the world on alert .
Are we in the process of reliving the same rise in prices as in 2007-2008 ?
Although prices , particularly grain prices , have risen sharply since the summer , and also more recently , we do not seem to have reached the price levels of 2008 .
The situation around the world as regards common wheat is tight , but there is not a problem with market supply .
Current harvests in the southern hemisphere are larger than expected .
Nonetheless , to facilitate the end of the marketing years for the European Union market , we are thinking of suspending customs duties for imports under the tariff quotas for common wheat of low and average quality and for feed barley in the belief that this is one of the measures that could help to ease the market a little at European level .
It should be noted that the forecasts for global common wheat stocks at the end of the 2010-2011 marketing year are higher than in 2007 .
As for sugar , the prices are once again at record highs with , for white sugar , a price close to EUR 625 per tonne in mid-January .
The increase in prices follows two years of a global deficit resulting from low production .
The production of the current marketing year was recently revised downwards in certain countries , including Australia .
However , according to the latest forecasts , the world sugar balance should be in balance for the period 2010-2011 .
However , there is a lesson to be drawn from all this .
While markets may be tight , there has certainly been an over-reaction at the level of prices given what the physical fundamentals tell us .
Food security and the underlying issue of the volatility of agricultural prices are clearly global issues , which must be dealt with at a global level , and I am glad that the issue of food security and volatility is one of the priorities set by the G20 in Seoul .
This is a major challenge for the Commission as a whole .
As Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development I have already , and repeatedly , expressed my commitment in this area , in Berlin at the end of January for example , with my counterparts in the various countries involved in the G20 , but also recently , within the United Nations , with the Secretary-General , Ban Ki-moon , during a recent visit to New York .
Let us also remember that the issue of food security is clearly stated as being one of the challenges of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) in the Commission Communication on ' The CAP towards 2020 ' .
It is a crucial issue both for the European Union and the world 's poorest countries , which is why I am working closely with Commissioner Piebalgs on these issues in order to also adapt the EU 's development policy to this issue of food security better .
Today I would like to share with you my thoughts on these issues , in particular on four areas : transparency , stocks , volatility management options and the role for trade .
We hear that volatility is aggravated by a lack of transparency both for the physical markets and derivatives markets .
For the agricultural markets there are sources of data on production , consumption , trade and stocks .
International organisations , national services and specialised organisations , such as the International Grains Council , produce detailed data on this subject .
That said , certain data can be improved , especially data concerning stocks , on which there is a lack of information , in particular on the worldwide distribution of stocks .
The G20 leaders meeting in Seoul also asked the competent international organisations to improve information on stocks and production forecasts .
Improving the relevance of these data is a prerequisite for improving the transparency of the markets .
We also need to examine the issue of a forum for discussion at a global level among key market makers , both exporters and importers , so that crises are not simply noted when they occur .
That is why these three issues are linked : we must first have the information , then be able to process these data , and , finally , have a forum , at international level , where the situation noted can be discussed .
The Commission has published several communications on the price of agricultural products and foodstuffs .
In its most recent communication , the Commission launched actions to improve transparency along the entire food chain , and I am cooperating with European Commission Vice-President Antonio Tajani to move this key issue forward .
Proposals have also been announced to improve the transparency and supervision of products derived from agricultural commodities .
As volatility increases , it is important that futures markets continue to fulfil their risk hedging and price discovery role .
We therefore need a balanced and rigorous approach , and I welcome the work carried out by Commissioner Barnier in this area and am fully in favour of his work also covering the specific issue of agricultural raw materials .
On 2 February the Commission published a new , more global , communication on the commodities market and the financial markets that are derived from it .
This constitutes a contribution to the discussions conducted within the G20 both on the volatility of commodity prices and on the supervision of derivative markets .
We want to contribute , together with our G20 partners and more broadly , to more effective regulation of derivative markets in the interest of producers and users alike .
Therefore , I think that we need to work as a matter of priority in the coming months - until the summer I think - on the following issues : first , the availability and transparency of information relating to private and public stocks as well as to production and consumption ; second , the collection , processing and dissemination of this information ; the security mechanism for countries facing a situation of food tension ; the role and organisation of food aid at international level and in the European Union ; the improvement of international governance , for example through mechanisms for institutional dialogue between key countries ; the levels of investment in sustainable agricultural production and research not only in the European Union but also in the poorest countries .
The priority to be assigned to agriculture in development policies is also an issue to be addressed , especially as the Commission is preparing to adapt and reform development policy .
I think that , in this context , the European Union should have a far greater presence , not only with food aid but , above all , by providing support to countries in the south to enable them to develop their own local production capacities in a sustainable manner .
In the European Union we need to look more seriously - and I have every intention of doing so - into identifying market mechanisms that would enable us to prevent catastrophes in certain sectors as a result of temporary squeezes on the income levels of producers and input costs .
I am thinking in particular of livestock breeding .
Let me turn , finally , to the role of trade .
We believe that trade can contribute to global food security as it enables available food to be distributed around the world .
Export restrictions have only strengthened the spiralling increase in prices to the detriment of already fragile countries .
However , trade policy concerning foodstuffs should be connected to other policies relating to food at the international level if we want a coherent approach on this issue .
In conclusion , I can assure you that I am closely monitoring trends in food prices and I want to work in the future in consultation with you , here , in Parliament , and with the Council , on this issue , so as to come forward with concrete proposals , first and foremost with the reform of the common agricultural policy , but also with other , more specific , instruments .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , can I thank both the Council and Commission for a very clear statement of their intent on this very crucial issue of rising food prices .
Those of us in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development who are in the Chamber today are more accustomed to debating agricultural matters at midnight .
I am delighted that when agriculture suddenly becomes food , we debate this very important issue in the middle of the day when people can hear .
I think we should remember this .
( Applause )
Let me say very clearly that the disconnect between agriculture and food is part of the problem that we are debating here today .
The realities of agriculture and the low farm incomes in both Europe and the developing world are central to this debate and , lest we also forget , one of the crucial problems - and the Commission identified it in its position paper - is that rising commodity prices and rising food prices do not translate into higher farm incomes .
The real problem is that the costs of producing food are rising faster , and this is a treadmill on which farmers cannot continue .
The challenge for us as policy-makers is how to increase food production in a sustainable way , how to produce more from less , how to manage our stocks and how to deal with the issue of stock dislocation that the Commissioner has identified .
Global stocks are no longer the key figure ; we need to know where the stocks are and to realise that they will not come out of China or India .
What we need to do - and I think this has started to happen since my report during the last Parliamentary term - is to put agriculture and food centre stage .
Let me finish by saying this : we need to be cautious as to how we reform our agriculture policy . We must maintain and increase food production within the European Union as part of our contribution to global food security .
And yes , let me endorse your point about agriculture in the developing world : it has been neglected for far too long .
It is now high time that our policies assisted that agriculture .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I fully agree with the remark that Mairead McGuinness has just made on the fact that there is a fundamental link between the issues of food and agriculture .
The issue we are addressing is rising food prices and the consequences that may have for a certain number of populations around the globe , as well as in Europe .
I would first like to make the following observation .
The trend towards ever higher agricultural and commodities prices is , in my view , a long-term trend , which will continue for three main reasons : first , world demographic trends and a rising world population ; second , the fact that , with global warming , we are experiencing problematic weather hazards such as drought and floods ; third , because the world is also developing .
With new emerging economies consumption levels are increasing .
Therefore , the tight situation on agricultural markets and agricultural commodities is a trend that is on the increase .
It is aggravated by price volatility , and price volatility is a consequence of the financialisation of the global economy .
This is what we should be addressing if we want to resolve the agricultural issue and the food issue .
To do this - what the Commissioner said is important - there are two elements : yes , there needs to be transparency on stocks , but we also need a public policy on stocks in Europe and stock management at a global level , especially at the level of the United Nations .
Secondly , regulation of the financial markets and market speculation is essential , in particular by ensuring that there is no longer any connection between the speculative volume and the physical quantities exchanged on the markets .
As regards food , it is unacceptable that speculators speculate without taking account of the consequences this may have for world food and humanity .
This leads me to draw two major conclusions .
Firstly , we need a strong European policy and to strategically reassert Europe 's commitment to being a global player in the food and agricultural sectors .
Secondly , we need to change our development policy to ensure that globally - and Europe is a global player - we once again invest in agriculture , because we need agriculture to feed the world .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , it is welcome that we are actually discussing agriculture and food issues in the middle of the session on a Wednesday afternoon rather than at midnight .
I very much welcome that .
One of the reasons is that the massive volatility that we are witnessing today in food prices has at long last acted as a wake-up call to politicians across Europe .
Over the last 30 years , we have all become complacent as food prices declined year after year after year in real terms .
Food has never been cheaper than it has been in the last few years .
We have come to expect our supermarket shelves to be overloaded and groaning with food 24 hours a day .
Too much food was thought to be the problem .
That dominated the debate up until 2007 , rather than the problem being too little .
The recent price spikes are a turning point , a sign that the days of plenty may be drawing to a close .
Our current agricultural production model has been based on cheap energy , an abundance of land and plentiful supplies of water .
That model cannot meet the challenges we face in the future .
A rising population to 9 billion , growing demand from developing countries and the impact of climate change .
As Professor John Beddington , the UK 's Chief Scientific Officer , recently predicted , unless we take action we face a perfect storm of scarce energy supplies , scarcity of water and food shortages .
We need to act now and build a new agricultural model .
Europe needs to take the lead and the reform of the common agricultural policy gives us the opportunity to map out a sustainable food production system that can meet that huge demand in world food supplies that is going to be needed in the future .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , as in 2008 , the price of agricultural raw materials is soaring on world markets .
We are only at 3 % of the 2008 level .
The fall in production in certain traditionally exporting areas due to climate change , the diversion of cereals to biofuel production and the financial speculation accentuating the price rises are responsible for this situation , as evidenced by the reports of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) and the French authorities , and as also indicated by the Commission .
The consequences of this new food crisis are exacting a heavy toll on the 1.2 billion people in the world who live on less than USD 1.5 a day .
Since October , 44 million more people have joined those who live below the poverty line .
Just two days before the meeting of the G20 , what is Europe waiting for before it takes measures similar to those voted in favour of by the United States ?
Since 13 January 2011 , the US administration has demanded the limitation and the transparency of the positions taken by the financial funds on the agricultural commodities markets .
This is a first step towards countering the appetites of the speculators .
The impact is also dramatic for European farmers .
They are no longer able to feed their animals .
Hundreds of farms have gone bankrupt .
Five years ago , wheat was worth EUR 100 per tonne ; today it is traded at close to EUR 300 .
This is a whole new ball game .
The Commission is demanding that farmers adapt to market signals .
It would do well , today , to follow its own advice .
Faced with this crisis , the European Union cannot wait until 2014 to find solutions .
The crisis must be confronted and I propose three concrete actions .
Firstly the immediate creation , in the relevant countries , of cereal stocks to be made available to farmers at a subsidised price .
Secondly , the indexation of meat prices paid to farmers to fodder prices .
Thirdly , for 2011 , a mechanism for transferring part of the aid directed at supporting cereals towards livestock farming .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , rising food prices can bring governments to their knees .
We have seen that in recent days .
I would just like to take us back a little bit .
I have been a Member of this Parliament since 1989 .
When I came to Europe in 1989 , we did not have a food problem .
We had beef mountains , we had butter mountains , we had milk lakes and we had cereal mountains .
Now they are all gone and we are not producing enough food fast enough to feed ourselves .
So where has the food gone and why have we only a small supply ?
When a drought in any part of the world can actually cause total confusion in the whole market for everyone else , this is not a situation that we can allow to continue .
We have a situation in the European Union where farmers are leaving the industry hand over fist in every Member State .
In actual fact , what we are doing is to encourage them to go even faster , and we have no young farmers coming into the industry .
We must act before it is too late to reverse the trend in rising global food prices .
This action must be taken sooner rather than later to alleviate the pressure that has been put on ordinary people .
Shelter for ordinary people can be constructed through a strong common agricultural policy which ensures high-quality food at reasonable prices without negative impacts on the environment .
A strong pillar of direct payments is vital for the world and to meet food demands .
Further steps can be taken to solidify this in the future , which is much needed as far as investment and , indeed , research and development is concerned .
Hopefully we can find a way to do that .
The problem as I see it is that everyone comes here to these debates and makes all the right statements , says all the right platitudes , but they are not prepared to take the tough decisions necessary to help those most in need .
I have to say that talking is no longer enough : it is action we need on global stocks and volatility in the market , and until you start to tackle that problem , you will not solve the problem .
Madam President , as a politician involved in development policy , I always ask myself why it is actually so difficult to learn lessons from past crises and disasters .
It seems to me that the drama of the hunger riots of 2008 has still made too little impression on the minds and hearts of those with political and economic power and also of those who are unscrupulously speculating on the agricultural commodities markets .
The number of starving people worldwide has once again risen above a billion , and it is the poorest people in the world who are most affected by the price rises on the food markets .
They have to spend more than 80 % of their money each day on food .
The global promises of 2009 to provide more than USD 20 billion in agricultural aid to the developing countries , including USD 6 billion via the World Bank , for the fight against hunger have not been honoured .
So far only USD 925 million has been paid .
Speculations on the agricultural commodities markets no longer concern foodstuffs but are now almost exclusively concerned with financial market activities and transactions , which have a direct effect on food prices .
I am therefore pleased that the Commission is now starting to abandon its reticence towards this situation .
Nevertheless , the speculation in relation to price developments has not become more transparent , nor has it been controlled or restricted .
However , that is crucial if we are to be able to act effectively here and to bring about changes .
I therefore call on the Council , the Commission and the Member States to give the fight against hunger top priority in all policies , agendas and strategies and also to consider new methods and new approaches , such as food sovereignty , so that ultimately those who work the land have more creative power and influence over the supply of food to their own people in their regions .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , whilst food prices are undoubtedly rising , the situation at the farm gate is very different .
British farmers producing beef , sheep meat , pig meat and eggs have actually seen a drop in the value of their produce over the last year ; poultry meat is unchanged and milk only marginally higher ; sugar beet will fall next year .
These businesses are facing huge cost increases themselves and cannot sustain the status quo for more than a few months .
Then they will either succeed in claiming higher prices from the retailers or they will cease production .
Either way , retail food prices can only go higher .
What is the EU doing about this ?
Well , it is making it unnecessarily expensive to import non-GM soya beans .
It is charging farmers a global warming levy on their electricity bills , whilst those same farmers have lost thousands of tons of sugar beet and potatoes in the ground due to very cold weather .
The EU wants to increase the public subsidy to organic farming rather than allowing this sector to be consumer-led .
Any switching of conventional production systems to organic will lead to a reduction in food supplies .
Madam President , the main reasons for food inflation have been rising global commodity prices , soaring energy prices and volatility within the marketplace , and there is no doubt that the consumer is suffering .
It is , however , the agricultural industry which has been dealing with this for some time , as well as rising feed prices and rising fertiliser prices .
Profit margins have been reduced and many farmers , especially those in the intensive sectors , face financial ruin .
I would ask Parliament today to consider the consequences if we did not have support for farmers from the common agricultural policy .
What would we be paying for food in that financial climate ?
I would also urge Parliament to consider very strong support for the common agricultural policy in the very important debates that are coming up .
It is important that we have a policy that will support farmers and ensure adequate food supply at a fair price .
I would also say that fairness is absolutely essential , and in fairness we need transparency within the food supply chain .
This will only come , particularly in the United Kingdom , if we have a supermarket ombudsman .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr President , Commissioner , I will address an issue that has been raised on several occasions and often presented as a single reason : speculation .
I believe that , with regard to speculation , moderation is required .
It is clear that there is a definite link between certain financial activities and increased volatility and prices for raw materials .
However , looking at the entire issue solely in terms of financial speculation would certainly be a mistake , since part of what we call speculation is actually the legitimate hedging of prices on the part of producers and , as we are well aware , these producers could not do without this hedging possibility .
However , a situation must be avoided in which direct investment in commodities has a harmful impact on price volatility because of its massive scale or its purely speculative nature .
In this regard , the proposals made by Commissioner Barnier on financial matters , in particular the regulation of short selling and derivatives , and also the revision that is going to come from the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive ( MiFID ) , must give Parliament the opportunity to take account of aspects of commodities speculation in financial regulation and supervision , which will be put in place to ensure that those markets are also regulated in an effective yet pragmatic manner .
Commissioner , you said that these efforts should continue , and I believe that Parliament which , in a financial crisis , has complied with and , sometimes , anticipated what the Commission proposed , will live up to its responsibility .
Finally , I welcome the declaration of the Hungarian Presidency indicating that Europe would support the French Presidency of the G20 , which has made the regulation of the commodities markets one of its priorities .
( PT ) Madam President , prevention is always better than cure when it comes to disasters .
There is a real risk of a global food crisis .
That is not my phrase : it came from the government of one of the founding Member States of the European Union .
The signs are worrying .
The prices of some essential food products such as cereals do not stop rising and even hit record levels in January , according to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation .
The problem is obviously not European and , as has already been highlighted here today , the contribution of each of the hypothetical causes explaining the phenomenon is very far from being known
We know that the Commission is not ignoring the issue , and its communication of 2 February is a document that deserves to be read closely .
Nonetheless , the specific nature of agricultural production deserves particular attention in the context of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , by dedicating proper risk-analysis instruments to development cooperation policy , and by backing food production to the detriment of other forms of international aid .
I should also like to welcome France 's stance in the G20 here , influencing the regulation of the financial markets and the combating of price manipulation , as well as establishing rules that could prevent the sudden interruption of trade flows , as happened with Russia recently , for example .
Madam President , feeding our population has to be the highest duty of government , and indeed feeding our population is the primary objective of the common agricultural policy .
Food security is our North Star and this is an EU success story .
It is worth remembering there have been food riots on every continent but ours over the last year , and we are seeing governments fall on a virtually daily basis , it seems , across the rest of the world , while we have at least been able to provide a degree of a safe haven for our citizens so far .
So , food security is our priority .
You would not think it listening to some of the NGOs and lobbyists and , indeed , some of the politicians who have been involved in the debate about the reform of the common agricultural policy going forward .
Food security must be our focus and must be our priority , and I would disagree on one point with colleagues .
I do not believe that free trade is the answer .
I do not believe that global food security is something that we can achieve or should strive for .
Export bans caused by countries seeking to feed themselves are not , in themselves , unjustifiable , and I would quote the English President of the National Farmers Union , if you would forgive me briefly : ' if we are talking about morality , a country seeking to feed itself is nothing compared to rich countries allowing their agriculture to decline and then expecting the rest of the world to feed them .
We have a responsibility to lead the world in producing more , not less ' .
( CS ) Madam President , if we are to have a genuinely serious discussion about rising food prices , we cannot avoid the issue of how the European Union is itself contributing to this unwelcome trend , however uncomfortable that may be for some .
All commodities market analysts agree that there are two main factors behind the rise in food commodity prices .
The first is the large-scale printing of new money in the USA and the European Union in recent months .
This influx of new money into the markets is pushing the price of food and other commodities upwards .
It is not speculators that are to blame here , as the report under discussion today asserts , but rather the misguided policies of American , European and other central banks .
The second factor pushing up food prices is the EU and US policy of forcing consumers to make ever greater use of biofuels .
The commitments that the EU and the US have assumed in this area have led to a sharp increase in the amount of non-food commodities grown on agricultural land .
As a result , less and less agricultural land is used for food production , and it is therefore only logical that food prices increase .
If we want to succeed in lowering global food prices , we must abandon this absurd policy on biofuels .
( FR ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , all the hungry people in the world , all those who have to pay more to feed themselves or to clothe themselves , expect us to respond with more energy to the greatest calamity afflicting our planet today , that is , the calamity produced by money-grabbing food speculators .
They are the ones who are driving up food prices to the detriment of farmers and consumers .
I listened carefully to the impassioned plea by Jean-Paul Gauzès , but he will be aware that , in his region , cereals have been bought this year for the next harvest even before they have been sown .
Consequently , we are indeed talking about speculation .
The only way forward is for the European Union to act in several directions .
Firstly , it must act to stop these financial speculators by setting up a global agricultural and food fund , building up emergency stocks , putting in place mechanisms for stabilising real prices for actual and not virtual production under the auspices of the United Nations Organisation ( UNO ) .
Our common agricultural policy must also revert to a system ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Madam President , today in the European Parliament we are discussing the issue of rising food prices .
This phenomenon , of rising food prices , is felt by consumers in Hungary and other European countries alike .
Those who do not feel it are farmers and , in particular , smallholders .
How is this possible ?
Where does the money go ?
This puzzle , this mystery is solved , among others , by point ( d ) of the excellent motion for a resolution submitted by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , but the whole motion for a resolution is in itself excellent and I must congratulate them on it .
It also offers detailed answers and solutions .
Point ( d ) draws attention to the phenomenon of speculation .
It states that there has been an increase in speculation by purely financial institutions , that is , the commodity market speculation of money capital , which is causing an artificial inflation of commodity prices .
We therefore partially have the solution .
The money goes to the speculators , and to the purchasers and traders whose hunger for profits often knows no bounds .
How proud the Hungarian people would be if the Hungarian Presidency treated the resolution of this issue , that of food speculation , as a priority .
I must ask the attending representative of the Hungarian Presidency whether we can by any chance count on this , and I ask Mr Cioloş , EU Commissioner for Agriculture , what solution he envisages to food-related speculations .
Madam President , in developed countries the average household spends 10 % to 20 % of its income on food , whereas in developing countries the figure is generally as high as 80 % .
This underlines the dreadful consequences for those suffering countries .
We must respond and we must continue responding until they stand on their own feet .
In December 2008 this Parliament voted overwhelmingly in favour of my report on the EUR 1 billion food facility to provide financial aid to developing countries in light of soaring food prices at that time .
The purpose of this facility was to respond to those soaring prices , the causes of which were mainly , though not exclusively , droughts in grain-producing countries and rising oil prices .
The situation remains extremely volatile , affecting producers and consumers in both the EU and developing countries .
We must learn how to cooperate with other countries such as Thailand .
In the region , Thailand is a major producer of food , yet when some of its neighbours like Burma and Vietnam were in poverty and running out of food , we did not accept Thailand 's offer to cooperate with us and act as our agent in the region .
We have to learn how to do that .
We must ensure a quick transition to stability in North Africa .
We must ensure that aid is delivered to regions hit by unforeseen natural disasters such as Haiti and Pakistan , and in this regard we must continue to mobilise the reserve for emergency aid , allowing the EU to respond promptly to specific aid needs arising from such events .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first allow to me to express the regret that it took a crisis in Europe to trigger the debate we are having today and the motion for a resolution we will vote on tomorrow .
Just last year , when the developing countries rose up in what was called the ' food riots ' , Europe simply proposed emergency response measures , that is , to send seedlings and fertilisers , as though the problem were cyclical , when we have long been warning of structural problems .
We have a common agricultural policy ( CAP ) that lacks effective regulatory mechanisms because the liberal majority still believes that nothing must restrict the market .
There is widespread , economically destabilising and morally unacceptable speculation on agricultural products of developing countries that are prisoners of single-crop farming for export , with a Europe that does not support them and allocates only 4 % of its development aid to the agricultural sector .
With this resolution , Parliament as a whole finally acknowledges that the right to food is a basic human right , that it is unacceptable that the hunger of some is exploited for the benefit of others , that regulation is indispensable in ensuring price stability , and that trade agreements must preserve small family farms and the right to food .
Today , Parliament is delivering a clear message .
It is up to the Commission and the Council to translate it .
Madam President , by the time I sit down , 16 people will have died of starvation .
That is about the size of that part of the Chamber over there .
Every day 36 000 people die of starvation around the world because they do not have enough food to eat .
The European Union was self-sufficient in food until recently .
Now it is importing food .
It is actually taking food away from the poorest people 's mouths .
I am told that the EU is importing from the rest of the world an amount of food that would take about 35 million hectares of land to grow .
We should be self-sufficient in food , and we should help the developing countries to be self-sufficient in food .
There is an answer to all this .
In the 1960s in India , there was a revolution in green agriculture under Professor Borlaug .
People said that India would starve .
India did not starve .
Brazil is now self-sufficient in food .
We can do it if we have the will .
( PT ) Madam President , three years after the crisis of 2008 , the world is on the brink of another food crisis .
To prevent it , we have to look at its causes and attack them .
We have to look at the agricultural and trade policies that are destroying small and medium-sized agriculture , that promote models of intensive production for export and that , in this way , threaten food security and sovereignty ; as is the case with the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
We have to look at the trend towards increased oil prices and at farmers ' high level of dependency on this raw material ; this dependency must be reduced .
We have to look at the enormous power of the agribusiness multinationals that have a monopoly on the key factors of production ; at the growing use of fertile soil for purposes other than food production ; at the appropriation of land from the local communities that live and work on it .
Above all , we have to look at and attack the irrationality of an inhuman system that allows speculation on foodstuffs .
We have to put an immediate stop to the financial instruments that enable speculation : the EU has to accept this or be complicit - as it already is - in its consequences .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , eating and drinking - hardly anything could be more commonplace and self-evident for us .
However , what we take so much for granted is , for many people , becoming a serious challenge that they are barely able to cope with .
Food prices have now risen sharply , which has made the situation even worse for many people .
A package of measures is needed to tackle the multiple causes of the price rise .
In this regard , it is important to prevent price speculation and to establish stocks .
In so doing , the dominant position on the market of some food corporations and chain stores must also be examined .
The developing countries also need greater support from us to develop their agriculture .
That is the only way we will succeed in providing food for the poorest people and improve their economic situation .
In order that we may have no misconceptions about this : appropriate prices for agricultural commodities are not the problem .
On the contrary , they represent the solution to the problem .
Appropriate prices for agricultural commodities - appropriate , as far as I am concerned , means free of speculation - are , in my opinion , the crucial prerequisite for the establishment of agriculture in the developing countries .
Adequate food is a human right and hunger is a crime against humanity .
Supplying the population with high-quality and affordable food within the European Union , but also worldwide , must therefore be a central concern of European agricultural policy .
Madam President , for the past 30 years food prices have been both low and stable .
Now , the United Nations FAO has warned that rising energy costs , growing world population , greater wealth and climate change are about to present huge challenges to the world food system and to the cost of food .
This will have two important consequences on European governments .
First , the rising cost of food and energy hits the very poorest families hardest .
Second , at a time when Europeans most need a period of price stability while the economy recovers , rising food prices will fuel inflation .
In the short term , the temptation will be to import cheaper food and to expect the food and farming industry to absorb the greater cost .
Neither route would be wise .
Over-reliance on imported food would dangerously expose consumers to price volatility , and over-pressuring the farming sector , which already faces steep cost increases and depressed margins , would endanger productive capacity .
We need to invest in the common agricultural policy .
Technology will be the key and now is the right time to do this .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the increase in food prices requires two types of response .
The first concerns the need to plan medium- and long-term actions .
In this sense , answers must come from the new common agricultural policy , which must ensure food security for European citizens , provide consumers with food at affordable prices and protect farmers ' incomes .
With the new CAP we must give - and this is what we are in fact doing - strong support to farm incomes under the first pillar and support measures for rural development , increasing investment in agriculture and food security .
The second response is the need to intervene with emergency measures to protect the weakest link in the chain , because when food prices fluctuate , the effects are actually quite strange : when prices rise , producers and farmers do not derive any benefit , but when prices fall , producers see their profits and their already meagre earnings decrease .
It is clear then that there are problems in the supply chain and a lack of transparency .
Commissioner , these serious problems in the supply chain include , for example , abuse of dominant purchasing power , unfair contractual practices - including late payments - unilateral changes to contracts , advance payments for access to negotiations and uneven distribution of profit margins along the food supply chain .
The Commission must propose measures ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , social tensions , such as the recent ones in North Africa , are almost always triggered by rising food prices .
The record increase in the prices of cereals , sugar and vegetable oils is a clear sign of the increasing imbalance between global supply and demand .
A further - sadly possible - rise in prices would have dramatic consequences particularly for those parts of the world where food expenditure accounts for more than 40 % of per capita income .
It also poses a real risk of creating tensions throughout the entire planet in an increasingly interdependent world economy .
The European Union must therefore have a clear awareness that agricultural policies - the common agricultural policy for the European Union and the Farm Bill for the United States - have a role of extraordinary and strategic importance to play in the world order , a role that goes far beyond the legitimate protection of farmers ' incomes .
We need , Madam President , a new global food policy capable of coordinating agricultural policies at international level .
Personally I hope that the forthcoming G20 summit will be an opportunity to actually embark on this new path .
Madam President , the relentless increase in the price of oil and its consequent upward pressure on fertiliser prices , together with swingeing increases in the price of wheat , maize and other cereals , is creating a crisis in our farm sector , as well as a growing global crisis .
It is worth remembering that the uprising in Tunisia which set off the domino effect across the entire Middle East began with the self-immolation of a poor street food trader .
Europe 's farmers can make a positive intervention in helping to resolve this crisis if they are provided with the appropriate tools .
It is time we grasped the opportunities provided by biotechnology to help us meet growing demand for quality food products .
More than 125 million hectares of GM crops are being grown commercially worldwide by more than 13 million farmers , and yet we do not mention biotechnology in this resolution .
Wake up and smell the coffee , Europe , before we have food riots on our streets !
( EL ) Madam President , there are several reasons for the widespread volatility in food prices : extreme weather conditions , limited natural and energy resources and the increase in the world population .
Another two reasons should also be highlighted : concentrations , by which I mean the oligopoly of the multinationals in the food supply chain , and a lack of transparency and speculation on the commodity markets .
In the wake of deregulation of the financial markets , futures trading on the commodity exchanges changed from a hedging tool to a tool for speculative transactions .
The most important exchanges are located outside Europe .
Following the financial crisis , various hedge funds turned to the commodity exchanges , where financial reserves are now fifteen times higher than actual agricultural stocks , in order to recoup their losses .
We therefore need an institutional framework limiting their investments in derivative agricultural markets directly linked to the food sector .
I welcome the initiatives being taken by the French Presidency of the G20 and I firmly believe that maintaining a strong European agricultural sector in order to safeguard food security depends on securing a fair income for farmers and taking effective measures to regulate the market within the framework of the new CAP .
Madam President , let me make it absolutely clear that I speak on behalf of those in the developing world and not in defence of the common agricultural policy .
According to the World Bank , over 44 million people have been plunged into dire poverty as a result of rising food prices .
There are a myriad of contributory factors - fewer smallholdings , deforestation , desertification , lack of access to water and climate change .
Hence , we need a holistic approach to ensure that we encourage people to take care of their own development needs and to ensure food security at local level .
We need to reform the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy so that there are no direct or indirect negative impacts on the developing and developed countries .
We must promote local land ownership and , finally , we must strip away the obscenity of land grab , whereby land is bought and used by foreign investment companies and foreign companies for their own needs .
There is no defence for this obscenity .
( PL ) Madam President , consumers as well as farmers have every right to ask us politicians what is going on .
Why is the food market in the situation it is in ?
Farmers know what profits they make , how much they sell their products for , and they know how much they and other consumers pay for food .
What can we say to them today ?
Let us remember 2008 and the situation the food market was in .
Did we learn from this ?
My answer is that we did not .
We are still limiting production .
To make matters worse , we are paying to reduce production , while previously we paid to increase it .
This Chamber has heard other comments concerning agriculture .
Maybe our colleagues should come here today and listen .
Maybe they would learn something about food security .
There is a continuing debate about the future of the common agricultural policy post-2013 and once again everyone wants to lower expenditure on the CAP .
The current situation , this crisis , has occurred to warn us against a disastrous political decision .
We have a chance to rectify our mistakes .
We talk about stability .
We ask why there are no reserves but we are limiting agricultural trends .
Where are these reserves to come from ?
Who will pay for them ?
Commissioner , this situation , this crisis is providing you with exceptionally strong arguments .
Ladies and gentlemen present in this Chamber , we must convince those remaining of the seriousness of the situation and of the responsibility of this House for the future of the CAP and for feeding our society .
The problem of food security is becoming a global problem .
It is good that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Madam President , rising food prices hit the most vulnerable population groups .
Against a background where , in 2010 , the number of undernourished people in the world reached 925 million , providing food security must become a priority for the European Union .
Extreme natural phenomena are not the only cause of rising food prices , but the volatility of the markets and the subsidy on biogas production also play a role .
I call on the Commission to create instruments to combat price volatility and excessive speculation , which in turn help exacerbate the global food crisis .
I must also stress that , in most cases , the rise in food prices does not result either in an increase in farmers ' incomes .
On the contrary , due to the poor operation of the supply chain , the remuneration received by farmers is far from fair .
I believe that the problem of rising prices helps dismantle the arguments against maintaining a strong common agricultural policy .
( DE ) Madam President , a few days ago one of the largest German newspapers had a picture on the front page of a bread roll with barbed wire around it .
The article was about the fight for bread .
I think that there will hardly be a topic that will occupy us as much during this and the forthcoming decades as the question of the availability of food .
It is therefore good that we are talking about it as the reason for that - namely increasing demand - will not be going away and so prices will also continue to rise .
We must now give political attention to this whole situation .
We must consider how we can produce food and make it available .
Commissioner , the idea of proposing further set-aside areas within the framework of the common agricultural policy by means of screening is the wrong approach .
We need to make the land that we have productive .
However , we should not view all of this in too negative a light .
For years we have complained that food prices are too low .
If we consider , for example , whether EUR 100 for a tonne of wheat really is an appropriate price then we have to say perhaps not .
If we consider what proportion of the price of the final product , for instance bread , is represented by the price of the raw materials then I think that the increase in the prices of the raw materials is not the only reason for rising food prices ; other factors are also involved .
Thus , this whole issue is also an opportunity for agriculture to put itself in a better position for the future .
( DE ) Madam President , food prices have reached new record highs .
The volatility of food prices has increased in recent years for various reasons .
There is , therefore , great cause for concern .
Climate change is causing extreme weather conditions and in some countries whole crops have been destroyed .
In addition , there is increasing speculation on food , the danger of which cannot be overestimated - you only have to look at the financial crisis .
Moreover , there is increasingly often competition between providing food for the poor and running the cars of the rich .
We need to find solutions so that farmers have sufficient incentive to produce food and that only areas that are not used for food production are used for the production of the likes of biofuels .
For me as a Social Democrat it is important that everyone has access to wholesome food at reasonable prices and at the same time that farmers are able to receive a reasonable income for their work .
( PL ) Madam President , let us just say openly that there are powerful trade lobbies active in the European Union in whose interest it is to weaken European agriculture so that greater profits can be made by importing food from all over the world .
We have heard it said many times in this Parliament that markets should be opened up in order to prevent prices rising .
We reformed sugar production , opened up the markets , restricted sugar production in Europe and abolished export subsidies .
What was the result ?
The result was that sugar prices did not fall , they simply increased .
This should be a lesson for all of us .
It is not the way forward .
I agree with Mr Smith who said that the market is not the answer .
We really should not bow to the trade lobbyists , but look to guarantee reasonable food prices by better protection of our agriculture , its production potential , and food security .
Only then will we have sensible prices .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I fully share the concerns aroused by rising food prices , and I could hardly do otherwise , as this is an issue that is very closely connected to the lives of European citizens and especially of the less well-off classes .
These increases result in an inability to meet the basic food needs of the populations of all countries in the developing world .
Faced with this scenario , the developed countries , with the EU Member States among them , cannot remain indifferent .
In the new common agricultural policy , we must therefore provide instruments that are capable of reducing price volatility , limiting speculation on agricultural commodities and ensuring an adequate level of production within the EU .
I must therefore stress the fact that we cannot leave land idle at a time when the world population is growing , making it necessary to increase the supply of food .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , I would like to present a statistic , an observation , and three courses of action .
The statistic is that , whenever food prices increase by 1 % , 16 million people around the world are plunged into dire poverty .
The observation is that , it is impossible to prevent volatility , especially on agricultural markets , extreme volatility is not inevitable and it can be combated , however difficult this may be .
The three courses of action , which have already been mentioned , are : firstly , to give priority , in development policy , to subsistence farming and regional food markets ; secondly , the need for a public regulation policy , including through stock-piling and stock management ; thirdly , an outright ban on speculation on basic food products .
Europe must be there , at the forefront , especially at the level of the G20 .
What I have heard from János Martonyi , Commissioner Cioloş and , in other places , from Commissioner Barnier , is to be welcomed .
President Sarkozy was very clear and we have great hopes that the French Presidency will be a driving force in this area at the level of the G20 .
( DE ) Madam President , market fluctuations are important for the proper functioning of markets in order to create incentives for the buying and selling of goods .
For us farmers , commodity futures trading is a basic component of the buying and selling of harvested crops .
It provides an important opportunity to achieve planning certainty through the early setting of prices and quantities .
In contrast to the situation in our prosperous industrialised nations , rising food prices are a particular problem in the poor regions of the world where people have to spend a large proportion of their income on food .
We must not intervene in the markets every time the prices change in an attempt to combat natural fluctuations .
However , without internationally applicable framework legislation for the financial markets , we cannot even start to think about regulating the commodities markets , because if there is too much money in the financial market it will find suitable equivalents , and commodities are currently highly regarded .
Therefore , we should not be surprised if agricultural commodities are now also a sought-after trading objective .
- ( SK ) Madam President , the food crisis caused by the exceptionally poor harvest last year has highlighted to us the shortcomings of our agriculture and food policy .
The current food price increases can be blamed partly on the poor harvest .
If something is in short supply , the price of that item naturally rises on the market .
However , the issue is that the shortage of certain agricultural products , Commissioner , may to a large extent be ascribed to the misguided agricultural policy of the European Commission , which has long discriminated against the new Member States and their famers through its subsidy policy .
Do not be surprised , Commissioner , if farmers who cannot get prices for their products that will at least cover production costs simply do not sow the crop or break up their herds .
They are waiting patiently until hungry and rightly annoyed citizens direct their anger against those officials in Brussels who have long failed to resolve the general and widely recognised problems of agriculture .
You know , Commissioner , the shortage of agricultural products in the new Member States is not caused by poor harvests but by the fact that it no longer pays our farmers to produce under your subsidy and pricing policy .
They are waiting , however .
When they are given the same subsidies as their counterparts in France , they will definitely start planting crops .
( DE ) Madam President , the provision of daily necessities , and in particular agricultural commodities , must not be left at the mercy of the efforts of speculators to maximise short-term profits .
The projects announced by the Commission in the new strategy for commodities and raw materials , aimed at securing transparency and stability on the commodities markets , are therefore welcome .
In view of the forecasts that food production will have to be increased by 70 % by 2050 in order to meet demand , particular attention should be paid above all to pillar 3 - recycling and boosting resource efficiency - and proposals should be tabled soon .
In the area of raw materials diplomacy , I expect the EU to provide developing countries with the expertise to bring about the sustainable and environmentally sound extraction of raw materials .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , an intense debate has been conducted on an issue which clearly causes us concern and which is highlighted when the situation so requires .
It is , however , a permanent concern of the Commission and the European institutions , since we are lucky enough to have a common agricultural policy , which needs adapting , but which is an important tool in enabling us to manage these issues .
However , I think that this debate has also shown us that our stability now increasingly depends on international balances and world stability .
This must be incorporated , even when we talk about our common agricultural policy .
I think it is also clear that rising food prices is a worrying trend which , in addition to the issue of volatility and the considerable variation in prices , makes the problem we have to solve even worse .
It is clear that , if there is a need for greater production on the market , there is a need for investment in agriculture .
However , for farmers to be able to invest , they need , above all else , stable incomes to give them the courage to take this step .
That is why , in the medium and long term , our common agricultural policy must be conceived with this in mind .
It must offer a minimum of stability and encourage investment so that our farmers can produce and supply our markets .
It has also emerged in the course of the debate that it is necessary to ensure that our common agricultural policy and the agricultural policies of developed countries are also in step with the development of agriculture in the southern countries and that our policy to support cooperation and development with the southern countries is in step with the common agricultural policy .
At the same time , our common agricultural policy must guarantee the sustainable development of agriculture .
It may be necessary to review the instruments at our disposal for managing these extreme market situations , while allowing the market to play its role without , however , being deprived of the necessary instruments to enable us to act and to avoid being caught unprepared for crisis situations .
The common agricultural policy still has work to do on this point in the months and years ahead .
The issue of speculation , and hence of volatility , needs to be addressed , and I am not speaking euphemistically .
The Commission has already set out proposals , which it intends to follow up , to deal with this situation .
On this point , therefore , we are not talking simply of wishes but of concrete proposals .
We must also consider the role that the European Union has to play on the international scene with regard to the food problem .
This issue cannot be stabilised in the European Union if it is not stable at international level .
It may also be necessary to review our role in agricultural policy and in development policy and the way in which we address the food issue through different policies : trade policy , development policy , and financial policy .
Perhaps here too we need concerted action .
I have also taken account of the need to act in the short term in certain sectors , and I am thinking in particular of the animal sector which , it is clear , is going through a difficult period as a result of strong pressure from all sides , low prices for producers , who are not benefiting from rising prices , and also high prices of inputs .
I have taken note of this issue .
I have also noted the various proposals and suggestions that you have put forward .
As regards the balance of aid between the crop sector and the animal sector , for example , the Member States already have the possibility to act on the decisions taken in 2008 in the health check of the common agricultural policy .
On the issue of stocks , it is an issue that must be analysed once again and reviewed since , with high prices , it is now impossible to speak of intervention stocks .
However , it may be necessary to decide what role such stocks can play and how they could influence the proper functioning of the markets .
I think that these are questions we must ask ourselves before we put forward proposals to this effect .
Finally , I would like to say to Jaroslav Paška that differences in payment between Member States do not necessarily come from the Commission .
It is a decision taken by the Council , and by the agriculture ministers .
The final decision always comes from the regulation proposed by the Commission , but these are regulations of the Council and , now , of the Council and of Parliament .
I also wish to make clear that no subsidy is given to agricultural production for biofuels in the European Union .
Therefore , it is not the common agricultural policy that is stimulating the production of biofuels .
Nor is it the intention of the Commission to set land aside .
Something quite different is involved but , in any event , land is not going to be set aside in a situation where we actually need to produce .
These are the various points I wished to add in response to the issues raised .
I also thank you for this fruitful debate and I hope that today 's debate will still be fresh in people 's minds in a few months ' time when we will discuss the resources to be allocated to the common agricultural policy , a policy that is a basic instrument in addressing food security .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I would like to thank all the Members for this constructive debate .
I believe that the high level of political attention afforded by Parliament to this issue provides a helping hand to the Presidency to fulfil its agenda with regard to the rising food prices .
As has also been highlighted in this debate , due to the extent and depth of this issue , it requires multifaceted cooperation and complex solutions across various areas such as agriculture , regulation of financial products and services as well as development policy .
With respect to biofuel production , I would just like to repeat that the EU is fully aware that the unsustainable production of biofuels can have negative effects , notably mass deforestation and food shortages .
That is why the EU is committed to stepping up the development of second-generation biofuels made of non-food crops .
The EU has also abolished the perverse financial incentives for biofuel production at the expense of food production .
Given the deep structural global roots of the problem , Europe needs to play a leading role in tackling food prices and food security at global level .
This is already taking place through a number of international organisations and programmes such as FAO and the World Food Programme , as well as through more general forums such as the G20 .
I would just like to add that , on a personal level , this debate has reinforced my long-standing conviction that , to tackle global challenges , such as hunger in the world , volatility of food and raw material prices , turbulence on the financial markets , regulation of financial products and services , there is a need for much more global governance and more global rule-making .
Europe , based upon its unique experiences with governance and rule-making , does have a very special mission and responsibility here .
It is for this reason that we believe that Europe and the European Union have to take a leading role in combating all these challenges .
The Hungarian Presidency is pleased to note that it can count on Parliament to maintain the work being made by the EU , both in terms of policy and of efforts at international level .
To wind up the debate , six motions for resolutions have been tabled under Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 17 February 2011 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
Global food security is a crucial issue for the European Union .
Immediate and sustained action must be taken to guarantee the food security of the citizens of the EU and the planet as a whole .
It is essential to develop sustainable agriculture in developing countries and to allocate an appropriate share of EU development aid to the agricultural sector .
The spectacular reduction in the level of development aid allocated to agriculture since the 1980s is regrettable , and it is to be hoped that recognition of this need will reverse this trend .
The European Commission really must give priority to agriculture in its development aid , particularly aid to allow farmers to gain access to markets and aid to small and medium-sized family farms .
Humanitarian food aid must respond to the needs , challenges and structural limitations of developing countries , with account being taken of production , distribution and local transport as well as the trading capacities of these countries , in order to help lay the foundations of their long-term food security .
in writing . - ( GA ) Security of food supply is a major concern today .
There are 79 million people in the EU living below the poverty threshold and during the winter of last year food aid was given to 16 million people in the EU .
Since the cost of food is at a new high level for the seventh month in a row and since the volatility in prices is creating serious problems in the food chain , more people will have difficulty finding wholesome food at a reasonable cost .
Common agricultural policy ( CAP ) programmes , like the Programme for Deprived Persons , are of critical importance for providing food .
Programmes of this kind must be supported and prompt , long-term measures adopted to ensure security of food supply in the EU and throughout the world .
Currently 30 % of the food produced in the world is wasted .
This is unacceptable , immoral wastage and must be curbed .
A strong agricultural industry , a strong CAP and a food supply chain in which every effort is made to curb food wastage are essential for tackling the food supply challenge .
in writing - ( PL ) I approve of the fact that the European Parliament has focused on rising food prices .
Unfortunately , these price rises are not a short-term phenomenon , but seem to be developing into a long-term trend .
This is compounded by a growing demand for food , notably for cereals , poor harvests in recent years and low stocks , and also unfortunately financial operations and a weakening dollar .
All this is causing chaos on the markets .
From our point of view the social consequences are more significant .
The populations of many countries are growing exponentially , and they are permanently malnourished and hungry .
Their despair creates a source of increasing political tension .
We cannot observe these events passively .
We need international cooperation under the auspices of the UN and the European Union .
Countries that are members of the G-20 should effectively counteract speculation in agricultural products .
We should look again at the regulation of agricultural markets in Europe so as not to artificially restrict potential growth .
There should be no speculation in global hunger as the effect of this speculation will be that many innocent people will die of hunger , especially in the poorest nations .
During the second half of 2010 , the wholesale prices of agricultural produce increased by 32 % .
World grain consumption increased to 41 million tonnes between 2005 and 2010 compared to 21 million tonnes between 1990 and 2004 .
According to various analysts , a substantial food crisis in 2011 is a reality ; it would take just a single failed crop .
The biggest exporting countries Russia , Ukraine , China and Mexico have already been forced to import in order to ensure their supply .
The reasons for the increase in prices are vague , and one can no longer talk about the trends of the agricultural produce market .
Recent price increases have been dramatic and unpredictable as a result of various speculations .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the growing use of biofuel is increasingly reducing the share of grain used for animal and human consumption .
This has caused a very tense situation where we need to realise that increasing food prices lead to a growth in inflation , feed protectionism and cause unrest , all of which could lead to social , economic and political instability in Europe as well as globally .
Europe , as one of the biggest importers of food products , has a great influence on global food prices , but that equally makes it vulnerable to various price shocks .
I support the endeavours of the European Commission to accept a new legislative package by spring 2011 which would give the Commission greater authority to regulate markets and prevent speculation .
The European Union must find means to ensure sustainable prices and a sustainable economy .
A balance needs to be established between security and openness as well as development .
We must be ready to face a potential crisis .
The current high prices are a good thing for some people and a bad thing for others .
For example , they benefit wheat farmers in the EU , but not animal-based food producers .
They benefit countries with cereals available for export , but they create a deadlock and hunger for the people in developing countries who depend on cereal imports for their food .
Of course , the final outcome may differ from one area to another and / or from one producer to another .
That is because , concealed behind each group of winners and losers are problems in the agrofood chain in the EU , the threat of climate change to food security and the deadlocks created by superficial and inconsistent choices in connection with production , trade and development .
The EU must find realistic and balanced solutions , by evaluating the conditions calmly and seriously , with a sense of its role on the international markets .
The CAP reform must help in this direction .
in writing . - ( HU ) The steep rise in food prices is caused by the simultaneous effect of three factors : the loss of yields caused by natural disasters , the growing demand for food , especially on the part of China and India , and commodity exchange activities , that is , price speculation .
French President Nicolas Sarkozy raised a very pertinent question a couple of weeks ago : If money markets are regulated , why aren 't commodity markets ?
We must take action against speculation far more effectively at both EU and global level .
The main cause of the food price shock has been the tremendous fluctuation in supply .
Only 10-20 % of cereals change hands on the global market , and yet a reduction in production can result in a state of panic .
Based on forecasts of diminishing supplies , importers drive up prices .
It is not fair towards either the producers or the consumers that internal prices , too , are determined by export prices , since at least 80 % of production is used where it has been produced .
Russia , in its former position as an exporter , and currently as an importer , has been a fundamental influence on the European cereal and oil seed market .
The supply shock is further exacerbated by speculation on the futures markets , resulting in a food price shock .
The main problem is therefore not caused by a physical lack of food , but by food prices the poor can no longer afford .
This results in foodstuffs remaining in storage instead of being sold at equitable prices .
High prices have a debilitating effect on consumers , in particular those in the poor strata of society .
We are discussing a problem that is above all a political issue requiring a vision for the future .
However , much more than short-term remedies , what is needed is the courage to establish a new architecture that reconciles the need to increase food production by 70 % in the next 40 years with the increasingly limited natural resources .
Therefore , what is done or not done in Africa , in Asia , in the Americas or in Europe affects everyone , everywhere , with consequences for availability , for access and for food prices .
This is severely affecting the poor , as well as producers of meat and milk .
That is why the response must be global and goes far beyond the field of agricultural policy : it is essential to invoke a set of other policies , without which we will not truly be achieving the necessary solutions .
At global level , these solutions include advocating food as a right , supporting the countries ' abilities to feed themselves , supporting farmers and ensuring their fair access to value in the food chain , limiting financial speculation , protecting access to land , and creating food reserves .
in writing . - ( FI ) People 's right to adequate nutrition is a human right that has been acknowledged in the UN 's Universal Declaration of Human Rights since 1948 .
We should therefore remember that when we discuss the price of food , in fact we are talking about fundamental human rights .
The reform of the European Union 's common agricultural policy is taking place at the same time as a rise in global market prices for food .
If we are to respond to these changes in a sustainable way , based on human rights , we will need a comprehensive outlook and policy .
The price of food and food price trends are affected by several critical issues in global agriculture , such as climate change , energy policy , and the availability of natural resources and how efficiently they are used .
The European Union should be a pioneer for a new way of thinking about agriculture .
We need a food policy in which whole elements of the entire food production chain are assessed critically and its effects on health and the environment are taken into account .
A more natural and resourceefficient food policy needs to be supported and guided by means of both economic and policy measures .
Speculation on food prices should furthermore be restricted .
Michel Barnier , Commissioner for Internal Market and Services , has proposed new measures to curb speculation on basic commodities in the derivatives market .
Barnier has the right idea .
The dramatic fluctuations in the price of food are harming farmers , consumers and even entire national economies .
Commitments made in the derivatives market must be made more transparent and subject to greater monitoring , and , if necessary , restrictions on trading using the price of food should be introduced .
The creation of a sustainable food policy is at present one of the most important issues for the European Union .
According to a statement from the World Bank , food prices have risen by over 15 % since October 2010 , and the price of grain , for example , has risen at an annual rate of 39 % , according to the FAO .
Not only does an increase in food prices threaten the lowest income groups , but it also reveals much deeper and more serious problems that will pose a major threat in the future .
Global food production is threatened by a number of factors , such as pests , diseases and natural disasters .
These factors are currently being exacerbated by extreme weather conditions that are probably due to climate change .
A good example of this would be the drought and fires in Russia in 2010 , or the floods in Pakistan , and more recently in Australia .
We can expect the problem of rising food prices to get worse in the future .
It is pointless to discuss the causes of climate change here , because the risks are real and to doubt them is an unacceptable gamble .
However , food prices are also affected by economic factors , especially abuse of the market system through government manipulation of the US dollar exchange rate and irresponsible speculation in commodity trading .
Europe must realise that decisions made now will affect the future of the whole food system .
In the short term , we can focus on minimising food waste , decreasing dependence on imports , reducing or stabilising demand , and establishing regulatory mechanisms on the market in order to prevent speculation .
In view of current political conflicts , the fact that food prices are at their highest level since records began is a more pressing problem than ever .
At the end of the day , this is a matter of food supply , and in developing countries it is a question of the essential supply of basic foods .
The European Union is called on to speed up the progress of the global fight against poverty and hunger - there are around 1.4 billion people suffering extreme poverty .
Poverty is an issue within European borders , too .
The only means of guaranteeing food supply in Europe is through the European common agricultural policy .
The challenges faced by agriculture are huge and they encourage the tendency to produce ' more from less ' .
Higher food prices will not automatically be reflected in higher incomes for farmers ; the gap between producer and consumer prices is widening .
The reality of price management is complex : scarce raw materials , higher production costs , high fuel prices , dependency on harvests , exports and the world market - a dense network of causes that have to be disentangled by means of targeted measures .
In order to tackle these causes , measures and agreement across all policy areas are urgently needed .
I call on the Commission to make fundamental progress in strengthening agricultural production in Europe and in the developing countries .
Speculation on our most vital goods is unethical and we must take stronger action in this regard .
Food prices have been rising significantly in recent years , not so much because of the laws of supply and demand , but above all because of speculation .
The fact is that these increases primarily affect poorer people who have to spend more than half their income on food .
It is unacceptable some should profit from the hunger of others , whether in Europe or in developing countries .
Citizens have a right to food security , a precondition of which is access to healthy food for all .
Food shortages have a number of causes : examples include , inter alia , the wrong spatial planning and agricultural support policies , and climate change .
It is therefore crucial that the EU support farmers in cultivating their land and producing the necessary food products .
It is unacceptable that consumers should pay a lot and producers earn little , while speculators reap the rewards .
Climate change must also be an EU priority in the interest of food security .
in writing . - ( LV ) The last few months have seen a sharp rise in food prices , as a result of which the number of people living on the margins of poverty has rapidly increased .
The situation in Europe is not so critical , as our citizens ' incomes are incomparably greater than those in developing countries .
Nevertheless , our voters too are becoming aware of increasing food prices .
According to World Bank statistics , around 44 million people in developing countries have fallen into poverty since last June , since food prices at the beginning of 2011 have reached the 2008 level , when rising food and oil prices had a significantly adverse effect on poverty throughout the world .
Of course , the price of oil in the world has an effect on food prices , but we should still remember that in the summer of 2008 , oil was standing at USD 140 a barrel , whereas today it costs about USD 100 , which means that the rise in prices has been partly caused by speculation .
In order to avoid such situations in the future , the G20 countries must develop a mechanism to prevent such a price rise and speculation in foodstuffs .
In order to achieve this , we must have joint working at an international level .
The problem posed by variable food prices is further proof that we need a powerful common agricultural policy that is fair and provides a level playing field for all European farmers , so that our population can obtain good-quality food of high value at acceptable prices .
in writing . - ( LT ) On the subject of food prices , I would like to draw attention to two areas .
Firstly , as recent experience in my country shows , by manipulating public opinion a little it is very easy to influence rising food prices .
Due to resellers the price of sugar rose by more than 10 % in one day in the whole of Lithuania .
Therefore we cannot leave everyday foodstuffs to self-regulation .
They may be considered an investment , the management of which requires specific knowledge that the growers of agricultural products ( farmers ) do not possess .
Although the free movement of goods is one of the fundamental principles of the functioning of the EU free market , it is necessary to take more stringent measures both at Member State and EU levels , to restrict speculation in foodstuffs and defend the rights of the weaker half - consumers , small-scale farmers and traders - in relations with large processors and shopping centres .
The second dimension is the close link between food products and energy sources and the interrelationship between their prices .
On the one hand , in order to combat gas emissions that are driving climate change , we promote the use of biofuel ( and have even set obligatory quotas for its use ) .
On the other hand , the growing on agricultural land of plants intended for biofuel , rather than products intended for food , is precisely the thing that is driving up food prices .
Thus , although combating climate change is one of our priority objectives , we must find a means of not influencing the prices of foodstuffs , for instance , only land that will never be suitable for growing agricultural products should be used for biofuel .
The resolution on rising food prices addresses the finding that food prices are steadily increasing .
It is because of this increase that we are calling for urgent measures to combat price manipulation .
Climatic phenomena are one particularly noteworthy cause of this increase ; in other words , better water and soil management are needed .
The direct impact on the world 's population of an increase in food prices , which could provoke riots and unrest , must also encourage the G20 leaders to come to an agreement on market measures to combat speculation .
Situation in Egypt ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the situation in Egypt .
Commissioner Füle will take the floor on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is my pleasure to be here with you today .
As you are certainly aware , the High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission is visiting the southern Mediterranean at the moment and has asked me to address you on her behalf on the events in Egypt .
The political reality of Egypt changed spectacularly last Friday when President Mubarak stepped down after 30 years in office .
His departure has opened the way to the possible transformation of Egypt .
Let me repeat this in front of this House : the European Union salutes the courage of the Egyptian people who have pursued their struggle for democratic change peacefully and with dignity .
A great responsibility now rests on the shoulders of the Supreme Military Council to guide Egypt towards the democratic future for which its people have striven .
We have taken good note of the commitments to revise the Constitution , to hold parliamentary and presidential elections , to honour international treaties and obligations and to limit military rule to six months .
There are already reports on the first steps taken .
The proposal for a constitutional amendment should be delivered within ten days and submitted to popular vote within two months .
We will closely watch the steps that are taken and we hope they will pave the way towards democratic , free and fair elections later in the year .
The European Union responded to the events in Egypt as soon as the public protests escalated .
We repeatedly called on the Egyptian authorities to ensure an immediate transition and to respond to the democratic ambitions of the people .
The High Representative contacted directly the Egyptian Vice-President Omar Suleiman when concerns of rising violence or human rights abuses arose .
The European Union immediately expressed its readiness to lend full support to Egypt 's transition process towards democracy .
The European Council asked the High Representative to develop a package of measures supporting the transformation process in Egypt and Tunisia .
She was also asked , together with the Commission , to adapt European Union instruments to stimulate the transition and the country 's economic and social development .
We have started work on how we can best support Egypt and we are aiming at the kind of joined-up foreign policy response that the Treaty of Lisbon allows .
In doing so , we are listening to all voices , including those of the Members of this House .
You have a crucial contribution to make as democratically elected representatives and also as an arm of the budgetary authority .
The High Representative and I will also report on this process to the Foreign Affairs Council in a few days ' time .
I would like to add at this point that High Representative Ashton has convened a special session of the Foreign Affairs Council for this Sunday .
In Egypt , as in Tunisia , the European Union is unequivocally supportive of the transformation process that has started .
There is , however , an important difference .
In the case of Tunisia , the political situation has become a little clearer .
We have managed to establish a dialogue with the transitional government on the needs of the country and the possible European Union response .
The High Representative has been in close contact throughout with international leaders to discuss the challenges facing the region and to ensure a coordinated and , therefore , strong international response .
We will first seek to adjust our ongoing programmes to support the aspirations of the Egyptian people for reforms as and when matters clarify .
The European Union already has a wide portfolio of programmes in place in Egypt and spends close to EUR 150 million a year there .
For several years , we have been financing projects on democratic reforms , good governance and respect for human rights .
EUR 40 million were allocated to this objective in 2007-2010 and EUR 50 million are planned for 2011-2013 .
We also have more funds mobilised , in particular for civil society , through the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
The new situation in Egypt should create the right environment to put these funds to maximum use and push forward the implementation of much more ambitious programmes than was possible in the past .
Beyond the existing programmes and funds , we intend to listen to the Egyptians and hear where they consider the country needs our support most .
Their demands , in terms of democracy , social and economic perspectives and free , fair and inclusive elections , must be met .
The European Union stands ready to support this reform process based on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The Egyptian authorities have already approached us with initial requests , including on dealing with suspicions of the misappropriation of public funds .
We are coordinating with Member States on this and the Foreign Affairs Council is expected to address this issue .
As and when other requests come , we will do our utmost to be responsive and mobilise our expertise on democratisation , elections , human rights , economic and social reforms , as well as any other issues where Egyptians may see a need .
However , let me be clear .
It is not for us to dictate outcomes or impose solutions .
The future lies firmly in the hands of the people of Egypt .
I mentioned at the beginning that the High Representative and Vice-President is travelling in the region as we speak .
She was willing to visit Egypt as part of her trip and she expressed that will to her Egyptian counterparts .
She has now been invited to Cairo by the Egyptian authorities and will travel there on Monday evening , after the Foreign Affairs Council .
This will be an opportunity for her to listen to the Egyptians and to assess the priority needs of the country on the road to democracy .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Mubarak has disappeared from the scene and everyone seems to have breathed a sigh of relief .
Firstly , the Egyptian people , who have seen their legitimate expectations of greater dignity and democracy satisfied , and , secondly , the international community that , not without a certain cynicism , has gone from being the ally of yesterday to the nuisance of today and , perhaps , to the accused of the future .
However , Madam President , I do not believe that we should deceive ourselves .
The departure of Mr Mubarak and Mr Ben Alí are necessary conditions , but not sufficient , to guarantee the process of democratic transition , over which there still hang many uncertainties .
The most important thing is : to consolidate democracy .
Madam President , it is also evident that , although democratic freedoms and human rights can be initiated by sixteen days of protest and public spiritedness , and be proclaimed by law from morning to night , economic and social progress cannot , unfortunately , be marshalled in the same manner .
We have seen this in the heavy economic losses that both Egypt and Tunisia have been suffering in recent days .
Returning to the Commissioner 's speech , I would like to say that , after the initial hesitations and some problems with the EU 's image , it appears that things are back on track .
Baroness Ashton is in the region and what Mr Füle proposes makes a lot of sense .
Firstly , to firmly and wholeheartedly support the process of democratic transition and the political reforms in those countries.Secondly , to carry out a critical review of the European neighbourhood policy in a way that strengthens the democratic clause .
We have heard today , in the Enlarged Bureau , from the Polish Foreign Minister , the next President-in-Office of the Council , and his initiative to establish a Polish foundation on the subject of democracy and human rights .
This could also be extended to the entire EU .
Madam President , the EU has mobilised large amounts of resources in its Euro-Mediterranean policy with poor results .
The EU 's image has suffered in this conflict , even more than that of other international players .
However , the EU 's appeal remains intact .
I would like to say , Madam President , that this is a good opportunity to underline that the EU understands , once and for all , that today history is being made in the present and in these historic times we are living through we have to act as a global player and perform the necessary duties or we will have to resign ourselves , Madam President , to not playing on the international stage in the role we want to maintain and we will have to restrict ourselves , as was the case until now , to picking up the bill for major global problems .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , for years the Euro-Atlantic players thought that Islam could not possibly produce democratic behaviour and institutions .
Therefore , they opted for either supporting authoritarian regimes or mechanically transferring the Western model of democracy to the Arab countries .
Not only did both strategies fail , but they are responsible for the emergence of Islamic fundamentalists and the alienation of secular parts of the civil society .
The present events in Egypt prove that Islam need not only be fundamentalist , but that it can also be democratic if we accept that democracy may have a variable geometry , and if we let it grow naturally from its specific soil .
At the same time , we must admit that the popular uprising was on one hand the result of the evolution of Egyptian elites in the cyber or Internet society , and on the other hand the consequence of the existential hardships brought on by the global economic crisis .
If the European Union does not immediately and consistently address the need to overcome these hardships , the revolution might move towards anarchy ; and from there towards another dictatorship .
Finally , we must not only applaud the fact that no Israeli flags were burnt during the recent events in Egypt , but also observe that the lack of a long-due solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is at the origin of the feeling of failure which upset Arab society and fuelled its neurosis .
Therefore , the European Union should immediately take the initiative in order to use the transformation in Egypt - which today is a mere hope - and turn it into a real opportunity for internal democracy and regional peace .
In this context , the trips of the High Representative / Vice-President to the region , and her readiness to adapt and upgrade the necessary European instruments to cope with the challenges , are good news .
Her action must be supported by all of us .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , Mr Cohn-Bendit and myself we were very critical of Baroness Ashton two weeks ago , and I see that Mr Severin has adapted his language slightly and is speaking more boldly .
This intervention was absolutely necessary two weeks ago because the European Union had taken a wishy-washy attitude .
It is clear that the situation in Egypt demands three things : first of all , the Commission has to come forward with a credible and global plan for Tunisia and for Egypt - how to strengthen civil society , what to do to fight corruption , how to help in building democratic institutions , how to create an independent justice system and how to help economic construction and development .
These are questions not of millions , Commissioner , but of billions .
I think you will have to come forward as fast as possible with a global plan .
Secondly , yesterday our group had a videoconference with Dr Ayman Nour , one of the leading opposition leaders in Egypt , and there are a number of concerns .
In all this debate in Egypt on the change of the constitution , I can tell you that the secular democratic political parties are not involved for the moment and that is a message to give .
Secondly , to deal with this in two months and to organise elections in two months is a non-starter , because it means that we will not have normal political parties there participating in this .
Then there is the whole question of the proportional representation or an individual representation system there .
I sent a message to High Representative Ashton to ask that , in her contacts on Monday , she raise these three questions that are fundamental for a real democratic society in Egypt in the near future .
I think that Parliament should back her in these three claims and hope that she expressed these three elements , these three concerns , in her contacts in Egypt .
Thirdly , Commissioner , this is not the end .
We see things happening in Bahrain , in Yemen , in Algeria , in Iran , in Libya , in Morocco and in Kuwait .
What we also need now is a bold message from the High Representative on what is happening in these countries ; we should not wait until a number of things have happened .
On these issues we also need a clear communication from the Commission , and mainly from Baroness Ashton , on what is happening in these countries , expressing our support for the masses in those countries .
Madam President , Commissioner , I believe that we are , indeed , faced with several issues .
The first issue , which will not be resolved in two weeks , is that the Commission is wondering what a realpolitik means in a climate that has existed for years in the Mediterranean region and perhaps elsewhere .
In other words , what kind of relationships can and should the European Union have with these dictatorships and what form should they take .
For it is all rather extraordinary .
Today everyone says that Mr Mubarak was a dictator .
I did not hear that a month ago in the European Parliament .
He was not a dictator then .
So if you wish to freeze assets , do not simply freeze the assets of Mr Mubarak 's friends , but freeze those of Mr Mubarak and his family , as you did in Mr Ben Ali 's case ; you did not just freeze the assets of Mr Ben Ali 's entourage .
Secondly , I believe that what we are seeing today in Egypt and Tunisia is a democratic tsunami .
What did we do when a tsunami claimed scores of victims ?
We mobilised exceptional funds precisely to help the peoples affected .
We must now mobilise exceptional funds to help the peoples of Tunisia and Egypt , because the reasons behind the revolt were primarily hunger and poverty , and if this poverty is not alleviated during the democratic transition , there is the danger that some of the protestors will join the ranks , for example , of the fundamentalists and the hardliners .
We cannot delay .
I therefore believe that the Commission should offer a substantial package to Tunisia and Egypt and say that democracy is a good thing , because it also brings funding .
At the same time , I do not think that a trip by Baroness Ashton is sufficient as things stand today .
There must be a special envoy , because we must continue discussions with the committees .
For example , in Tunisia and Egypt , the committees re-drafting the constitution do not include members of the opposition parties or women .
There are only men , even though women took part in the demonstrations .
We must therefore support this process , and I believe that the Commission should do as it did in the past for the East , and offer its help with any constitutional aspects needed - in other words , it must be present on a political , legal and economic level .
I have one last point .
On the subject of this region , you are aware that discussions are currently taking place on the technical upgrading of the association agreements with Israel .
I do not think that this is the right solution .
I do not think that this is the right signal to send out .
Israel must be protected , but the policy of everyone in that region , including the Israeli Government , must be reviewed .
This is not about calling Israel into question , but rather the policy of its government .
To gift Israel today with the technical upgrading of the association agreement would send out a bad signal to the entire region .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , during the first thirty years of Israel 's existence , Egypt was its implacable foe .
For the past thirty years , the two countries have , mercifully , been at peace .
It is hard to overemphasise how important the Camp David accords are to Israel 's security .
Israelis are really afraid that the radical Muslim Brotherhood will indeed fill the vacuum created by the Egyptian revolution .
It is bad enough that Israel faces the terrorist threat of Hezbollah on the Lebanese border , the fanatics of Hamas launching rockets from Gaza and the existentialist threat from a nuclear-armed Iran .
However , an Islamist takeover in Egypt would almost certainly result in the revocation of the Egypt-Israel peace treaty and the opening of the Rafah border to Hamas .
The EU should make our help conditional on preserving the peace treaty , and not countenance supporting any political developments in Egypt that threaten the security of our strategic ally .
Supporting a democratic Egypt is incredibly important for us , and the economic challenges are massive .
I fully support the idea of mobilising loan finance from the EIB and EBRD , as suggested by the High Representative yesterday in the Financial Times .
Our political parties and groups in Europe must also help set up secular , pluralist , democratic sister parties in Egypt to compete freely in elections in six months time , when the military will hopefully leave power .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( HU ) Mr President , I cannot help but ask my fellow Member how balanced he thinks the picture he provided about Israel and the situation in the Middle East is , considering that he did not say one word about the gross violations of human rights committed by the state of Israel , including its disgraceful attack on Gaza , the so-called Security Fence , which has nothing to do with security , or all those human rights violations , which have been condemned by the UN and several other organisations and human rights groups .
Mr President , this debate is about how we helped Egypt .
Of course , I emphasise the need to also help our strategic ally , Israel .
I do not need to debate now why Israel is our ally , why it shares our common democratic values , why the security wall has actually reduced terrorist attacks and suicide bombers by over 90 % , or why Israel has a free press and has free elections , unlike any of its neighbours .
That is a debate for another time .
All I am saying at this stage is that the peace treaty with Israel is essential for regional stability and security and , of course , you must remember that the EU is a very big player within the Quartet .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Mr Füle , the European Union has a very serious problem with its neighbourhood policy , which must be corrected .
We have shifted from our necessary tutelage over the Mubarak and Ben Ali regimes -a collaborative approach which as I say was necessary- to a situation in which we are now seeking to decry these dictatorships and also seeking to have a degree of tutelage over the revolutionary process for democratic change staged by some sections of civil society .
The revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt have something in common .
The protesters are very young , the role of political organisations has been negligible -although this has not been the case with trade unions- and both revolutions are demanding a democratic welfare state , with religion completely out of the picture , which is something we should rejoice in .
However , our neighbourhood policy has been lacking in credibility .
One cannot play a necessary collaborative role towards two dictatorships one day only to revile them the next day and seek to have tutelage over the Egyptian constitutional reforms , which will shape the future state .
Mr Füle , we fail to understand why Article 2 of the association agreements has never been implemented .
Clause 2 has never been implemented .
Not in Egypt , not in Tunisia , not in Morocco , not in Israel .
Never .
This clause is a key element of the association agreements , yet it has never been implemented .
Its terms are very clear : any countries signing association agreements with the European Union must observe international law and human rights .
This key clause has never been put into practice , it has never been activated .
Therefore , we do not share this philosophy whereby free trade takes precedence over human rights in the Mediterranean region .
This is what needs to be changed , Mr Füle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fall of President Mubarak has paved the way for democracy , but it is also a tremendous opportunity to liberate the Egyptian people .
The reform of the country 's democratic institutions will allow for , amongst other things , further development of the economy and the possibility of spreading prosperity to all members of society , even the weakest .
Without democracy , economic development will serve only to enrich a few families , as has always been the way in countries that have no social justice .
European policy must therefore support Egypt as it embarks on reforms and help the Egyptian people to choose their own future unaided .
On the other hand , we must be clear with the future government of Cairo and emphasise that a new and more generous partnership policy will be conditional upon regional security and peace with Israel .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is only natural for revolutionary events to be accompanied by a great deal of emotion .
However , as Europeans standing on the outside , we should guard against such emotion and keep in view the reality of the situation .
If we now generally rejoice at the bursting out of democracy in Egypt or even in Tunisia , then we are ignoring reality .
The reality is that we have a military regime in Egypt , which - we hope - is only a transitional regime , and in Tunisia there is a regime that is not in a position to keep thousands or tens of thousands of people from emigrating illegally .
Europeans must , of course , be the friends of the peoples and the allies of freedom .
However , with the future in mind we must also act accordingly in relation to regimes and dictatorships that are still firmly in place in other Arab countries .
I believe that we can only do so if we are under no illusions and if we help these peoples to develop what is needed for democracy : the rule of law , a free market economy and the structures that are required for democracy to even be conceivable .
( The speaker agreed to take a question under the ' blue-card ' procedure ( Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) )
( DE ) Mr Mölzer , do you think it is in good taste for the EU currently to be negotiating with Colonel Gaddafi over the return of refugees when there have been 40 people injured in demonstrations in Libya today ?
Do you think it is better , together with the dictator , to now force the refugees to return ?
Do you think that is in good taste ?
( DE ) Mr Cohn-Bendit , you heard me say that the EU must take a position with regard to dictators that are still in power and are currently still accepted partners of the European Union , and we should do so before revolutionary changes occur in the countries concerned with regard to human rights , democratisation and the rule of law .
However , democratisation in these countries does not really provide grounds for asylum and if democracy now breaks out there it must also be possible for the people to be able to stay there .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , there is something we need to recognise and it is something that we have not yet learnt , namely that we often have to work with undemocratic regimes because many countries in this world are ruled by dictators .
In so doing , however , we must not forget to work together with civil society .
We need to do that in order both to support human rights and to develop democracy .
My second point is that we need to recognise that stability is not the only decisive factor .
Real stability will only come about if we support freedom .
If we do not seize the opportunity now and provide assistance to the courageous people in these countries , there is a risk that we will then find ourselves in a vacuum and unable to bring about a change - a wind of change - as we did in 1989 in Central and Eastern Europe , but instead we will see a situation like that of Iran in 1979 .
Providing assistance now also means stability and security for us - freedom and stability go hand in hand .
I am therefore thankful that , after the difficulties during the start-up phase of our new service , the External Action Service and the Commission are clearly now making progress and coming up with sensible proposals .
In this regard , it is important that we not only improve and enhance our assistance from a structural point of view , but also offer - whether our offers are accepted is up to the people there - to help these countries to build democratic structures so that they are in a position to enter into a democratic contest and so that the democrats win the elections and not , at the end of the day , those people who are perhaps organised by a military regime or the Muslim Brotherhood .
In this regard , we need to be more courageous and perhaps set out our programmes in a slightly more intelligent way than we have done in the past .
I hope that we are on the right track here .
If we achieve this , we will no longer make many of the mistakes of the past and we ought to use this to seize an opportunity for ourselves .
( NL ) Mr President , Mubarak may have gone , but that can only be an intermediate step .
Many other measures are needed , and the army , which is now holding the reins of power , must find a credible way of guiding the transition process which has already started .
That means lifting martial law and involving all democratic forces in the steps that are now being taken .
Drawing up a new constitution will be the first important test , in that respect .
For its part , the European Union should employ all possible means , direct and indirect , to guide that process .
Amongst other things , that will , indeed , mean helping democratic parties and civil society to develop .
It also means freezing the assets of those who have misused state funds .
Obviously - and this will be much harder and will require more work - we need to adopt a package of economic support measures , because the transition can only really be judged to be a success when the economy has picked up .
Finally , we have indeed noted that the democracy clauses which are in place , but which are not being applied , have proved unsuccessful .
They will therefore have to be evaluated .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the course of a revolution is seldom predictable .
That was the case with the American and the French revolutions , as well as the major revolution in Europe in 1989 / 91 .
It is important for us to be clear about one thing : this is and remains the Egyptian revolution .
It is not a European revolution that we would be able to steer .
Instead , what Baroness Ashton is doing there is right , namely to listen and not to try to dictate events there as Europe would wish .
However , one thing is key : there should not only be an election in Egypt in August , the Egyptians must have a genuine election .
It is good that the Muslim Brotherhood has involved itself in the process to amend the constitution , has founded a party and will take part in elections .
However , the secular powers must be equally involved so that the Egyptians will have a genuine election in this revolution for freedom .
I would like to say a few words about adaptation of the instruments .
That is jargon and hardly anyone understands what it means .
What does it mean ?
Firstly , it means providing more money to enable the European Investment Bank to do something . But what else does it mean ?
We need a European foundation for democracy to enable us , in future , to work more efficiently , more quickly and more democratically with these civil societies .
( PL ) - Mr President , once once again , Parliament is debating the situation in Egypt which is dynamic and requires monitoring .
In the meantime , the President of Egypt has resigned , but this has not lessened the fear of destabilisation in this country and the whole region .
The threat that power may be seized by extremist elements still exists .
Previously , I suggested that Parliament and the Commission should send a special observation mission to Egypt , and now we should grant this delegation the power to make decisions .
At stake is not only support for free elections , but also the provision of an emergency aid package , especially in view of the fact that the Egyptians themselves are appealing for financial aid for Egypt .
A deepening of the existing crisis could lead to the growth of unrest and anti-democratic feeling .
For the steps taken to be effective there should be consultation with diplomats from the United States , who are actively engaged in the politics of this region .
( NL ) Mr President , an appalling lack of political freedom , coupled with a harrowing socio-economic situation , has led to weeks of mass demonstrations and the eventual resignation of President Mubarak .
The word on the streets of Cairo was that only one Egyptian citizen was actually still adhering to the curfew : Hosni Mubarak .
However , witty remarks alone will not improve the average standard of living of the Egyptian people .
That will definitely be one of the first tasks of Mubarak 's successors , if they wish to avoid the risk of the explosion of a new wave of protests .
At the same time , we are still waiting for the internal democratisation process to get off the ground .
Ensuring the peaceful unfolding of that process will be of great importance , not just to Egyptian civilian society itself , but also to the region as a whole .
I welcome any assistance which the European Union can provide for this double transition process , and that also applies to the vulnerable position of the Copts and the continuity of Egyptian-Israeli relations .
( NL ) Mr President , now that the dust has settled in Egypt , it is time we opened our eyes to what is really happening in North Africa .
Many of the protesters are seeking , not democracy , but the imposition of sharia .
' Allah akbar ' was a slogan which was often heard during the protests .
Journalists were harassed , a Dutch correspondent was threatened with death and the saddest thing of all is that the splendid American journalist Lara Logan was sexually abused by a mob .
The ayatollahs behind dictator Ahmadinejad and Al Qaida must be having a field day .
The Muslim Brotherhood can now continue their holy war against Israel and the West .
I call on our members not to be naïve today .
The Egyptians are facing an important choice .
Will the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood come to power , or will Egypt get a secular government ?
Under sharia law , Coptic Christians , apostate Muslims , women and gays will have no decent future in Egypt .
If the Muslim Brotherhood 's Islamists have their way , Israel will once again be the target of violence .
The only fair position that we can adopt today must be : Egyptians , choose freedom , not sharia !
Islam and democracy do not mix .
The new Egyptian constitution must not be given over to sharia .
Imams should not be allowed to control politics .
The Dutch Party for Freedom has the guts to say that out loud .
Do Parliament and the European Commission have the guts to say that today ?
That is the question we must answer today .
Mr President , the departure of Hosni Mubarak signals the transition towards a pluralist democracy responding to the aspirations of the Egyptian people .
The Egyptian armed forces now have the responsibility of leading their country , in a short period of time , towards genuine democracy , the rule of law with an independent judiciary , good governance and accountability on suspected cases of corruption .
The military leadership is cautioned not to disappoint the youth , who were at the forefront of the demonstrations and whose representatives should be called upon to play their role in building democracy during the transition .
The message of Egypt is a message for the whole Arab world .
The Arab countries are our partners ; we have no intention of patronising them or imposing anything from the outside .
However , the message for them , as sent by the Egyptians and the Tunisians , is : ' Reform and reform now .
Democratise , govern well , fight corruption or face the wrath of the people . '
This message is not only for the Arab world .
Yesterday it was relayed in Diyarbakir in Turkey , and in Teheran and other Iranian cities .
The people can do it !
Mr President , I am delighted that the High Representative will be the first and most senior foreign diplomat to visit Egypt , and following this debate she will take with her Parliament 's support for the immediate release of political prisoners , for legal accountability for those responsible for the violent suppression of peaceful protest and for an asset freeze and other actions for the authors of past human rights abuse .
Commissioner , this was the social media revolution , planned in an Internet cafe , with Wael Ghonim of Google one of its heroes .
But companies like Vodafone must learn the lesson of turning off their services and we should call on them to join the global network initiative alongside human rights organisations to show that they will defend the principle of freedom of expression where it is under threat .
Finally , this Parliament was shy of discussing Tunisia ; we debated Tunisia as Egyptians took to the streets and today debate Egypt when perhaps we should be asking ourselves how we can better support democratic transition now in Yemen , Syria , Libya and elsewhere in the Arab world before people have to die in the streets of their capitals to shame Europe and the world into so doing .
( FR ) Mr President , I do not believe that history would forgive us if the events that have just occurred and are continuing to occur were to prove beyond us .
I therefore believe that it is very important for the European Union to be able to draw conclusions quickly from its relative invisibility , to put it mildly , during the recent events .
That is why I believe that no effort must be spared , that we must offer our full and unconditional support to the democratic transition process , both in Tunisia and in Egypt , that we must be on the side of these peoples and must tell them so , and that we must do everything in our power to ensure that the rule of law emerges , stronger , from these revolutions and these changes , particularly in the case of Egypt .
I believe that the rule of law alone will provide an element of stability and serve to stabilise the entire region .
In other words , this is extremely important .
We must organise a donor conference and , above all , we should not be scared .
These revolutions are secular revolutions on the part of Tunisians and Egyptians who simply want democracy and development , which are intrinsically linked .
However , we should review our neighbourhood policy and explore the issue of relations between states , but also relations between different public opinions .
This is precisely the role of the European Parliament .
Mr President , today we are having a very different debate to the one that took place only a matter of days ago in this Chamber .
It is essential that the people of Egypt should know that we are standing by them .
I welcome the fact that our High Representative is currently in that part of the world .
The people of Egypt are now reliant upon the army to come forward and deliver free and fair elections , to bring about the sort of society that they have paid for with their lives and blood .
It is now for the international community to make sure that we step in to help them build their institutions and allow the political parties to come forward and take part in those election processes .
I hope that the European Union will play its part in that .
Finally , Commissioner , the siphoning-off of funds by leaders in developing countries is something we are only too well aware of .
It is about time that Europe said that we refuse to be used as a vehicle for such people to park their funds any more .

( asking Mr Madlener a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) ) Mr President , the tragic outcome of the Egyptian transition to democracy has been described .
It has been said that it was inevitable that Islamic fundamentalists would take over power democratically , and so on and so on .
Do you not think that this picture is catastrophic , and wrong ?
Why do we not take into account the fact that the reasons for Islamic fundamentalism and terrorism in the Middle East are strongly linked to tyrannical governments , and that there is now an opportunity for democratic regimes to reduce both ?
( NL ) Mr President , I am outlining here one of the real dangers that Egypt is facing , namely that it might fall prey to the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood .
I am also calling on us and the Commission to face up to that risk and to send out an important signal to the Egyptians , and that is that they can forget our support if they opt for the Muslim Brotherhood and sharia .
That is , I think , a very important signal to send out today and I hope that you will support me in this .
( RO ) Mr President , 18 days of riots , Hosni Mubarak 's resignation and the taking of control by the Supreme Military Council basically pave the way for transition .
We hope that this will be a transition to democracy .
The situation is without doubt evolving , at a rate which revolutionary events basically do .
As you are aware , the constitution was suspended and parliament dissolved recently , and the committee set up to revise the constitution is proposing to make changes in 10 days and hold legislative and presidential elections in six months .
I believe that the European Union must use every means to support any move indicating democratic transition .
On the other hand , I would like to warn against a certain degree of haste because all these construction processes require a certain amount of time .
Let us not forget either that the democratic forces are in critical need of renewal and strengthening so as to avoid causing an imbalance in the political landscape .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Egypt : from the virtual community on Facebook to the real one , with millions of people seeking fairer distribution of wealth and greater justice , and protesting against corruption .
We must move on from the transition period of soldiers and tanks to a true democracy : a new constitution , new elections , abolition of the death penalty , more humane prisons , social rights and freedom .
It will be difficult .
Those who are willing to deploy any means in the name of an idea are lying in wait .
We want to believe in the great Egyptian people , who have not , however , ever experienced democracy .
We want a secular democracy , with a distinct separation between religious authority and political power , a democracy that integrates minorities and establishes true rights : to public healthcare , social security and work .
Europe is supporting this approach by investing resources with the ability to promote real development in Egypt : no more dictatorships , no more misery , no more poverty .
Mr President , colleagues will have received an e-mail from me on Monday describing my experiences during an informal visit to Cairo last weekend .
It was a privilege to be there as Vice-President for Democracy and Human Rights .
Mr Kasoulides referred to the role of young people in the recent revolution in Egypt .
He is absolutely right .
They played a fundamental role .
I spoke just a few moments ago to one of the organisers and said , ' Are you still optimistic ? '
He said , ' Of course I am .
Things are going in the right direction . '
But there are problems .
The timetable for elections is wrong and the timetable for reforming the Constitution is far too short .
We need much more time .
We are talking about Egypt , but this process is spreading .
It is like 1989 and the European Union needs special procedures - this House , the Commission , the Council , the EAS - and we welcome Cathy Ashton 's down payment for democracy , but we need to do more .
We need to reward reform .
As I said in Cairo on Sunday - and I hope to be saying it among other peoples - ' I am not here as a Briton or as a European , I am here as an honorary Egyptian . '
I still am .
( ES ) Mr President , we need further clarification on the Supreme Military Council 's plans in Egypt .
One specific undertaking is the holding of democratic elections within six months , following a constitutional reform led by experts .
However , I have also read that next week we will see a new government supposedly including opposition representatives , according to the British Foreign Secretary .
I think we all agree , in any case , that the best way forward is to have a transitional process , supported by the widest possible political consensus , until the elections are held .
It would also be desirable for the social forces to work together to ensure that this transition is unburdened by major tensions .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union must support the democratic process and contribute to its success .
Egypt is a key country , and developments there will be felt throughout the Mediterranean and the Arab world .
I therefore welcome Baroness Ashton 's visit to Cairo next week .
One further point : The Tunisians and the Egyptians have given us a lesson in the people 's desire for freedom .
I hope the foreign ministers will not overlook this lesson when they come to assess the common position on Cuba , which is precisely aimed at attaining a democratic transition in that country , and which defends those who defend freedom .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , it can never be said often enough that what is happening in the southern Mediterranean and , more generally , in the Arab world , is historic , especially for those peoples who , half a century after their countries gained independence through decolonisation , are today gaining their individual and collective freedoms .
It is historic , but also unexpected , as are all popular revolutions , I hear you say .
However , this new situation requires us to totally rethink our vision , our policies and our relationships with these countries .
Proposals have been made .
Indeed , the caution with which we have reacted to date is easily and worryingly explained by our obsession with stability , by which I mean that safety-first approach fuelled by our fears , an approach of which the sole priorities were the fight against immigration , terrorism and radical Islam , along with some economic interests , not least access to energy .
We accepted authoritarian regimes , when their sole aim was to confirm our fears .
The people 's revolt has made the failure of our policies plain to see ; we no longer have the right to go on basing our analyses on the same fears , or , worse still , the same xenophobia-tinged beliefs .
That is why we must stand side by side with those who aspire to greater freedom and democracy , in places where it is possible to be Muslim , democratic and secular .
That is the message that we are being sent .
( EL ) Mr President , the uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt are already creating a political domino effect in numerous Muslim countries .
Communities are rising up with demands and requests which have been repressed for decades .
Beware !
Nothing has ended .
It is all just starting .
New challenges and new prospects .
The question is what is Europe doing ?
What can it do and what must it do ?
Certainly not what is has being doing to date .
It has basically been absent , with no cohesion and no reflexes .
What will it do , for example , about the new influx of immigrants ?
Surely not what it has been doing to date , with the lack of solidarity on the part of the North for its partners in the South ?
That is why we and our colleagues from Cyprus , Malta , France , Spain and Italy have tabled a question to the Commission on the subject .
Developments in our wider neighbourhood are becoming a yardstick for European foreign policy .
Will we succeed or will we fail ?
Time is running out .
Lampedusa is calling us .
( ES ) Mr President , my voice will also be one of praise for Baroness Ashton 's recent visit to Tunisia , and for her trip to Egypt next week .
What can Europe do , as the previous speaker said ?
It is crucial to give a clear indication of our support for these countries at this point in time .
Geography and history make Europe the natural ally of the countries in the Mediterranean region .
This is the right time to let them know how important they are to us , how radical a change they have brought to our neighbourhood policy , and what high hopes we have for this new Mediterranean region engendered by the young people of Egypt and Tunisia , much to our surprise and disbelief .
We should now support this transformation , as other speakers have said .
Above all , we should do this by dismantling the machinery of repression -let us not forget that the dictatorship continues even though the dictator may have stepped down- , lifting the state of emergency and helping pro-democracy forces so that Europe can make a genuine contribution to this process , so that democracy can become truly consolidated and a new partnership can be established .
What has been said about the need to adapt instruments is by no means gratuitous .
The truth is that one page has been wiped and we are now moving on to a new one .

( SK ) Mr President , it is quite clear from the context of what Mr Verhofstadt has been saying here that the Egyptian democratic opposition forces have failed to organise a unified body representing the revolutionary forces from the streets .
It is one thing to get rid of a dictator , but quite another thing to introduce a democratic regime .
One of the fundamental features of the revolutions in Central Europe in 1989 was the ability immediately to create genuine organisations to represent the democratic , secular revolutionary forces .
There is room here for the European Union to provide assistance .
This is possibly more important than funding and other matters .
These will be important in future stages .
Who will sit down at a table at this point and genuinely negotiate with the military leaders ?
Who will genuinely come forward in elections as the representative of these democratic forces ?
This question remains undecided and the European Union can provide assistance here .
If this can be done , we will not have to fear that Egypt will take the path of Iran but , on the contrary , we can be sure that Iran will take the path of Egypt .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )

Mr President , I would like to say to my friend Mr Zala that I very much benefited from what he has said about his personal experience of being in a revolution .
Mr Zala , there are two questions in this debate I would like your views on .
To the people on the ground , if foreign countries fail to speak out for democracy , does that not help extremism , rather than hinder it ?
If foreign countries do speak out for democracy , is that seen as interference and inappropriate ?
I would appreciate your views .
( SK ) Thank you very much for the question .
In my opinion , we now have sufficient experience of revolutions against dictatorial regimes to be concerned that we would be interfering in the internal affairs of other countries through our advice .
In 1989 , we undoubtedly knew and had consultations with many people from abroad .
We should rely on our own historical experience .
There are many , many issues we can advise these countries on , and I believe that if the advice is sensible , it is acceptable .
Mr President , considering the enormous importance of developments in Egypt to the whole region , and EU relations with that part of the world , it is very important that we show our timely attention and interest and take a pro-active role rather than a reactive one .
When a nation - Egyptian or any other - comes together to claim its right to democracy , the EU should offer to help its people to transform their dream into reality .
Taking into consideration that the constitution is suspended , Parliament dissolved and presidential elections scheduled later this year , it is very important to ensure that free and fair elections are granted in this country .
People will exercise their right to free media and freedom of expression .
At the same time , we face a risk that if elections are held without the foundations of deep democracy being laid , then yes , it is possible that extremists will triumph .
- ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , I strongly support all the steps being taken by the High Representative to help Egypt achieve democracy and prosperity without further bloodshed .
However , this does not mean that we should turn a blind eye to the growing violence being committed against Coptic Christians by radical Muslims .
I am in contact with European citizens and Czechs who are helping the Copts , but in doing so they are literally risking their lives .
The European Union must openly ask the Egyptian Army to set an example by punishing those who persecute Christians .
At the same time , the European Union should actively help those Copts who are at risk to temporarily relocate to a safe country .
I would like to ask you to propose that the Council initiate temporary protection measures under Directive 2001 / 55 / EC , in order to save the lives of Copts until Egypt is a safer homeland for them .
Commissioner , can you do this ?
( MT ) Mr President , there are three things that we will need from now on .
Firstly , we need immediate assistance during the transition stage to be provided to Egypt , just as it needs to be provided to Tunisia , so that they can work towards a full and stable democracy .
Secondly , we need a long-term plan - which I call a Marshall Plan - for each country that , like Tunisia and Egypt , plan to take the road to democracy .
In this way we can show that we are there to lend a helping hand to those who opt for democracy - and demonstrate that democracy is the precursor to success .
Finally , we need a complete revision of our policy on the Mediterranean .
We must appreciate and admit that this lacked the necessary vision to understand what could have occurred in the Arab countries , and which did , in fact , occur .
Mr President , last time some of us voiced our frustration over the mild tone of our public - I repeat , public - pronouncements , not activity , on the events in Egypt before Mubarak 's resignation .
Of course , in her position , Lady Ashton is caught between a rock and a hard place , but if we want the EU 's voice to be heard it must be loud enough to be heard .
Coming back to Egypt , based on my own experiences as a Romanian , I would expect the real difficulties to be only just starting .
Far from solving their concerns , the departure of the former President will complicate and multiply the problems facing Egyptian society .
Some of those problems , like the army not fulfilling the promise to organise free elections at the set time or the denunciation of the Treaty with Israel , will affect us directly .
Nevertheless , I am encouraged by our willingness to try , through constant contact with the local authorities , to anticipate such problems and prepare to intervene with the most appropriate means .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I come from Berlin , and the whole world rejoiced with us Berliners when the border in our city fell and the borders opened everywhere in Eastern Europe .
Now , in the case of Egypt , we reacted too late , too cautiously and , above all , too unemotionally .
Where was our joy ?
Every other word from us was simply about ' maintaining stability ' .
However , freedom is the most important thing for every person in the world .
We Germans in particular know what we are talking about .
What we had in Egypt was not stability ; it was oppression .
Freedom and stability can go hand in hand any time .
Therefore , we should not dictate to the Egyptians who they should elect .
Provided the elections proceed in a fair and democratic way , we will have to recognise the result and must not be so arrogant - as we were at the time in Palestine or even in Algeria - as to decide whether or not we will recognise those who are elected .
We must recognise the choice that is made .

Mr President , I would like to say to Mr Füle that we really need to focus on insisting on a transition to civilian government , and on making sure that the military regime now in place will fulfil its promises .
I think that a committee has now been set up to work on the constitution , but there is not a single woman in it .
That it is rather a pity when we consider how many women - young women - were in the streets making sure that this democratic transition , this revolution , includes the whole of society .
So , we need to support them , we need to demand , when you go there and when Baroness Ashton goes there , to meet with women : to meet not only those who might be called ' the usual suspects ' but also those who were involved in the revolution and whose voices are not so often heard .
We have to insist on all prisoners being released and on an investigation being conducted into the violence that has occurred .
Lastly , I think that Baroness Ashton is right : this is a time to think big .
This is about EU trade , about visas , about money - and it is about courage .
Mr President , at the beginning of this debate , the Commissioner praised the courage of the young people who took to the streets in Egypt and Tunisia and created the uprising .
Hundreds of thousands took to the streets in Teheran and other cities in Iran on Monday and were brutally suppressed .
They were crushed .
One young student was killed .
Others have been tortured and taken to prison where they will no doubt be executed for trying to rise up against that fascist regime .
Why do we never say anything to encourage them ?
Why are we like rabbits caught in the headlights when it comes to dealing with the Mullahs in Teheran ?
Why do we say nothing to condemn the brutal psychological torture and siege of the 3 400 opposition Iranians in Camp Ashraf ?
It is time we took action and showed that we support the Iranian opposition .
( EL ) Mr President , the recent popular uprisings and all the others which are looming on the African rim of the Mediterranean should be a deep cause for concern to us .
We need to identify the cause of these uprisings ; is it poverty , religion , injustice , corruption or the lack of democracy and freedom ?
What exactly do these people want , who are rebelling against regimes which they have voted for , as their guide and governor , for the past 30 or 40 years ?
It seems to me that we here in this House think we are the be all and end all of full democracy .
The first solution we propose is money .
They had money and a few shrewd people socked it away .
However , we need to understand that the important issue is geopolitical instability , the changes which it may bring to the area , the impact of popular reaction and the new balances that will emerge .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank the honourable Members for their valuable comments and questions .
I have very much appreciated today the opportunity to exchange views on the events in Egypt and on the best response to them .
I have heard a lot of constructive remarks and proposals and I will pass on your messages to the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
We will reflect together on how best to address these issues and we will keep them high on the priority list as our response to Egypt develops .
Let me assure you that , through the ongoing review process , we will address comprehensively both important elements : firstly the transition and reform needs of the countries concerned , but also , secondly , the strategic reflection of these tremendous and historic transformations in our neighbourhood area and our neighbourhood policy .
This House has an important role to play to play in that .
The Egyptians have proven their ability to take their future into their own hands .
They ask for democracy , they ask for socio-economic reforms , and the European Union must be able to lend its full support to the democratic reform process .
As I have said , these are still early days , but the European Union is fully mobilised to listen and react to the demands coming from the Egyptians themselves .
Mr President , I would like to compliment you on the way you handled catch-the-eye today .
It was the first time I have heard the names being called out in advance , when the number of speakers was limited , so that other Members who would not be able to speak could go about their business .
I did not ask to be included in catch-the-eye in this debate , but I did note what you did and I hope other Presidents will emulate it .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
The Egyptian authorities made plans to have their country 's constitution revised .
A group of lawyers has been briefed and will have 10 days to table its proposed amendments .
This is very good news .
The most controversial articles , in particular regarding the unlimited number of presidential terms , the restrictive conditions concerning who can stand in presidential elections , the methods for supervising elections and the limited opportunities to appeal after legislative elections , will have to be revised .
The democratic transition is therefore under way .
However , the revision of the constitution is not the only issue which must be tackled .
Economic well-being and social cohesion are essential conditions for the emancipation of a people and the smooth running of a country .
The European Union , for its part , cannot stand by and do nothing while these changes take place .
Once she has welcomed the democratic transition , Baroness Ashton will have to upgrade the partnership agreements and place the rule of law , justice and human rights at the heart of her concerns .
These values cannot be allowed to sink into oblivion on the pretext of stabilising our relations .
in writing . - It is essential to define the role of the EU in the turmoil taking place in many Arab countries in general and Egypt in particular .
The turmoil has taken everyone by surprise and it does not seem that any contingency plan was made for such an eventuality , which is not localised but widespread .
The socio-political base provoking the changes in the Arab world is not dissimilar across those countries which are now in transition to what we hope will be a democratic environment .
Baroness Ashton is on record as stating that the EU has a ' democratic calling ' to listen to people who want change - and we are witnessing a changing world because what will happen in the Arab countries will have an effect on political , social and economic issues worldwide .
One particularly important issue is that of security and stability , and there is no doubt that the ' democratic calling ' concerns countries mostly considered as being allied with others that currently have democratic political systems .
At this point , it is not known where the democratic transitional process will lead or what position will be taken by the traditional democracies and especially the EU .
Media law in Hungary ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on media law in Hungary .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I am pleased to inform you that , when the plane was touching down this morning in Strasbourg , I got the good news that the Hungarian Prime Minister has agreed to amend the media law so that it complies with all aspects of EU law that we , the European Commission have raised , including the concerns raised regarding the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
They assure me that the amendments will be adopted by the Hungarian Government at its next session .
The body language of the representatives of the Hungarian Government gives me the feeling that this is correct and that it will be tabled in the Hungarian Parliament within the coming days .
The four areas where the Hungarian authorities agreed to amend their law are the following .
Number one : balanced coverage .
The amendments agreed would limit the balanced reporting requirements to broadcasting , as in other Member States , and would no longer apply those requirements to on-demand audiovisual media services or the written press .
Moreover , any restrictions on broadcasters would need to respect the principle of proportionality .
Of course the Commission will monitor the way that principle is translated into secondary law .
I mentioned four areas .
The second one is the country-of-origin principle .
The amendments agreed would mean that foreign broadcasters could no longer be fined for breaching the Hungarian media law 's provisions on protection of minors or incitement to hatred .
Instead the Hungarian authorities could suspend transmission of such services on Hungarian territory , which is in line with the AVMS Directive .
What does that mean ?
It means that broadcasters legally established and authorised in other Member States , and compliant with the laws of those countries , would be free to broadcast to Hungary without running the risk of being subject to fines by Hungarian authorities .
Number three : media registration .
The amendments agreed would mean that audiovisual media service providers would have to register only after they begin offering their services , and that is in line with the directive .
It means that audiovisual media service providers and publishers would no longer be subject to prior authorisation by the Hungarian authorities .
Number four : offensive content .
Additionally , the Hungarian Government agreed to amend another provision of its media law that raised concerns with respect to the freedom of expression .
A provision of the media law specified very broadly that media content may not cause offence , even by implication , to individuals , minorities or majorities .
The amendments agreed would limit the prohibition to discriminatory treatment .
Moreover those provisions would no longer apply to media service providers established in other EU countries .
We will work closely with the Hungarian authorities to make sure that the agreed changes are now adopted into Hungarian law and applied in practice .
We will continue to monitor the situation , but that is quite clear .
Needless to say , the Commission is also verifying the national rules implementing the AVMS Directive in other Member States and will raise similar concerns where necessary .
The Commission does not shy away from using its powers .
It does not shy away from defending media freedom and pluralism when it is needed , and the present case hopefully pre-empts and proves that .
I can assure you that the Commission acknowledges and shares the concerns that many of you and parts of civil society have about the general state of the media in Europe .
I am ready to go further and take action in the matter of media pluralism within the EU competences , of course respecting subsidiarity .
The Commission not only has a duty , but also a sincere interest , in facilitating the dialogue amongst stakeholders and policymakers at a European level .
The changing structure of the media landscape in Europe causes concern for the future .
It brings opportunities but also wider risks for media pluralism beyond the ownership use .
It is quite clear that we need an approach to measuring media pluralism in a broad sense ; one that will bring together legal , economic and social aspects , rather than treating them quite separately , as has often been the case up until now .
Therefore , I intend to establish a multi-stakeholder group and ask them to address the challenges for the media at present and in the future , including the situation of media pluralism in Europe .
Since you know that I value your input very much , the European Parliament will be represented in the group of experts , if you will accept that invitation .
I will announce details quite soon .
The group will be asked to advise me on the next steps to be taken concerning the media landscape and I am fully committed to taking concrete action within all the competences that I have .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am taking part in the discussion a little shamefacedly , because the Commissioner has more or less told us that it is pointless to conduct this debate because there is nothing to argue about .
We would not be in this situation if my fellow Members had listened to us when , on previous occasions - in committee meetings and discussions in this Chamber - we asked if it was possible to wait for a while , because the Hungarian Government had , after all , always proved willing to accommodate the European Commission 's views - and it would have been strange if it had been any other way , given that Hungary currently holds the Presidency of the European Union .
Yet they resolved to go ahead anyway , perhaps - no , definitely - because of political and ideological elements , deciding that this debate should take place .
Resolutions have been submitted that are due to be put to the vote tomorrow .
More caution probably should have been exercised and more confidence shown in those governments elected democratically by their peoples , starting with the Hungarian Government , which was elected by such a large majority of its people that it certainly did not need to manipulate the media in order to achieve an internal consensus .
Personally I think the most useful thing to do is to ask our fellow socialist and liberal MEPs , who submitted resolutions of a certain type , to withdraw them , thus stopping us from making fools of ourselves and letting Parliament get back to dealing with the real problems of European citizens .
I am of course grateful to the Commissioner for her work .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the Socialist and Democrat Group of course welcome the advance in the four key areas of balanced information , the country-of-origin principle , and so on .
Commissioner , of course we welcome it .
That was the text of our resolution ; that was the pressure we were placing on you and the Hungarian authorities to deliver .
First of all , I have to ask you about the timing .
Was it purely coincidence , as you were waiting in the airport as you said , or was it the fact that pressure by this Parliament has brought forward four key amendments in the four key areas we asked for ?
Please let us know those concessions have been secured .
Of course Parliament has still not been able to see the text of the negotiations between the Commission and the Hungarian authorities ; therefore we require more time to fully state our position on the matter .
However , it seems clear that negotiations have not fully addressed many other serious concerns of this Parliament and , of course , of our Socialist and Democrat Group .
Crucial issues still unanswered include the composition and time frame of the media authority and of the Media Council , which are politically homogenous and still exert pervasive and centralised governmental , judicial and political control on all media .
We need answers on where we go on this crucial issue .
Furthermore , it is regrettable that the Commission has not acted upon the recommendations of Parliament , the Council of Europe , the Commissioner , and the OSCE for example , on the violation of the principle of confidentiality of journalistic sources , extremely disproportionate sanctions , and abolishing the political and financial independence of public service broadcast media .
There is a list , Commissioner , which you know of , which still needs to be answered and we need these questions to be answered , preferably in this debate .
Obviously we commend the Hungarian authority 's willingness to amend the legislation .
We also encourage the implementation of amendments to address the outstanding areas of concern for all of us in this Parliament , whilst fully embracing the spirit of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights and , in particular , Article 11 , which protects the freedom of expression .
We would like further answers on whether you believe Article 11 has been fulfilled .
We must involve civil society and stakeholders to uphold principles of transparency and accountability and to ensure best practice .
Commissioner , we tabled a resolution for our group because we wanted the concessions that you have already announced , but we want more .
Democracies are built upon the principle of a free and independent media .
We make no apologies within our group for firmly defending this principle and we will do everything in our power to protect it , for Hungarians and all EU citizens .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , in the past in this Parliament we have discussed cases when different governments have shown their desire to control the media , but the attempts never went as far as in the case of the Hungarian media law , where from television to radio , to the written press , to on-demand media , bloggers , everything is controlled , from registration to performance and suspension .
When we , the Liberals and the Democrats , the ALDE Group in this Parliament , first raised our voice against this law , we were accused of being politically motivated .
However , experience has shown that we were right and today even the Hungarian Government admits that something is very wrong with this law .
Therefore several amendments are envisaged .
We trust the Commission that this is indeed the Hungarian position , hoping to receive it in writing , and we will closely follow the changes .
Nevertheless , the four areas requested by the Commission are only a part of a much bigger picture .
Other aspects must be changed as well : the enormous control powers vested in the hands of a politically appointed person who has been heading two media control authorities for nine years , the lack of protection of journalists ' sources and the lack of effective judicial remedy , to name just a few .
After all , not only our critics , but also the European Commission itself , will have to answer to the Hungarian and European civil society and journalists to say why the OSCE and the Human Rights Commissioner of the Council of Europe have also harshly criticised the aspects I have just mentioned .
We cannot all be politically motivated .
Quite the opposite , we are motivated by a genuine interest to see that media freedom is a reality for the benefit of our citizens .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , my first questions are for Commissioner Kroes .
Mrs Kroes , the Audiovisual Media Services Directive refers to an independent regulatory body .
Yet , positions in the new Hungarian media authority and the Media Council , who have powers to impose heavy penalties on vague grounds , are being taken up exclusively by supporters of the ruling party .
That is taking place in an already highly polarised political environment .
Why has the Commission not objected to this lack of independence ?
Why have you failed fully to assess the powers of the media authority and the Media Council , which , in my view , fall within the scope of European law , against the Charter of Fundamental Rights ?
You , Mrs Kroes , have said that the Hungarian Government has so far made four amendments .
For the foreign press , for the audiovisual media , but not for domestic newspapers .
You would also like to see Mr Orban and his people triumphantly waving the stamp of approval , your Brussels flag , and then continue , uninterrupted , preaching intolerance , slandering philosophers and banning gay pride .
All of that , too , while Hungary is holding the presidency of the Council .
You must be deeply unhappy about that .
Moving next to my fellow members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , who said in their resolution that there was nothing to be concerned about and who have accused critics of the media law of making manipulative and politically motivated comments .
That is quite an accusation , and one which is also directed at the OSCE and the Human Rights Commission of the Council of Europe .
It is quite an accusation , given that we know that even Mr Orban himself has , in the mean time , realised that a few amendments need to be made to his media law .
This reminds me of the Stalinist days , where people were airbrushed out of photographs .
Together with us and the OSCE , you ought to be protecting European values , not becoming a mechanism for imposing your power at home .
( The Member agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )

( HU ) Mr President , well , the Fidesz government deserves what is happening right now , namely that the left wing , from Mr Martin Schulz to Mr Cohn-Bendit to all the others , is now applauding them , and our dear fellow Members on the left are giving them lectures on democracy .
Let me ask you , what is your message to left wing parties , such as MSZP , which had people shot in the eye in Hungary in 2006 ?
What guarantee does the nation of Hungary have that such incidents cannot happen under the government of your left-wing party , and that you will not have protests dispersed by force as you did between 2002 and 2010 ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I do not think that the independent media creates violence and I do not see the relevance of this question , but I thank the asker of the question for her question .
Mr President , freedom of speech is of great value .
We all know this , which is why we should have a serious debate .
Unfortunately , it seems that today 's debate cannot be described as such .
It seems to be a pretext for the centre-left to attack the right-wing , conservative government of Prime Minister Orban .
The fact is that we could point to many European countries where freedom of speech is not respected .
Just look at Poland 's experience .
In Poland , where it could be said that the ruling party has an overall majority in every governing body , a monopoly of power , where it controls government , the Senate , the President , the National Broadcasting Authority , the body which oversees the media , and finally has control over public broadcasting and the support of the largest electronic media corporations , journalists are being thrown out of their jobs for the simple reason that they hold conservative , right-wing views .
Right wing or conservative programmes have been withdrawn , such as the programme Warto rozmawiać directed by Mr Pospieszalski or Misja specjalna directed by Mr Gargas .

It begs the question : where is Mr Schulz , where are you , ladies and gentlemen , when these violations are being perpetrated in Poland ?
Let us discuss actual violations , those that have already occurred .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
( DE ) If I have understood you correctly , you said that there are restrictions on the freedom of expression and freedom of the press in many countries in Europe .
I would be interested to know to which countries you are referring and what you personally intend to do about it .
( PL ) Thank you for your question .
I wanted to draw attention to the fact that freedom of the media is a fundamental problem .
If we are to address it , we should separate it from political sympathies , independently of whether we have socialist or right-wing and conservative views .
In short , if journalists are dismissed only because they have left-wing views or only because they have conservative views , we should protest .
For example , in Poland today , journalists are dismissed purely because they have conservative views .
I would expect support and protests from Mr Schulz and from other socialist and left-wing members , because this would show that we are concerned with standards and not political point-scoring .
We are concerned with protecting the freedom of the media .
We protest against situations like this anywhere they may occur , even if they are taking place now , for instance , in Poland .
Commissioner , I have listened to you carefully and frankly I do not know whether I am disappointed or shocked at the Commission 's efforts because I still do not understand whether the Commission fell intentionally or unintentionally into the Hungarian Government 's trap .
The Hungarian Government has decided to discuss concessions on some trivial details , but to make no fundamental changes to this law .
The highly disproportionate and biased composition of the Media Council , the exceptionally steep fines for newspapers , and all the factors that led to censorship and self-censorship of the media are still in place .
However , what is utterly disgraceful , as previous speakers have said , is that as soon as the Commission extracted the concession that foreign newspapers and publications would be exempt from the fines , everything else was forgotten about .
It seems to me that the principles of post-1989 Europe , after the fall of the Berlin Wall , have been undermined .
What the Commission actually meant to say was that we would not abandon our fellow Europeans from any country to censorship and restrictions on freedom of expression .
Apparently , the Commission has done this , but Parliament shall continue to keep an eye not only on the Hungarian Government but also on the Commission now , because it is our duty and our responsibility not to let this issue drop , as the Commission has disgracefully done .
Mr President , this will certainly not be remembered as an exhilarating chapter in Parliament 's history .
The criticisms and attacks rained down on the Hungarian Government , in conjunction with the EU Presidency , with regard to the Hungarian media law 's alleged total failure to comply with European legislation , have been reduced to what they really are : an instrumental and specious attempt that , apart from anything else , is based entirely on ideological bias , which is even more shameful when it is used against a country that today has the struggle for freedom encoded in its DNA - and this has indeed been the case throughout its history , which we all remember very well .
The political forces that have promoted this far from exhilarating debate are still heavily weighed down by the responsibility for what is certainly not a high level political manoeuvre .
Rather , it is seriously invalidated by these purely ideological overtones , and it also has the failing of casting an undeserved shadow on the European Union Presidency , which is being held for the first time - and this is certainly a great political and historical fact - by a former communist country , joined with us today in freedom .
Mr President , in the light of the announcement made by the Commission today , it is clear that this debate has been overtaken by events and that there is no longer any reason whatsoever to proceed with the vote on the resolutions tomorrow .
I believe that those who expressed genuine concern about the media law in Hungary were entitled to a response .
What I find worrying is that this Chamber is increasingly engaging in crusades against individual Member States - that coincidentally happen to have EPP governments - before the Commission has fully investigated the matter , let alone reached its conclusions .
Worse than that : in this case , this was done despite the fact that we had a clear undertaking from the Hungarian authorities at the highest level that , should the Commission raise any concerns about this law , they would be prepared to change it , as they did .
What exactly was the point of this debate ?
What is the point of the resolutions tomorrow , if not political instrumentalisation ?
The EPP stands firm in its commitment to respect for human rights and the rule of law , regardless of the Member State concerned .
There is no question about that .
However , it is not willing to single out individual Member States and condemn them summarily before the due process of law has been completed .
Once it has been completed , we should respect it .
When this issue first came up last month , I said that politicising this issue was not just attacking a Member State , but was also undermining the EU Presidency .
Today , I feel that we have also undermined our own institution .
That cannot be right .
I sincerely appeal to all groups to withdraw the resolutions that are up for vote tomorrow - not suspend them , not postpone them , but withdraw them - because there is no longer any basis for proceeding with this vote .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , Council representatives , please allow me to begin by stating the obvious .
Sometimes it is necessary to repeat the obvious : the free circulation of news and independent opinion is the most important safeguard of any democratic society .
This is the reason that brings us here today .
The insistence with which the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) , the Council of Europe , several Member States and an ample majority of the Members of this Parliament have voiced their concerns is justified by the fact that the most basic principles of our European project are at stake .
When this law was hastily passed by Mr Orbán 's Government in Hungary , we considered that there had not been sufficient reflection during its preparation and that the law should be amended to ensure its consistency with European regulations and with the essential spirit embodied in the treaties .
We are pleased and grateful to the Commissioner , who has stood here today and told us that the Hungarian Government is prepared to amend the law .
However , the creation of an information monitoring authority , whose council would be politically controlled exclusively by members of the ruling party , runs the risk of exercising a biased , centralised political control that would inevitably lead to censorship and , even worse , self-censorship .
So the question is , will this authority be reviewed ?
We have shared with the Commission and with you , Commissioner , our concerns on the issue of information pluralism , the principle of proportionality and the fundamental rights to freedom of expression and information , enshrined in Article 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Hungarian Government 's answers accepting the amendment of this law must be supervised to ensure that the changes implemented are sufficiently far-reaching to hold back the threat posed by these laws to our fundamental rights and values .
For instance , by reviewing the monitoring authority , as I said before .
We urge the Commission to continue with its investigations , particularly into matters affecting fundamental rights .
May I also stress , Commissioner and Council representatives , that this is not a political issue , as some people would have us believe .
What is at issue here is the defence of the values of our European Union and respect for its laws .
Have no doubt about it : this is our sole objective and our task here today .
( DA ) Mr President , well , it is a little strange to stand here as a Conservative-Liberal through and through and be accused of being left-leaning .
However , that is something that remains to be seen .
This is not , in fact , about being left- or right-leaning ; it is about freedom of the press .
I cannot understand why my fellow Member from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is choosing to pursue the debate in this way .
That is , I think , a touch pathetic .
This is not about Hungary , either ; it is about freedom of the press .
I am pleased - and I will gladly acknowledge - that the Hungarian Government has answered the questions that have been put to it extremely well .
Having said that , problems still exist , and we in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have also pointed that out all along .
We still have the problem of a government-appointed Media Council that is to assess whether the coverage is balanced .
We still have problems with regard to the fact that we have a Commission that is supposed to be the guardian of the Treaty and take a stand with regard to the problems with Hungary 's media law .
Of course , I hope that the Commissioner will indeed do that .
I will focus on what we are to do now and on the fact that the Commissioner has raised the question of an independent council .
That is something I would like to welcome on our behalf , and I wonder if the Commissioner would perhaps give us a little more detail about what this council is to concern itself with .
Colleagues , for those of you who do not know the procedure , a blue card is at the discretion of the President .
If I feel we do not have enough time for the debate then I do not give the floor .
If I see later that we have cut down on speaking time then I may give the floor again .
So , when you raise a blue card , unfortunately I cannot always give the floor to you .
It will have to be at the discretion of myself and of the secretariat .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are absolutely no grounds for self-righteousness on the part of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
The fact that changes have now been made to the Hungarian media law is primarily down to those who took action in this regard .
Mr Orbán was not involved in this at the beginning .
I would like to make this very clear : the changes that have now been made are not enough .
We still have a supervisory authority that for nine years has only been composed of members of Fidesz .
That is not compatible with the legislation at EU level .
There is still no source protection .
Therefore , this really is not a democratic media law .
Mrs Kroes , you did not go far enough in my view .
You were clearly more interested in a quiet life and in not disturbing the Hungarian Presidency than in a truly democratic media law .
May I remind you that anti-communist liberal democratic intellectuals like György Konrad , Agnes Heller and Michael Woida called on the European institutions for support .
We have not yet managed to provide this .
I really do believe that this law really needs to be revised to make it democratic .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the Hungarian Government has shown great sensitivity towards Europe and towards the principles upon which it is based in this affair .
In fact , immediately after the approval of the Hungarian media law , a campaign was waged by the left , which used the phrase ' gagging law ' .
In reality , only those who have experienced communism , fascism and Nazism know what a gagging law is , while democratic states know that freedom and pluralism of information are part and parcel of democracy .
However , they should be harmonised with all other powers of the rule of law and must not harm , in particular , the foundation of democracy , which is human dignity .
For example , Article 21 of the Italian Constitution does in fact guarantee freedom of information , but it also directly prohibits publications that are contrary to public morality .
The 1948 law on the freedom of the press in Italy , which no one has ever challenged , lays down an obligation not for authorisation but for registration of any publication , as does the Hungarian law .
The reservations that the European Commission itself has rightly expressed do not devalue the stated aim of the Hungarian law , and that aim of ensuring respect for human dignity is demonstrated precisely by the attitude that the Hungarian Government has taken by opening itself up immediately to the acceptance of criticism and taking responsibility for changing the law according to the guidelines provided to it .
The statement that the fundamental rights of the European Union will be written into the Hungarian Constitution is also proof of Hungary 's fundamental desire to be part of European culture .
In conclusion , I no longer understand the point of this discussion , except to ' blame ' Hungary for having supported its government and parliament democratically by a two-thirds majority .
Yet this gives Europe reason for hope , not reason for criticism .
I am therefore grateful to the Commission and to the Hungarian Government .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , efforts to reduce the freedom of the media are a general European phenomenon .
As a patriot , I am particularly saddened by the fact that it was the Hungarian media law that sparked heated debates in the European Parliament and other European institutions .
It is not a pleasant feeling .
The strong criticism voiced by the European Commission forced the Orbán government - which had , back in December , still adamantly refused to amend the law in any way - to give way .
Now the Commission is forcing the Orbán government to amend the scandalous laws .
The main point is that , according to the Commission 's evaluation , Hungarian media legislation is in conflict with EU law .
It is not only in violation of the Audiovisual Media Services Directive , but also the EU Treaties and the provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The EU 's criticism marks a political defeat for the Hungarian right wing .
However , the majority of the objections made by four groups within the European Parliament continue to apply unchanged .
Both the Commission and the European Parliament must intently monitor the effects the amended Hungarian laws will have on freedom of speech and the freedom of the press in Hungary .
A question to Mr Martonyi : what was the Orbán government 's justification for abolishing the parity-based composition of the media board , as stipulated by the previous media law , which consisted of a 50-50 % ratio of members delegated by the government party and the opposition ?
What does Commissioner Neelie Kroes think about this ?
I firmly request the Hungarian Government to not create the nationalist impression that the criticism is directed against Hungary .
I ask the Orbán government now , after the strong criticism received from the European Commission , to exercise introspection and cease the antidemocratic government practices it has been following up to now .
' He who conceals trouble only makes it worse , ' warned the illustrious Hungarian poet Gyula Illyés .
Dear colleagues , what I said before may have caused some confusion .
There will be no more blue card questions in this debate .
We do not have the time .
( Interjection from Mrs Morvai : ' Shame on you ! ' )
What a life !
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , as you announced at the beginning of today 's debate , an agreement has been reached between the Hungarian Government and the European Commission concerning the amendment of several points of the Hungarian media law .
I agree with my colleagues , in that the debate we are witnessing here now , one motivated by political impulses , bias and , listening to the socialist and liberal Members , occasionally hatred , has become meaningless .
One European socialist speaker referred to the protection of common European values , and elaborated on his position to that end .
To quote a Hungarian socialist classic : ' fiddlesticks ! '
This is not at all the case here , my fellow Members .
The case here is simply that the European socialists , liberals , communists and greens are once again using double standards .
Mr Martin Schulz did not say a word when a minister of the socialist government in Hungary gave the order , through his direct political associates , to defame a journalist who had become a nuisance to him by having drugs placed in his car .
Mr Martin Schulz did not say a word when one of the secretaries of state of the Hungarian Government filed a criminal report against a Hungarian journalist for writing an article exposing legislative fraud , which resulted in the imprisonment of that Hungarian journalist .
Liberal Chair Guy Verhofstadt did not say a word when Hungarian journalists exposed electoral fraud at the leadership election congress of the Hungarian liberal party , which was followed by the party boycotting the TV station of those journalists for a long time .
Since you did not mention or raise your voices for the protection of common European values at that time , there is no credibility to your statements today .
( SL ) Mr President , I welcome the Hungarian Government 's intention to amend controversial sections of the media law , as well as the fact that you , Commissioner Kroes , are pleased with the announced amendments .
However , I am greatly concerned that , one day before the resolution on the Hungarian media law is due to be adopted , we in this House have only very vague messages to rely upon and that we have not received any detailed assurances from the Hungarian authorities as to the actual amendments to be made .
Therefore , I would like to know how it is that you were able to come up with those findings within a few hours and whether or not any external experts were involved in the process .
In addition , the speed with which the amendments were announced seems to suggest that these will not be substantive revisions , but only cosmetic changes , and that is not acceptable by any standard .
Why is it that we have been informed as late as today , on the day the debate is actually taking place , that the Hungarian Government will amend the law within a fortnight and that the Commission is happy with that .
It appears that somebody is seriously bent on silencing the concerns of the European Parliament that the technical work announced by Hungary will not lead to democratic amendments of the law in accordance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Like the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , we too have serious concerns about the composition and powers of the Media Council , as this is obviously a case of a major extension of state control over journalists .
While I welcome the readiness for dialogue , I must reiterate that this is not an attack on Hungary .
I used to be a journalist myself - and this is about protecting journalists throughout Europe .
Moreover , I am disappointed that Commissioner Reding , who is responsible for fundamental rights , has not been involved in the issue of this controversial law .
Finally , Commissioner , I would like to know one more thing : what is the European Commission 's vision for the future of journalism in Europe ?
We need in the Union some minimum criteria which guarantee the freedom and independence of the media and media pluralism .
I call on you to get to work on this as soon as possible because media freedom , and consequently the quality of media reporting , is already under serious threat in other parts of Europe , too .
( NL ) Mr President , it seems to me that we are all agreed that the Hungarian Government has done the right thing in removing all doubts today and made it clear that there is a free press in Budapest and no lack of media pluralism .
Fortunately , with Hungary 's formal pledge to the European Commission that the new media law will be adjusted and explicitly brought in line with European fundamental rights , that ambiguity has been removed .
However , ladies and gentlemen , my only regret is that every debate on media pluralism always seems to get bogged down in national party political games .
In my opinion , we definitely need to put a stop to that .
Having said that , Commissioner , I think that your new initiative to start a working group on media pluralism is an excellent one and we , in Parliament , will obviously be extremely happy to discuss that initiative and work with you on it .
This is an excellent opportunity to finally look into this in depth , to go to the heart of the matter , media pluralism , without the discussion being coloured by emotions generated at a national level .
It is the perfect initiative for exploring the media landscape in the European Union in an objective way .
Finally , allow me to make one more thing clear : in my opinion , a European legislative initiative to regulate the media , which is what some of you in this House will be demanding tomorrow , is totally the wrong approach and I believe , Commissioner , that you agree with us on that point .
( SL ) Mr President , I , too , welcome the decision of the Hungarian Government to improve the media law , but I think that this multiple attack on the Government concerning the media law is unfair and unfounded .
This law is a product of specific circumstances , which are not always well understood in Western Europe .
In all transition countries , the media environment has been rather asymmetrical or unbalanced in terms of ownership and political affiliation .
It was dominated by the left , which is why the call for greater balance in media reporting in transitional societies is perfectly normal .
The concept of balanced reporting has long been used in scientific and political discourse , and initially it was associated specifically with the media .
In addition , the objection about the political bias of the composition of the Media Council under this law is totally unfair .
Under this law , members are elected to the Council with a two-thirds majority vote in Parliament , while such a democratic mechanism is unknown to the vast majority of European countries .
I will be brief , Commissioner .
We will take you at your word that you will ensure the media landscape in the European Union is even more regulated .
However , you will not be able to achieve that just by reviewing the laws of Member States .
You need a more thorough analysis of the real situation , particularly in the new Member States , including Slovenia .
Mr President , on a point of order , I want to put a question to you .
Regardless of what you say , I am fighting for Members to be able to say what they want .
However , in this House so far , only the extreme right and the left have had the right to blue card interventions .
I think this is a one-sided way to conduct the sitting and would like to ask that the centre and the centre-right should also have the right to put questions to the other speakers , because otherwise Members are not being treated equally .
Mr Szájer , I do not give a blue-card question to people according to which political group they belong .
I give them on the basis of who raised their blue card first .
As it turns out , in this debate , the first blue cards were raised by certain people , but then the time ran out , so I said that for no-one - be they from the centre , right or left - would there be time for more blue-card questions .
There are the one-minute interventions , for which we probably will not be able to take everyone either .
I wish there was the time .
I wish there was the time for me to give everyone the floor , but I cannot .
I apologise to you and the others , but I assure you that this was not a political choice .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Kroes , President-in-Office of the Council , I would first like to thank you , Mrs Kroes , for having taken up this debate so promptly and for entering into negotiations with the Hungarian Government .
However , above all I would like to thank the Hungarian Government for keeping the promise it made in all of the hearings and prior discussions and at the start of the debate , namely that if there was a need for amendments to be made , it would also adequately implement these amendments .
Freedom of the press and media pluralism are important fundamental values in the European Union .
The media also have a very special responsibility in our society .
They are to respect personal rights , they must not practice discrimination and , above all , they are obliged to report the truth .
They do not operate in a legal vacuum .
That , too , is major progress in the new media law in Hungary .
The media enjoy very special protection , particularly through the current legal framework of the European Union .
The Commission , as guardian of this legislation , has done its job very well in the past .
The debate that we are having today would not have been necessary if there had been more trust in the work of the Commission as guardian of the legislation , because the fact that the system works can be seen by the results that we have been informed of today , namely that adjustments have been made in the areas in which the law was not completely in line with EU legislation .
That is a major success .
Ideological debates that arise time and again , especially in this context , are in my view completely out of place .
On the contrary , it is clear that the factual and cooperative debating of the contentious issues on the basis of current law in the context of the talks and negotiations that were held has helped to provide clarification and has led to positive results .
I hope that the various political groups will also stop their political games and withdraw the resolutions in question .
( HU ) Mr President , I would like to express my deep regret that this debate took place today , because we all know that the objective clarification of all misunderstandings and questions pertaining to the Hungarian media law is the task of the European Commission , and this is currently in progress .
I believe that it is meaningless for Parliament to take a position on an issue which could come to a positive conclusion in a matter of days .
I am aware , however , that we are players in a hysteria-mongering left-liberal political campaign , and what form the law itself will eventually take is perhaps no longer of any significance .
What is important is that our political opponents are attacking , with the disgraceful methods we are used to seeing from them , a country where last year centre-right political forces achieved a landslide victory after the eight-year depredations of the socialist government , and can finally complete the clear-out of the remaining ruins of the deplorable communist regime .
This includes a rearrangement of the framework of journalist ethics and media culture .
I must ask ; where were these critics , who fancy themselves progressive democrats , when the left-wing nationalist government of Robert Fico in Slovakia adopted a controversial media law , replete with sanctions , in 2008 ?
Yes , they were here at that time , too , and ferociously protected the aforementioned law , which , thanks to them , is still in effect to this day .
I deeply condemn and reject this double standard and call upon my colleagues not to let themselves be influenced by political instigation , and to entrust those in charge , the Commission and the Hungarian Government , with the professional evaluation and conclusion of the problem .
Let us please finally be aware that repeated attacks against the government of the country holding the presidency in an already crisis-laden period could represent a serious risk to the evaluation of the unity and international prestige of the EU .
( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , this is such a serious matter that one must rise above the dreadful arguments that I have just heard in this House , because when we talk about the media we are talking about the health of a democracy .
President-in-Office of the Council , I am one of those people who admire and feel affection for your country and for the Hungarian people .
I fully understand that your government and some members of the public wanted information to be handled in a more balance way , and , objectively speaking , they were right .
However , replacing one kind of propaganda with another kind of propaganda does not make it right .
Consequently I am pleased this evening , but I am vigilant .
I am pleased to see that your government has decided to return to several fundamental points and to change the December 2001 law on the media .
This needed to be done and you did well to address this matter .
I am also pleased that you are once more showing greater respect for the Charter of Fundamental Rights , rights which your people have always craved in the course of recent history .
I would like to pay tribute to the work of Commissioner Kroes , and I support the composition of her group of monitoring experts .
However , we will be vigilant , because we also feel that a number of points have not been dealt with , and we shall also pay attention to the details of the legislative amendments .
In conclusion , I should like to tell you , President-in-Office of the Council , that you are the heirs to the fatherland of Liszt , of Kossuth , of the 1940 hero , Joël Brand , of Sándor Kopácsi and Colonel Maléter of 1956 .
You are the heirs of Sándor Márai .
You are the heirs of Imre Kertész .
So do not let us down !
It was a Hungarian who invented the magical game that is Rubik 's cube .
Do not teach us , in Europe , to play with the media in the style of a ' Jobbik 's Cube ' because that is a dreadful game .
( HU ) Mr President , today the specific text of the agreement between the Hungarian Government and the European Commission has been formulated .
The Hungarian Government has read - which is a big thing these days , my fellow Members - and understood the comments of the Commission and , true to its word , will amend the media law .
This means that the Hungarian Government and the Commission acted lawfully and in a democratic manner , whereas you have been putting on a political flea circus here today .
Unfortunately this is not the first time you have done so , even though the cause of the problem has clearly been eliminated .
The Hungarian socialist Members here are making baseless accusations , and are even inciting others .
At home , on the other hand , their billion-forint scandals are coming to light one after another .
Dear furious fellow Members , you have been deliberately misled .
There is democracy in Hungary , and the media law is in compliance with all EU directives and requirements .
Lastly , ladies and gentlemen , we should be addressing issues the resolution of which is far more urgent than the current political flea circus .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while I accept that those who so strongly criticised the Hungarian law want only freedom for the media and nothing else , I think we also need to show respect for the work of the Commission and the content of the debate in Parliament .
In other words , I believe that , in order to avoid an unpleasant chapter in our Parliament 's history , we must take responsibility for not voting tomorrow and simply scrap a resolution of which the contents have no foundation in reality , as the Commissioner 's speech showed .
I therefore call on both the Council and the Commission to make informal contact with the Conference of Presidents , so as to allow for the necessary and essential exchange of information that will enable Parliament to vote tomorrow , even before the resolutions , on a decision not to proceed with a vote , thus putting an end to ideological debates .
( RO ) Mr President , the assertions that you have made , Commissioner , confirm that the European Parliament was right when it levelled harsh criticism against Hungary 's press law .
Indeed , the Hungarian Government acknowledges by its willingness to amend the law , albeit in only four chapters , the failure of an anti-democratic measure .
In your letter you finally acknowledge that you will examine this law and its compatibility , including with EU law in general .
I wanted to hear you say that you would refer to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I have two questions for you , Commissioner , which I would ask you to answer .
How can you think that the standards of the OSCE and Council of Europe are too high for the European Union ?
Secondly , if an accession candidate country had an identical law to the unmodified version of the Hungarian law , could it conclude the relevant negotiation chapter ?
- ( SK ) Mr President , we have a saying in Slovakia that the road to Hell is often paved with good intentions .
I do not wish to doubt the good intentions of our Hungarian friends to make up-to-date modifications to media laws , but the current discussion confirms that some of the provisions of the new law might perhaps be formulated in a more sensitive way .
The fact that the Hungarian Government decided to implement such a large number of changes and reforms in such a short space of time probably meant that insufficient attention was paid to the possible consequences of some of the provisions of the law .
The same clearly applies to the Hungarian national law on dual citizenship , which will clearly create many unnecessary problems not only for us Europeans , but also for our foreign partners .
How will our American or Canadian friends feel about it when hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians or Serbs turn up with European passports issued in Hungary to distant relatives , the descendants of inhabitants of the former Hungary ?
I do not know whether this law was passed with good intentions .
Mr President , one of the accounts of the Hungarian press law , says that it prescribes ' balanced coverage ' , which sounds all right on the face of it .
Another account says that it fines publications for violating ' public interest , public morals or order ' .
Now these concepts do sound very vague , meaningless and therefore dangerous ; almost as dangerous as concepts like xenophobia and racism , and whoever would think of legislating against them ?
However , before we cast stones at Hungary , let us look at the standards and broadcasting media in our own countries .
The BBC , also known as the British Brainwashing Corporation , acts in contempt of its charter 's obligations of impartiality , and it excludes representatives of our own party , whilst giving gratuitously excessive publicity to the Establishment Safety Valve Party .
Our party is significant enough to be attacked routinely , but not significant enough to be invited on the programmes .
In 2006 it colluded with the government to trap our chairman into a jail .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , a couple of the honourable Members asked an intriguing question : is it a coincidence that today 's debate should coincide with the Hungarian Government 's decision ?
Well , sometimes , Mr President , you need a small angel at your shoulder .
For my own part , I prefer , when you invite me to come , to make clear what is at stake , to be able to come armed with facts and figures .
Is what has happened today a coincidence ?
The answer I will give to that comes , in a way , straight from my heart .
We are talking about an entire procedure : it started at the end of December and we are now half way through February - so it has taken a bit more than seven weeks .
Well , in the light of the six years I have been in office in the European institutions , that is quite speedy .
My experience so far has been that things are rarely so speedy that I feel we can solve a problem within seven weeks .
Having said that , the background to today 's outcome is fascinating .
We have a combination of factors .
Firstly , we are not talking about this issue for the first time .
You have invited me to discuss it before .
You have been quite clear , so there has been no doubt about what is at stake - no doubt about what every party in this House thinks on this question .
Secondly , we are talking about a very important issue .
I do not need to explain to you that the issue of freedom of expression and freedom of the press is what is at stake for the Commission ; and that it would be ridiculous if we did not make that a top priority with regard to defending democracy .
Was it a coincidence that the previous item on the agenda this afternoon was the situation in Egypt ?
You have been talking about creating democracy , so there is a clear thread here , and you can be absolutely certain that the Commission is aware of that and is , indeed , doing its utmost to defend democracy and to repair it where it may have been attacked .
The third issue is , of course , the Hungarian Presidency .
Let us not be naive .
Of course our friends in this Member State within the family of Europe are aware that , for those in the chair , noblesse oblige .
So from their side too there has been an approach of doing their utmost to solve the problem .
The final point I would make in this explanation , in so far as I can offer one , is that the European Parliament has been crystal clear : you have been fighting and you have been keeping the outside world informed via the press - via a free press , I would add .
So do not underestimate your own role .
Having said that , for me the whole combination of factors is , at the end of the day , the explanation of why we have this result at this point of time .
Fundamental rights are the issue that has been at stake : there is no doubt about that .
Anyone who thinks that I am interested only in peace and quiet does not know me in the least , because I am fighting for democracy .
I do have a fair bit of experience and I have had a longer life in politics than most of you .
Let me touch , also , on a couple of the specific issues about which I was asked .
What about the independence of the media regulator ?
Our preliminary analysis of the Hungarian law concludes that the procedures for nominating and electing the president and members of the media council are no different from those that are commonly accepted in Europe .
We have to acknowledge - whether it furthers our case or not - that the governing party holds a two-thirds majority , and that , in a democracy , is a simple fact .
( Applause )
On the question of the application of Article 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , we are applying the directive - the AVMS Directive - and the Treaty , and that implies of course applying Article 11 of the Charter .
So there is no doubt about that .
Mr Moraes said there was no judicial review of decisions by the media authority .
A decision by the Media Council , passed in its capacity as an authority of the first instance , cannot be appealed via an administrative procedure .
However , as provided for in Article 163 , an official decision of the Media Council may be challenged in court in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure .
The lodging of the appeal does not have suspensory effect but the code may be invoked to suspend the execution of the decision .
Ms Weber said that the protection of sources under the Hungarian media law is insufficient .
If we take press freedom as a basic European principle , that should be the starting point and the ultimate end in all our thinking on this subject .
I have always defended press freedom at European level and I will continue - and I promise you the Commission will continue - to promote it untiringly .
The right of journalists to protect their sources is one of the main principles guaranteeing the effective exercise of press freedom .
Journalists should never be required to reveal their sources unless it is necessary for them to do so for the purposes of a criminal investigation , and that principle is valid whatever the political climate .
In fact , it needs to be defended with more passion whenever the press and the media generally are in a weaker position , as is the case nowadays .
The Directive on privacy and electronic communications currently in force requires the Member States to ensure the confidentiality of communications .
However , the directive does not apply to activities which fall outside the scope of the EU treaties .
That is to say that EU law does not apply to matters relating to public security , defence , state security or the enforcement of criminal law and , moreover , under the principle of subsidiarity , Member States have the possibility of taking measures that could restrict an individual 's right to privacy , in accordance with their own rules and with the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Any such restriction must be necessary , appropriate and proportionate within a democratic society , and a Commissioner is not in a position to judge or condemn such national doings , nor do I wish to do so .
On the matter of the absence of reference to Article 30 - and a number of Members have asked about that - I know that many of you have complained that the Commission has not taken Article 30 fully into account when assessing the media law .
I should like to say loudly and clearly : that is simply not true .
Although in its original proposal for the AVMS Directive the Commission had included an obligation on the Member States to guarantee the independence of the national regulatory authorities - and I know full well that your memory on such matters is excellent - that provision was not supported by the Council and , despite strong support from the European Parliament , it was changed into the current Article 30 of the AVMS Directive .
The final wording of the AVMS Directive does not directly establish an obligation to create independent bodies .
It is not what we would have wished but it is what was written down in the text and we have to accept it , albeit with regret .
The Hungarian authorities have agreed to delete the provision in question and add the following declaratory text to Article 10 of the Media Constitution , and I quote : ' It is the task for the entirety of the media system to provide authentic , rapid and accurate information on such affairs and events ' .
So that will be the text after the changes .
I have to apologise that you did not receive the text , but I myself did not receive it or , at least , I had only the text that we were negotiating and I could not distribute that to you .
However , as soon as it is possible , I will supply you with the text .
Of course - while I hope you believe what I am saying and I would appreciate that - I imagine that , at the end of the day , you want to see it in writing and have the opportunity to read it .
One of the issues that will make sense for you when you are making up your minds is that of the balanced reporting requirements : as I said in my opening remarks , these will no longer apply to the written press or to on-demand audiovisual media services .
On the question , which Mr Løkkegaard asked , of whether I am ready to propose legislation on media pluralism , I said in my opening remarks that I am ready to take action in the matter of media pluralism within the existing EU competences .
There is no one-size-fits-all approach : that is clear to me , and the Hungarian case has made it even clearer .
I will set up the working group to which I referred , and I thank you for your willingness to join it , in order to discuss the challenges we are facing , to make sure we have a comprehensive overview of the situation in Europe and , of course , to act accordingly - including on the question of media independence .
That should be one of the main priorities .
With regard to the position of the OSCE on the Hungarian media legislation , in relation to our own analysis , there is a difference of legal bases , but the OSCE was quite clear and quite right in its conclusions .
The main issues raised by the OSCE concern the new Media Authority , in particular the long duration of the term of office of its members and the regulation of the public service broadcaster .
I have explained the Commission 's point of view here , and I think that the terms of office of members of other broadcasting councils , for example in other Member States , range in some cases from five to nine years .
One example but it is not the only one , is the Rundfunkräte ( public broadcasting boards ) .
The crucial thing - and this is my final remark - is the message from the Deputy Prime Minister that I received this morning when I touched down , and I am certain that the Minister of Foreign Affairs will repeat the message that the Hungarian Government wrote down for me , and for the Commission , stating what the position is .
During the seven weeks in which we closely cooperated , I had already been impressed by the input of my own staff who had been working like hell . But I can assure you that both sides worked like hell and that they did their jobs not just in the proper way but in a constructive way , in order to find a solution , because this is a very important matter , and we have to find a solution .
( IT ) Mr President , I urge the Commissioner , as a procedural matter , to have the texts she referred to sent out tonight , at least to the group chairs , so that tomorrow we can be as confident as possible before expressing our vote .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , as far as I am concerned the answer is a clear yes .
The Hungarian minister 's body language is also saying yes .
That will be done as soon as possible .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , please appreciate that I do not have to use my body when I express myself .
A couple of brief points on behalf of Hungary : given the fact that Commissioner Kroes ' answer was extensive and exhaustive , and also concerned the composition of the media council , this was a specific question addressed to me which I think has been answered correctly , so I can limit myself to a couple of points .
First and foremost , I would like to underline that Hungary is fully committed to the values , principles and the rules enshrined in the Treaty , in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and in all other instruments of international law , be they European or universal , on human rights .
The first harsh criticism of the media law was made prior to the adoption of the law .
I make particular reference to the comments made by the OSCE media representative .
My simple wish was for the text to be read , studied and analysed , and then for us to be told what could be wrong , what kind of doubts or concerns might arise with respect to the text , or indeed with respect to the interpretation of the implementation of the law .
This was the reason why we immediately welcomed and supported the Commission , being the Guardian of the Treaty , in its analysis of the text , and invited it to express its doubts or concerns .
Now that is exactly what happened .
The Commission scrutinised carefully the law , made some proposals and all these proposals were adopted .
I can only confirm that the day after tomorrow there will be a cabinet meeting .
We will adopt the text and we will submit it immediately to the Hungarian Parliament and the amendments will be adopted as soon as is procedurally possible and will immediately enter into force .
I would like to thank the Commission for its hard work , help and assistance , but I would also like to thank all of you who made fair and reasonable comments and assisted us in this exercise , which I am convinced has been extremely important , not only for ourselves , but also for the European Union as a whole .
I would just like to offer our help and full support to the working group the Commission is about to establish .
This is in the interests of Europe as a whole and we all want to participate in it and to help it as much as we can .
The only thing I regret is the excessive language which appeared in some of the political statements .
As I said already before , the law would have been adopted .
Sometimes we had the feeling that we were being subjected to what the French call ' un procès d 'intention ' , a kind of ' Schuldvermutung . '
I had the feeling that it was the presumption of guilt which was being applied instead of the presumption of innocence which is , of course , a basic rule of any fair trial .
So sometimes these statements went beyond the limits of reasonable and fair political debate - a political debate which we otherwise fully support , both domestically and at a European or universal level .
In fact , it was harmful to the interests of Europe as a whole - it was harmful to European integration .
Now I believe that we are hopefully over that .
I just would like to confirm again our full respect and to testify to this I would just like to let you know that it is our firm intention to incorporate the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the new Hungarian Constitution .
Hungary will thus be the first country where the Charter of Fundamental Rights will be an integral part of the Hungarian legal system .
It will be applicable not only in the areas covered by Union law , but it will be at the top of the hierarchy of the overall legal system and it will prevail over any other legislation or regulation , be it criminal law , be it about the media or be it about any other subject .
That should give an assurance to all of you that the basic rules , the basic values and the basic principles which we all share are , and will be , fully respected by my country .
The debate is closed .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place at 12 : 00 tomorrow .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( HU ) In their motion for a resolution , my fellow Members request that the European Commission also take into account the provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights when scrutinising the Hungarian media law , and if the government fails to amend the law as desired within a fixed deadline , launch an infringement procedure against Hungary .
Similarly , my fellow Members also request that the Commission initiate , still in this year , a European regulatory framework to ensure the assertion of the freedom of the media in the Member States .
I am very pleased to note that increasing attention is being accorded to the provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and I therefore propose that the Commission also examine the application of the Charter , and in particular Articles 21 and 22 thereof , in the case of the Slovak language law .
Furthermore , I welcome the fact that there is a demand for initiating a draft European directive to ensure the inviolability of the freedom of the media .
I believe that the creation of a similar regulatory framework would definitely be justified with regard to the problems of indigenous national minorities .
This is because there are countries within the European Union where it is not the requirement of balanced reporting that results in infringements of the rights of European citizens who have been living in the same areas for centuries , but penalties that are imposed on them for the use of their mother tongue .
Freedom and pluralism of the media is one of the fundamental freedoms which underpins the European Union .
This is why I am overjoyed that the European Commission has reacted emphatically to information concerning the Hungarian media law and has taken real action .
As someone who has worked in the media for many years , I will be watching with interest the work of the expert group announced by Commissioner Kroes which is to advise the Commission on further action .
At the same time , I would like to point out that the legal analysis of the compliance of the Hungarian media law with European law carried out by the Commission has , unfortunately , illustrated the weakness of European law , specifically the Audiovisual Media Services Directive .
Paradoxically , the Directive does not give the Commission much room for manoeuvre .
So when the Hungarian law was being analysed , the Commission had to ' stretch ' certain arguments and base them on the actual Treaty ( freedom of enterprise ) rather than the Directive .
I realise that the European Union has limited jurisdiction in the field of audiovisual policy , but on the other hand I believe that the media , which is one of the fundamentals of democracy , must have certain minimum rights and must be subject to common standards .
This is why I share the view of my political group , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , on the need for a review of the EU legal framework in order to introduce minimum requirements for the freedom and pluralism of the media , and I trust we shall soon begin a substantive discussion on the subject .
Free trade agreement between the EU and the Republic of Korea ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation by Robert Sturdy , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the conclusion of the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and its Member States and the Republic of Korea [ 08505 / 2010 - C7-0320 / 2010 - 2010 / 0075 ( NLE ) ] .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this FTA is the first of a new generation of trade agreements launched in 2007 as part of the global Europe initiative .
Global economy , instability and a stagnated mutlilateral system have strengthened the need and pursuit for increased bilateral relations .
It is the first FTA in which Parliament will exercise its new enhanced powers given to it by the Treaty of Lisbon .
The FTA is designed to provide EU businesses , in a wide variety of economic sectors , with extensive and comprehensive access to the South Korean market through a series of unprecedented tariff liberalisations .
It guarantees WTO-plus disciplines in the case of , for example , geographical indicators , government procurement , greater transparency of state aid and strong enforcement of intellectual property rights , and contains an all-important chapter on sustainable development .
However , while the many advantages are both immediate and conspicuous , I welcome more than anything else the fact that the FTA has an effective bilateral safeguard mechanism - a safeguard that allows the EU to restore MFN duty rates , should it be that this particular FTA has led to or threatens to cause serious injury to EU domestic industry .
It is a safeguard that specifically addresses the concerns of Europe 's sensitive sectors , including the auto industry , consumer electronics and textiles , and guarantees the protection they deserve .
On this note I would like to thank Pablo Zalba Bidegain for the work that he did on this specific part of the agreement .
The South Korea market offers significant new opportunities for EU goods and services . It is a market that until now has remained relatively closed off , due to high tariff levies and costly non-tariff barriers .
The FTA will quickly remove EUR 1.6 billion worth of EU export duties levied annually .
There will be benefits for EU exporters of industrial and agricultural products , immediate savings on chemicals - approximately EUR 175 million -pharmaceuticals , auto parts , industrial machinery , and the list goes on .
It is also worth noting that these figures quoted will probably be even higher , because of the increased trade .
Korea is currently among those more globally valuable export markets for EU farmers , with annual sales of over EUR 1 billion to Korea .
The FTA fully liberalises nearly all the EU 's agricultural exports .
Exports are thus an important source of growth for the EU .
They contribute to wealth and employment for European businesses and their employees and will act as one of the most important factors in stimulating the EU economic recovery .
The Commission and the European Car Association have worked closely together to get this agreement .
The world is watching as Europe leads the way in improving trade and economic relations , with partners in every corner of the world looking at it .
I have always said that trade is the real means of development .
By removing barriers to trade and building new bridges we create new opportunities .
This particular FTA offers a new approach .
Complementary , of course , to Doha , it will drive Europe 's recovery and growth and the European Parliament will be instrumental in determining the future of global trade policy .
At this stage I would like to thank Ignacio from the Commission .
One of the economists said , Ignacio , that this is probably the best trade agreement that both parties could ever have agreed .
I urge all groups to put aside protectionism and support this agreement .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank the honourable Members for all the efforts which Parliament in general , and the Committee on International Trade ( INTA ) in particular , has put into securing prompt assessment - and , I hope , ratification - of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) .
This will permit its entry into force .
This complex task comprised two major processes : finalisation of negotiations on the Korea Safeguard Regulation , implementing the bilateral safeguard clause of the EU-Korea FTA , and the preparation of consent to this treaty .
I welcome the first-reading agreement between the Council and Parliament on the Safeguard Regulation .
The work that was done has not only secured legislation which will provide necessary protection for EU industry , but it has also confirmed the joint commitment of Parliament , the Council and the Commission to efficient law making .
This was also the first trade dossier on which Parliament acted as co-legislator under the Treaty of Lisbon .
The outcome of its involvement is indeed impressive .
I will not repeat the list of benefits which the EU-Korea FTA is expected to bring to the EU economy : we have thoroughly debated them here in the past , and Mr Sturdy has just summed them up .
Let me instead open a brief parenthesis to place the agreement with Korea in the wider perspective of the future of EU trade policy , as sketched out by the Commission in its communication of 9 November 2010 , and to recap the basic tenets of our policy line .
First of all , we continue to favour the multilateral channel of the WTO as the first-best way to liberalise trade and lay down the rules to govern global commerce .
Despite the setbacks and the deadlock since mid-2008 , we continue to push actively for the conclusion of the Doha development round , 10 years now after its inception .
It is still well worth clinching a deal , both for the economic gains and in the interests of furthering the WTO .
That is why I took the initiative of bringing together in Davos the trade ministers of the world 's seven most important trading countries to discuss , in concrete terms , how we can now proceed and enter the end-game , following the impetus given by the G20 in Seoul .
I believe our meeting was a success , and senior officials are now working intensively in an attempt to stage a political breakthrough in the summer .
However , as we said back in November , the bilateral and the multilateral are not enemies .
Indeed , it may well be the case that liberalisation fuels liberalisation .
We have pursued bilateral trade deals that generate genuine value added compared with what can be achieved through the WTO , and we will keep on doing so because the pace of multilateral progress is unavoidably slow .
This has been , and is , our fundamental motivation for pursuing the FTA with Korea .
I will reiterate today the Commission 's commitments to the European Parliament , which it made in relation to the implementation of the Korea Safeguard Regulation and the EU-Korea FTA .
As provided for in the Safeguard Regulation , ' the Commission will present a yearly report to the European Parliament and Council on the implementation of the EU-Korea FTA and will be ready to discuss with the INTA Committee any issues arising from the implementation of the Agreement .
' The Commission will closely monitor the implementation by Korea of its commitments on regulatory issues , including in particular the commitments relating to technical regulations in the car sector .
The monitoring shall include all aspects of non-tariff barriers and its results shall be documented and reported to the European Parliament and the Council .
' Particular importance will be attached to the effective implementation of commitments on labour and environment of Chapter 13 : Trade and Sustainable Development of the FTA .
In this connection , the Commission will seek the advice of the Domestic Advisory Group , which will include representatives of business organisations , trade unions and non-governmental organisations .
The implementation of Chapter 13 of the FTA shall be duly documented and reported to the European Parliament and the Council .
' The Commission also agrees on the importance of providing effective protection in the case of sudden surges of imports in sensitive sectors , including small cars .
Monitoring of sensitive sectors shall include cars , textiles and consumer electronics .
In this connection , the Commission notes that the small-car sector can be considered a relevant market for the purpose of a safeguard investigation .
' The Commission notes that the designation of outward processing zones in the Korean Peninsula , in accordance with the provisions of Article 12 of the Protocol on Rules of Origin , would require an international agreement between the parties to which the European Parliament would have to give its consent .
The Commission will keep Parliament fully informed of the deliberations by the Committee on Outward Processing Zones in the Korean Peninsula .
' The Commission also notes that if , due to exceptional circumstances , it decides to extend the duration of an investigation pursuant to Article 4 ( 3 ) of the Korea Safeguard Regulation , it will ensure that such an extended timing does not go beyond the expiry date of any provisional measures introduced pursuant to Article 5 .
' Moreover , the Commission and the European Parliament agree on the importance of close cooperation in monitoring the implementation of the EU-Korea FTA and the Safeguard Regulation .
' To this end , in case the EP adopts a recommendation to initiate a safeguard investigation , the Commission will carefully examine whether the conditions under the regulation for ex-officio initiation are fulfilled .
In case the Commission considers that the conditions are not fulfilled , it will present a report to the INTA Committee including an explanation of all factors relevant to the initiation of such an investigation .
' Upon request by the INTA Committee , the Commission shall report to the committee on any specific concerns relating to the implementation by Korea of its commitments on non-tariff measures or on Chapter 13 of the FTA . '
That is the end of the quotation .
Finally , let me elaborate on two issues which are of interest to you : the Korean CO2 legislation on car emissions , and the supplementary agreement on the draft Korea-US FTA ( KORUS ) , which was finalised in December 2010 .
On 24 January 2011 , Korea confirmed that certain changes will be introduced to its previous draft CO2 legislation , which satisfactorily address a number of concerns expressed by European car makers , while retaining Korea 's ambitious emission reduction objectives .
The changes , which the Commission welcomes , will not alter overall emissions , but will provide for fairer burden sharing between Korean and EU car makers .
Rest assured that the EU position on the Korea CO2 legislation was closely coordinated at all stages within the Commission and , in particular , with my colleague Connie Hedegaard and DG CLIMA , to avoid undermining Korea 's environmental protection efforts .
As for the supplementary agreement to the draft Korea-US FTA reached in December 2010 , the Commission has not identified elements therein that could have a negative impact on the EU .
I will , however , contact my Korean counterpart to ensure that no competitive disadvantage arises in future for the EU automotive sector insofar as non-harmonised automotive safety standards will not be applied in a more restrictive manner than was the case at the time of the negotiations .
The Commission will be closely monitoring the implementation of this provision .
In particular , the Working Group on Motor Vehicles and Parts established by the FTA will examine practical aspects of implementation to ensure that market access problems are addressed in an effective and speedy manner .
To conclude , I wish to emphasise that the EU-Korea FTA will not only provide important benefits for European exporters to the Korean market , but will also be a clear signal of our determination to pursue new opportunities in key Asian economies .
We are also addressing the concerns of some stakeholders by means of an efficient and effective safeguard regulation .
As this is subject to the ordinary legislative procedure , both the Council and this House have been able to introduce mechanisms for responding to perceived risks should they materialise .
With this FTA and the Safeguard Regulation we have an excellent package that I hope you will support tomorrow .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , international trade and exports are an important source of growth and employment in Europe .
The Free Trade Agreement that we are debating today will strengthen the competitiveness of the European Union and will provide our enterprises with significantly better access to a highly dynamic region of growth .
Both the European and the Korean economy will benefit considerably .
Our gross domestic product will increase .
That could lead to the creation of new jobs .
Our exports to Korea will double in the next few years according to all the forecasts because duties and non-tariff barriers to trade will be abolished ; the relief in terms of duties alone will amount to EUR 1.6 billion per year .
For the European Union there will be a substantial new trade in goods and services with a value of up to EUR 19 billion .

I am particularly pleased that , in the negotiations , the Commission took full account of the negotiation recommendations expressed by the European Parliament in the Martin Report from 2008 .
I am also pleased that the European Commission took account both of the concerns expressed by Parliament and also of those coming from industry and it was also able to dispel some concerns just in the last few weeks .
Something that I have never experienced before in the area of foreign trade is positive feedback even coming from the agricultural sector , which is usually more likely to be a problem for us in the area of trade negotiations .
In the area of agriculture , the agreement will facilitate access to South Korea for European agricultural products from 1 July 2011 .
Up to now , only 2 % of our agricultural products reach the South Korean market duty free .
For pork , annual duties amounting to EUR 240 million are paid , and for milk and milk products the figure is around EUR 100 million .
All of these barriers to market access for our domestic agriculture will now be removed .
I would be pleased if , for this area in particular , the European Commission would consider how we could set up some kind of market access programme , not only for small and medium-sized enterprises , but also for agriculture in the countries that will profit from the Free Trade Agreement .
Above all , I would be pleased if we were also to ensure that our partners in South Korea now actually implement the trade facilitation measures promised in the agreement .
I call for it to be clearly monitored whether new barriers to trade are introduced , and I would , in particular , like to congratulate the Commission .
What the Commission has achieved and what Parliament 's rapporteurs have achieved , particularly in the trialogue negotiations , is an example to us all .
I hope that we will have a broad majority in favour of this agreement in this House tomorrow .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner De Gucht , early in this parliamentary term , which is my first , one of the matters I first heard discussed was precisely the Free Trade Agreement with Korea .
Certain sectors of European industry , especially the automotive industry , were unanimous in opposing this agreement .
As a citizen of Navarre and Spain , where the automotive industry represents a substantial part of our economy , I felt the duty to become involved in order to improve , if not the agreement as this was no longer possible , the safeguard clause , which was where Parliament could introduce improvements .
Thus , we set out to achieve two objectives .
Firstly , to protect the industry and its jobs , and secondly , to make the agreement more attractive for the industries concerned , particularly the automotive industry .
Our aim was not just to avoid outright rejection , but to gain their support for the agreement .
I believe that here today , we can say ' mission accomplished ' .
This is all thanks to Parliament 's hard work and expertise .
I should like to express my gratitude to the rapporteur and to the shadow rapporteurs of both reports for their outstanding work .
Thank you Robert .
And thank you also for your words .
Recognition is also due to the members of the Committee on International Trade , led by its Chair , Mr Moreira .
¡ Muito obrigado ! , Vital .
I would also like to thank the Belgian Presidency of the European Union for their excellent work .
Their effort has had its reward in the form of the agreement we finally reached in December .
Lastly , I would like to highlight the work of the European Commission , and particularly Ignacio Bercero 's contribution , for which I am most grateful .
Tomorrow we will vote in favour of a clause which will be more effective , easier to apply and will genuinely protect European industry .
Today , concerns on the Free Trade Agreement with Korea have hugely diminished .
Indeed , we might say that they have all but vanished .
Today , the opportunities this agreement brings clearly outweigh the uncertainties .
The European Parliament should be proud of a job well done .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon has in fact put trade policy on a new footing .
The EU is solely responsible for trade policy and Parliament gives or withholds its consent .
In that respect , we have gained a new responsibility .
We can only enable this new responsibility to take shape if we act together .
We have proven that very clearly in this matter .
In this regard , I would also like to thank the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs .
Trade policy is not an end in itself .
Its purpose is , firstly , to strengthen jobs and industrial development in the European Union and , secondly , to improve conditions for people in other countries of the world .
The aim of trade policy must be to achieve both of these goals .
We therefore need to assess this agreement from this viewpoint .
Overall , this is a step in the right direction towards fulfilling these two requirements .
However , we certainly do have a few points of criticism , for example the question of duty drawback in South Korea , which will bring one-sided competitive advantages for certain sectors of industry in South Korea , particularly in sensitive areas such as the automotive industry .
It was therefore right for us to have very intensive talks about a safeguard clause and also to have jointly implemented such a clause , which provides for the close monitoring of precisely these points , so that we can be certain that the possibilities provided by duty drawback in South Korea do not lead to a distortion of competition in Europe .
Parliament has rightly established safeguards here .
Secondly , this agreement also has the purpose of improving the situation in South Korea for our colleagues there .
South Korea still has improvements to make with regard to Chapter 13 , in particular the question of the core labour standards laid down by the ILO .
Two absolutely crucial core labour standards - No 87 and No 98 , relating to collective bargaining - have not be implemented or ratified .
Section 314 of the penal code relates to the obstruction of business .
Neither of these things is in line with the nature and the provisions of this agreement .
Thus , Commissioner , I am relying on you , and on the statement that you have given in support of the safeguard clause , to change this situation in South Korea so that this agreement will represent a blueprint for the future to enable globalisation to proceed in a fair manner .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are currently witnessing a historic situation , because the Free Trade Agreement with South Korea that we are debating and that we intend to adopt is the first Free Trade Agreement that has been debated under the new Lisbon system , which grants Parliament full power of codecision .
This makes an important area of policy - trade policy - more democratic .
We , as Parliament , consider this to be important .
The debate here in Parliament has also shown that , as regards safeguard clauses , we were able to include important concerns expressed to us by workers , companies and associations in an improved safeguard clause that is intended to protect the interests of industry and , above all , jobs in the future by creating a level playing field and fair conditions for competition and avoiding asymmetries .
That is what we as the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have concentrated on .
As shadow rapporteur for our group , I am pleased that we were able to be successful in this regard .
The duty drawback mechanism , which caused us concern to start with , has now been explicitly included in the safeguard clause and there is the option for industry , and also for Parliament , to call on the Commission to carry out an investigation .
A monitoring process is planned , which is intended to be established in a transparent way via an online platform , and there is greater scope for the investigation of the factors that will decide whether significant damage has been done to European industry .
Mechanisms for monitoring to be carried out by the Commission , particularly for sensitive sectors in the event of increased imports , are also provided for .
We can start with this and focus on the advantages associated with the South Korea agreement , such as the considerable reduction in duties - the Commission expects enterprises in Europe to be able to save EUR 1.6 billion .
I would therefore like to thank Commissioner De Gucht , who has personally worked hard to enable us to reach a compromise , including with the Council .
I would also like to thank the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs , especially Mr Sturdy and Mr Zalba Bidegain , for their excellent work .
We have achieved something really good here .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is in fact the first major Free Trade Agreement that Europe has passed for some years , and when it comes to free trade agreements , it must be said that you do not lack ambition - South Korea , Canada , India , Mercosur .
There is not a single country or area that escapes the European Commission 's ambitions where free trade agreements are concerned .
In the case of this agreement , we have seen that there will only be winners , but I still wonder who the winners will be when I am told that they will be in the agricultural sector .
As the elected representative of Brittany , I can tell you that in in that region which produces more than 60 % of French pigmeat , the few benefits to be had by the agri-food product firms do not compensate for reductions in tourism , degradation of the environment and the health of workers , and farmers ' losses .
There are , indeed , also a great number of losers , and do we , here , have a vision of what economic and social Europe will be like after all these free trade agreements have been signed ?
No we do not , and nor do we know , at the end of the day , whether there will be any industrial or economic sector left to benefit from these free trade agreements .
Moreover , and most importantly , Commissioner , try as you might to tell us that we are not questioning South Korea 's environmental and climate policy , that is not true .
We are going to be able to export enormous saloon cars , those cars of which the manufacturers who make the least amount of effort to combat climate change are rewarded by this agreement .
For the first time , the European Union is questioning the climate policy of one of its trading partners .
Has the European Commission started to change , under pressure from Canada , its directive on fuel quality ?
We believe that we are putting Europe 's ambitions in the wrong order : the environment and the climate must come before trade .
That is why our group will vote against this agreement .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , with the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement signed in October 2010 , which has been assigned the attribute by the Commission and the Council of being the most ambitious agreement of its kind ever to be negotiated between the EU and a highly industrialised state , the bilateral protection duties are to fall by around 98 % in the next five years .
The trade exchange between the EU and Korea is supposed to double in the medium term and that - so it is said - will speed up economic growth and the creation of jobs and prosperity .
My group and I have justified doubts about this prediction .
Quite apart from the mantra of the role of free trade as a kind of saviour of the global economy that is currently in a precarious state , which is also reflected in the Free Trade Agreement itself , it is not clear from this agreement whether it will , or will able to , help us deal with the global challenges arising as a result of climate change and the necessary fundamental economic restructuring .
What are the efficiency criteria and what are the free trade criteria ?
At the same time , Commissioner , the Free Trade Agreement that has been concluded hardly contains any references to sustainability for the future , oriented change or international economic cooperation .
An agreement is being concluded in which the fundamental standards of the International Labour Organisation are still being contravened .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Mr President , tomorrow we will vote on the Free Trade Agreement with Korea , and this has been a long time coming .
Most of us will agree that this is a win-win situation .
It will be particularly beneficial for Europe 's farmers and economic operators .
However , we must not ignore the fact that the agreement does not only bring advantages for European companies and Korean farmers .
Some sectors will benefit from the agreement , whereas others will inevitably lose out .
Thus , in future , EU citizens will be able to buy cheaper technology products and cars from Korea .
In return , Korea will get badly needed food from Europe as well as medicines and luxury goods .
The agreement may also lead to better environmental and working conditions in Korea - that is something worth mentioning and to be pleased about .
I hope that the agreement can enter into force quickly , especially as the EU wants a first-mover advantage over the United States , which is also in negotiations with Korea in respect of a similar agreement .
Finally , I would like to thank all of the rapporteurs involved for their untiring and highly competent work .
. - ( NL ) Mr President , tomorrow we will be voting on the free-trade agreement with South Korea .
I must say that it looks good at first glance .
The delegation of the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) is a strong supporter of free trade .
Unfortunately , the European Union could not resist adding a safeguard clause to the trade agreement .
This means that non-competitive companies will be protected when unable to hold their own when faced with competition from Korean products .
In other words , should the European consumer choose to buy Korean products , rather than European ones , for the simple reason that the former may be better quality or cheaper , then trade barriers will once again be erected .
Look how the vicious European reflex towards protectionism and market intervention is rearing its head again .
Mr President , free trade that does not entail any disadvantage for European industry is , of course , an illusion .
Therefore , trying to overcome this by including a safeguard clause and offering compensation to disadvantaged industries is a totally misguided solution .
This will allow industries that are competing poorly to carry on doing what they have always done , instead of adapting to the competition .
Worse still , who will ultimately be footing this bill ?
Exactly : our citizens , unfortunately .
As consumers , they will be forced to pay over the odds for their purchases and , on top of that , as taxpayers , they will even have to cough up the required compensation .
How am I supposed to explain to my constituents that they will soon have to foot the bill if , for example , Fiat loses some of its market share to Kia ?
These rules have no place in a free trade agreement .
In practice , this is nothing other than subsidising inefficient companies on the backs of European citizens .
Free trade ?
What a great idea , but please let us drop this safeguard clause .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , South Korea is indeed a very important market for products from European industry - that has been emphasised and cars have been highlighted - but also for farmers .
I would emphasise that we need it to be a win-win situation .
There is a new generation coming up , which is a good thing .
The agreement with South Korea contains a chapter on sustainable development , which covers labour standards , environmental policy and a monitoring mechanism that is to involve civil society .
That is also good .
The Free Trade Agreement is a step in the right direction , and I would like to thank everyone involved and emphasise that some excellent work has been done .
Nevertheless , I would also call for clear rules for the production chain as a whole , particularly with regard to food .
We should not only consider the end product , and it should not only be the agricultural industry that benefits ; farmers should benefit , too .
In the interests of European consumers and our farmers , when trade flows are liberalised it absolutely must be ensured that agricultural products that are imported into the European Union meet our high standards in respect of environmental , animal and consumer protection , including at their point of origin and throughout the production chain .
I will support the position of the Committee on International Trade tomorrow , but where further liberalisation efforts are concerned I would call strongly for the food sector and farmers also to be taken into account .
( PT ) Mr President , in my capacity as Chair of the Committee on International Trade , I should like , first and foremost , to express my satisfaction that we are about to successfully conclude our first major test in exercising the codecision powers that the Treaty of Lisbon has granted us in the area of trade agreements .
I feel that we exercised our powers with a great sense of responsibility , and I believe that it is only right that I should thank the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs , and also express my gratitude for the spirit of cooperation on the part of the Commission and the Council , under the Belgian Presidency , during the negotiations on the safeguard regulation .
It should be noted that in the vote that took place in the Committee on International Trade , there was an overwhelming majority in favour of recommending approval of the trade agreement and adopting the regulation on the safeguard mechanism .
This demonstrates that Parliament is capable of forming a broad-based political coalition for more openness in international trade , in line with one of the principles laid down in the trade agreement itself , in fact .
The trade agreement is , to my mind , mutually beneficial .
With the mutual opening of both markets , each economy can profit from their competitive advantages .
The trade agreement will not only remove tariff and non-tariff barriers , but will also encompass the opening up of the public procurement market , safeguard intellectual property rights , and protect employment rights and environmental standards .
Once the agreement has been ratified , which will be tomorrow , I hope , we must move resolutely to the next stage , which is its implementation .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , this agreement contains a clause that does not convince us and has never convinced us .
I am talking about the refund of customs duties that Korea will receive for imports of products from China or other countries .
We have already discussed this , but as a liberal democrat I consider this measure to be deeply flawed .
It is a kind of export subsidy , and I would like it if , when voting on this agreement , we had an assurance that this clause will not set a precedent and will not be included in any other future agreements .
Tomorrow 's vote will conclude one leg of the journey we have undertaken together , but only one leg , because the relationship between Parliament and the Commission must continue , not least with regard to the actual implementation of the safeguard clause .
For the sake of European industry and European workers , we cannot make any mistakes when implementing it , or else we will face great problems in future agreements .
This is the Year of the Rabbit in the Far East , so I hope European industry will run like a rabbit , taking advantage of what this agreement can offer it .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I still remember very well how - as is happening now in Egypt and Tunisia - the people in Korea , particularly the young people , took to the streets and , in the face of police truncheons and weapon , fought for freedom , democracy and self-determination .
What has happened since then is unbelievable .
It is unbelievable how much has been achieved in Korea in respect of democracy , self-determination and freedom , but also with regard to the economy and now increasingly also the environment .
This makes Korea a good example for many other Asian countries , and it is also a country our ever closer cooperation with which I very much welcome , along with our work to break down customs barriers and to establish fairer trade .
Nevertheless , we are rejecting this agreement today and there are a number of specific reasons for this , some of which have been mentioned by my colleague Mr Jadot .
In addition to what has been said , I would also like to mention the regulation in the area of the financial sector , which we consider to be a step in the wrong direction .
However , there are also fundamental reasons for this .
We are concluding more and more free trade agreements , each one giving rise to another one .
What we need is not a patchwork of more new individual agreements , but just and fair rules for world trade as a whole .
Mr President , a free trade agreement cannot only be about tariffs .
It also has to be about intellectual property rights .
A business in my constituency , Avon Protection , is a world leader in the manufacture of gas masks .
Avon believes that its patents have been infringed by a South Korean firm making what are quite simply copies .
There is meant to be patent protection in South Korea , but will a Korean court really find in favour of a British company against a Korean business ?
For free trade to work , there has to be a level playing field and , yes , a safeguard clause such as Pablo Zalba Bidegain 's is useful , but the other signatory must also ensure that the agreement is indeed a two-way street , otherwise the Free Trade Agreement which should benefit both parties simply becomes completely one-sided .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is wrong to have turned the debate on the Free Trade Agreement with Korea into a stand-off between supposed neo-protectionists and die-hard free-traders .
I also think it is wrong for the Commission to have acted more like a service economy development agency than the political government of 500 million Europeans , which should strike a balance between considerations relating to growth on the one hand , and to employment and distribution of wealth on the other .
What differentiates us from the United States , which has not yet ratified this agreement - and we know why - and this also applies to relations with Korea , is the very fact that no world economic power exposes its quality - and I stress the word ' quality ' - manufacturing industry to inevitable dismantling processes , sacrificing it on the altar of financial interests , setting white-collar workers from the City of London against the white-coated workers of modern European factories , which is exactly what Europe does not need in the wake of the crisis .
All this , Mr Sturdy , Commissioner , has nothing whatsoever to do with neo-protectionism .
Otherwise we would have to include in this category the Spanish , German , Polish , Portuguese , French and Italian Industry Ministers who , in the 10 February edition of Le Monde , reiterated the need to make Community interest central to the work of the European institutions , stating that in this case it definitely could not be protected by the safeguard clause , however worthy it may be .
An excellent academic exercise in the field of international trade relations has taken place , but we have failed to act in Europe 's interests .
For that reason ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , this Free Trade Agreement is the first to have been examined since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force and that is why we MEPs believe that it really cannot come into force until we have obtained robust guarantees , guarantees that must , furthermore , act as a model for future trade agreements .
It will therefore be up to us - to you and to us - to ensure the proper implementation of these mechanisms in order to protect the European economy in the event of distortions of competition .
However , that should not in any case exonerate us from strategic thinking in two areas .
Firstly , in order to guarantee that competition is genuinely fair , it is essential for social , health and environmental standards to be taken into account in trade agreements .
That is an essential requirement .
My second point is that Europe must finally provide itself with the instruments necessary to retain or recover production capacity , for example industrial or agricultural production capacity , and to retain - and this is absolutely vital for its future - its technological progress .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I only hope that what we are discussing right now does not end up being an additional and perhaps final death blow to our economies .
We are already flooded with goods produced at low or very low cost , arriving mainly from east and south-east Asia .
Many Italian companies , especially SMEs , have been brought to their knees due to unfair competition .
This means that they cannot compete on the market , with tragic consequences as far as the economy and especially employment is concerned .
This agreement provides for various safeguard and protection clauses , but who can assure us that these rules will really be applied later on ?
There are still too many unknowns , and the possible benefit to be had by a few large producers cannot always rebound on the smallest producers alone .
In my region , Tuscany , our textile industry - historically a driving force - is already in a serious condition due to Asian competition : I only hope that Europe itself does not deal the death blow to this sector , and probably many others besides , with this agreement .
We will not vote for this agreement .
- ( SK ) Mr President , since the start of negotiations in May 2007 , the Free Trade Agreement with South Korea has had a long and difficult journey .
Despite the clear benefits to both sides , some key sectors of European industry were exposed to serious risks .
I also expressed my reservations on the floor of this Parliament , and I called for fair and balanced rules of the game .
The solution was the bilateral safeguard clause .
I would like to thank Robert Sturdy and Pablo Zalba Bidegain for their leadership as rapporteurs , as well as everyone else involved .
Thanks to their combined efforts , the economies of the EU and South Korea will be billions of euros better off .
From July 2011 , the real victors in this agreement will be the consumers and citizens of both sides .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everybody has said that the free trade agreement with the Republic of Korea is an institutional and strategic innovation on the part of the Union .
On the contrary , it is an unbalanced agreement that will have a negative impact on the European manufacturing industry .
The elimination of duties on Korean products in return for a rise in environmental and social standards in Korea cannot be considered fair .
The Korean shipbuilding industry benefits from substantial state aid , which has enabled it to attain a 30 % share of the world market .
This means that European industry , be it automotive , textile , chemical or any other , must defend itself against competition that if not unfair in form , is unfair in fact .
The introduction of the safeguard clause is an appropriate measure , but it is not sufficient to patch up the many weaknesses in the agreement .
I therefore call on the European Commission to be more prudent if it really wishes to defend European economic interests .
( PT ) Mr President , this is the pinnacle of a vision of trade that is geared solely towards competition instead of towards harmonisation and reciprocity ; that is to say competition between countries , producers and workers .
Large economic groups and transnational companies are , as always , expected to see a profit worth millions of euros with this Free Trade Agreement .
However , as always , the other side of the coin is missing : the sacrifice of millions of small producers and small and medium-sized enterprises , environmental sacrifices , the destruction of production capacity and jobs , and the onslaught on wages and workers ' rights .
This agreement will primarily affect countries like Portugal and the regions that are most dependent on the sectors concerned : textiles , automobiles related components , and electronics .
It is significant that the rapporteur himself has already predicted the inevitable redundancies throughout Europe , but we also know that trade unions and rural organisations in the Republic of Korea are against this agreement .
It is therefore clear who the winners and who the losers will be when it is eventually concluded .
( NL ) Mr President , this trade agreement with South Korea is ambitious and comprehensive .
It will help remove major trade barriers and European companies will be able to benefit from that .
Increased access to the South Korean market will improve European companies ' market position .
Given the fact that other major players , such as the United States , Chile and the EFTA countries , aspire to or have already entered into trade agreements with South Korea , this is a very important step .
With this agreement , the European Union has shown that it is not cutting itself off from open and sustainable trade , at a time when some other nations are showing protectionist tendencies .
Trade offers a way out of the economic crisis .
However , free trade must not be allowed to lead to freebooting .
The steel and car industries are worried about this , and not entirely without reason .
Therefore , when implementing the agreement , we must closely monitor whether all the conditions are being met and we must ensure that we are able to deploy bilateral safeguard clauses , quickly and effectively , if necessary .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will try to be extremely brief .
First , regarding the question asked by the Earl of Dartmouth , in a case involving the infringement of intellectual property rights , including patents in third countries , it is appropriate that the operators concerned have recourse to the available enforcement means , including legal proceedings if necessary , as this is a case between two private firms .
In the specific case of Avon Protection , it would be appropriate for your constituent first to seek redress for the alleged infringement of the patent via the existing legal framework in Korea .
Should the available enforcement in Korea not be fair or expeditious enough , then the Commission could look into the matter .
Regarding the remarks made by Mr Jadot , the initial draft of the Korean legislation would have forced EU car makers to reduce the CO2 emissions of their cars twice as much as Korean car makers .
This was mainly because the proposed emission cuts were not proportional , but highly progressive , depending on the level of emissions of the respective cars .
Consequently , despite being responsible for only a small share of car sales in Korea - 3 % in 2009 - and therefore of total CO2 car emissions in Korea , EU car makers would have been asked to contribute disproportionately .
Their average emissions reduction between 2009 and 2015 would have been 23 % , compared with just 10 % for their Korean counterparts , which account for 95 % of total car sales in Korea .
Such burden sharing would not have been fair , and that is why we discussed it with the Korean counterpart .
Finally , I would like to thank everybody involved in this legislative process - the Committee on International Trade ( INTA ) , the Commission rapporteurs , the Chair of the INTA Committee , the Council and my own staff at the Commission - for what , I would say , is a very good example of what the ratification procedure should be under the Treaty of Lisbon .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner also .
The whole process has been excellent .
Over the years I have worked on a number of codecision procedures and I have to say this has been one of the best .
The debate among my shadow rapporteurs has been phenomenal .
We have had extremely good input from virtually everybody .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Moreira , the Chair .
Without his expertise , I do not think we would have got a satisfactory conclusion on the comitology issue - a particularly difficult sticking point towards the end of the negotiations .
There have been a number of issues raised today .
I would just like to say to Mr Jadot : I think your pig producers in Brittany may well benefit significantly hopefully , Yannick , because pig producers across Europe are having a bad time .
I only pick on that because I am involved in agriculture .
As I said , the quality of the debate has been excellent .
There always will be two views and Mr Susta is absolutely right : there is always a split between the protectionist and the free marketeer .
I would just say that we cannot stick our head in the sand and close the door and expect the world not to move on without us , because it will move on without us .
We live in a global market , whether we like it or not .
There are problems with that but it is a fact .
I believe quite strongly that this offers huge opportunities for the European Union to move out of its problems with the financial crisis .
We have set a standard for future agreements .
However , they will not be as easy as this one .
I am sure that we will move onto other far more difficult ones and we look forward to working with the Commission on that .
I would like to thank everyone who has taken part in the debate tonight .
It has been excellent and it shows how comprehensive this House can be .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at midday tomorrow ( Thursday , 17 February 2011 ) .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
I think that the entry into force of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement would have a positive impact on the European Union 's economy .
Firstly , it would help achieve customs duty savings estimated at EUR 1.6 billion a year .
We would also see an increase in trade , especially in the services sector where the future growth in trade is estimated at 70 % , and in the agricultural sector where , just at the moment , European Union exports to Korea have an annual value of EUR 1 billion .
At the same time , this is an ambitious and innovative agreement .
It is the first in a new generation of free trade agreements which contain both a chapter on sustainable development and compliance with labour standards and a monitoring mechanism in which civil society will be involved .
The fears about the difficulties which Korean competition could cause the Union 's more sensitive industries , such as the car industry , are dispelled by the inclusion of the Safeguard Clause in the agreement .
This will be used to impose measures for monitoring imports and exports and evaluating the impact of the agreement on the various sectors .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0009 / 2011 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Rule of law in Serbia
How does the Council view the development of the rule of law in Serbia , particularly in the light of the questionable court case against alleged guerrillas belonging to the Albanian minority in the Preševo valley in southern Serbia ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) The opinion of the Council on the development of the rule of law in Serbia is presented in the Council conclusions of 14 December 2010 .
In these conclusions , the Council welcomes the fact that Serbia is continuing the implementation of its reform schedule and has shown further progress in implementing the provisions set out in the interim agreement signed with the European Union .
In its conclusions , the Council also established that Serbia continues to achieve good results in the performance of its obligations under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
However , the country needs to make further efforts , particularly in the following areas : the reform of public administration , the rule of law , including the reform of the justice system , the fight against corruption and organised crime , and the improvement of its business environment .
The Council did not discuss the development of the rule of law in Serbia with regard to the specific procedure referred to by Mr Posselt .
( DE ) Since I submitted the question , a group of Serbian citizens of Albanian nationality have been given the maximum sentences in a show trial by a special court where they stood accused of crimes in Kosovo .
Should this not have been dealt with by the European Union Rule of Law Mission ( EULEX ) instead of Serbia ?
Could you please look into this and find out about the specific case that I have asked about ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr Posselt .
Please note that the so-called accession criteria laid down in 1993 by the European Council in Copenhagen are decisive considerations with regard to the position of the Council on any enlargements and stabilisation and association agreements .
These criteria also include respect for human and minority rights , and nothing can be more important to the Council during the negotiations than this principle .
What I can tell you is that the Hungarian Presidency , representing the Council , will naturally acknowledge your request and the issue , is aware of the gravity of these events , and , as in all accession and association agreement procedures , is paying special attention to these matters in this case as well .
( DE ) Mr President , I have another supplementary question for the Council with regard to the Mr Posselt 's question .
My colleague has already asked whether the Council can envisage , in this specific case in particular , contacting the government and those responsible on the ground once again .
Therefore , I would again like to ask the Presidency of the Council : Can the Presidency envisage , in this specific case , entering into contact with the people responsible on the ground ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , of course , as you have mentioned the broader context and the spirit in which the Council approaches similar issues , what I can tell you is that Serbia 's accession is in progress , since it has submitted its accession application , and I believe that we have now entered into a new phase , as Serbia has replied to the questionnaire presented by the European Commission .
These replies were submitted on 31 January .
As in the case of all important matters pertaining to the accession procedure , both the European Commission and the Council will , of course , pay particular attention to such issues .
Subject : SMEs and the Hungarian Presidency
One of the stated aims of the Hungarian Presidency of the Council is to improve the situation of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
Could the Council elaborate a little on this point and give practical details as to how it will improve things for SMEs which are struggling to survive ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Small and medium-sized enterprises are vital actors in the European economy .
The improvement of the framework conditions for their operation represents one of the special priorities of the Hungarian Presidency .
Over the next months the focus of the Presidency will be on the implementation of the Europe 2020 Strategy and the flagship initiatives for innovation and industrial policy laid down therein , as well as the full establishment of the internal market , since at present only 8 % of European SMEs are engaged in cross-border activities .
Based on the report by former Commissioner Mario Monti , this accomplishment must include the elimination of all barriers that still impede the operation of the internal market .
We can achieve this by implementing and enforcing all directives , especially the Services Directive - this matter has also been addressed by Parliament in this part-session - precisely and in due time by providing consumer-friendly solutions within the Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) , by facilitating compliance with taxation rules for enterprises conducting cross-border business activities , and by promoting the adoption of an SME-friendly EU patent - and Parliament took a very important decision on this subject on Tuesday , after the Monday debate .
The prerequisite for all this is what I have been talking about so far , that we must inspire SMEs to undertake as many innovative investments as possible .
Additionally , the Hungarian Presidency will undertake the mid-term review of the European Small Business Act .
This Act should be a veritable Magna Carta for SMEs .
Furthermore , the Presidency intends to promote a comprehensive approach with regard to the new , integrated industrial policy , in the framework of which we endeavour to eliminate all informational , financial and technical support barriers that prevent SMEs from becoming the true backbone of the green economy .
In addition , we intend to reduce administrative burdens and the risk of state operation through a better and more intelligent regulatory framework , as well as institutional changes .
We are convinced that it is vital to strengthen the innovative capacity of SMEs , and this requires a new approach to innovation , one that does not focus on the promotion of technological innovation .
I would like to remind you that the European Council also took very important decisions with regard to innovation on 4 February .
Concerning the key issue of how SMEs can obtain financing , it can be said that we are committed to supporting healthy SMEs in obtaining credits and loans through guarantees , innovative financial instruments and banks offering favourable terms .
Lastly , I would like to add that the Hungarian Presidency will submit proposals to the Council with regard to the mid-term evaluation of high-budget , multi-year EU expenditure programmes in the field of research and development , which will also include important aid instruments targeted at SMEs , such as the Risk Sharing Finance Facility ( RSFF ) .
( GA ) Madam President , I want to congratulate the Presidency for being where it is tonight , and I welcome what the Minister has said .
One of the biggest problems of small industry is too much bureaucracy - or red tape as we say in English .
President Barroso promised in 2004 that he would do something significant to deal with this difficulty , but it has not happened yet .
Having heard what has been said by the President-in-Office from Hungary , may I say that I am extremely optimistic .
It is extremely important that we do everything to deal with this problem , because it causes great difficulty for people who are going into this kind of industry .

( LT ) Mr President , back in 2008 , the Council approved the allocation of a EUR 15 billion package from the European Investment Bank , which was supposed to be the main instrument for saving small and medium-sized enterprises during the crisis .
The report published shows that there was a low uptake of funds and these were allotted mainly to big business , while small business did not receive the required funding .
How does the Hungarian Presidency plan to ensure that instruments already adopted to support small and medium-sized enterprises are used and implemented fairly ?
I just wonder whether my colleagues would agree with me how disappointing it is that there has not been much support for a written declaration which is being sponsored by my colleague from the West Midlands , Malcolm Harbour , who is the Chairman of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Today he sent out an email saying that only 184 of the 736 colleagues have signed this .
Does this show that , when it comes to small businesses throughout the European Union , cooperation is not possible and in effect it is up to the Member States to take care of their own small businesses ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - First let me answer Mr Higgins ' question concerning the regulatory environment .
This is really very important for the existence and working conditions of SMEs .
Applying the ' Think Small First ' principle when preparing laws and policies is a cornerstone of the new framework we are trying to establish .
This is important at all levels , not only at EU level , but - and I think you share my view - also at national , regional and municipality level .
The Commission has revised its state aid rules to encourage Member States to direct more support for SMEs to key areas such as training , R & D and environmental protection and to overcome the current focus on large businesses .
The agreement by Member States to allow for the application of reduced VAT rates for locally supplied services , including labour-intensive services such as hairdressing , catering and repair services , will further stimulate economic activity and create jobs , and the Commission warmly welcomes this decision .
In the area of better regulation , the Commission has tabled important legislative initiatives already .
It has adopted a proposal for revisiting the VAT directive to remove barriers to electronic invoicing , with cost-saving potential amounting to billions of euros in the medium term .
The Commission also came forward in February with a proposal to allow Member States to adopt less burdensome accounting requirements for micro-businesses , thus fulfilling its commitment in the action plan for small businesses .
It has the capacity to reduce the burden by up to EUR 6 billion .
The Commission encourages Member States to reach an agreement as soon as possible to allow Member States who wish to take advantage of this opportunity to do so , so we in the Council definitely have to move along those lines .
The Commission will also carefully assess the likely burden of any new legislative proposals , not only for SMEs .
We have quite a number of good proposals on the table , and in the Competitiveness Council we are following this item and trying to address as many of these issues as quickly as possible .
Turning to the second question , on improving access to finance , even in my introductory remark I tried to make a reference to that .
To loosen the supply of much-needed credit , the EIB lent EUR 1 billion to SMEs in 2008 , an increase of 60 % compared to 2007 .
The aim is to lend more money on these issues later on .
I remember very well that , when I was still an MEP , I was responsible for an opinion on the EIB .
In my opinion for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I made an evaluation .
I have to tell you that the EIB reacted very quickly to the changed circumstances and reorganised its priorities .
So we welcomed those moves by the EIB .
I agree with you that sometimes money does not get to the intended recipients , and there should be better organisation .
My view on that is that we really have to pay attention to the counterparts of the EIB in the Member States , because in most cases they are the partners .
We should not always blame the EIB for the implementation , which is not directly done by the EIB .
So I agree , on the second question , that it is extremely important that Community money and EIB loans get to the intended recipients , that is , the small and medium-sized enterprises .
I believe the Council cannot give opinions on written declarations , so if you do not mind , Mr President , I will not comment .
Subject : Initiatives on the management of water and drinking water
In its publicity material setting out its priorities , the Hungarian Presidency has expressed the desire to give special attention to issues of water and drinking water management , as well as extreme events related to water resources .
Since the programme does not specify which policies it will follow in this connection , would the Presidency inform the EP precisely which steps it intends to take in this area ?
Does it consider that over the next few years a specific problem will arise as regards the management and security of supply of water resources and drinking water in European Member States ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) I would like to answer the question of Mr Georgios Papanikolaou concerning water resources .
This subject is of special significance to the presidency trio , of Spain , Belgium and Hungary .
It was an important aspect of the common programme we developed more than two years ago , and each country added to it during its six-month presidency in order to contribute to the common programme being realised with regard to an integrated approach to water policy .
We are therefore continuing the work started by Spain and Belgium , and would like to add our own contribution by submitting conclusions concerning water policy at the Council meeting in June 2011 .
These conclusions will cover three main topics .
The first is the integrated management of extreme water events , such as floods , water shortage , excess surface water and irregular distribution of rainfall .
The second topic is the role of ecological services provided by water .
This is a very exciting subject which I believe we do not talk about enough these days .
We take it for granted that we have water and we are using the so-called ecological services provided to us by wetlands habitats , yet we should show much appreciation for these .
The third topic will be the intensification of cooperation in the field of water management , both at international level and among EU Member States .
The Council conclusions intend to contribute to the European Commission 's communication on the concept of European waters , which is foreseen to be adopted in 2012 , and which will highlight the importance of the sustainable management of the water resources of EU Member States and of maintaining the security of water resources and water supply .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , there will also be conferences and events on the subject of water during the term of the Hungarian Presidency , such as the conference on the future of European freshwater resources , which will be held between 23 and 25 March in Budapest , in conjunction with the informal meeting of ministers for the environment .
Please allow me one final comment .
It is a priority objective for the Hungarian Presidency to ensure the creation of a Danube strategy for the EU and , in this context as well , water , the protection of our drinking water base and an integrated water policy will naturally have special significance .
( EL ) Mr President , Minister , thank you very much for your reply .
I would add that , in 2007 , the Commission noted in its communication entitled ' Addressing the challenge of water scarcity and droughts in the European Union ' that it considered that the European Union could provide funds to help create additional water supply infrastructures .
I also recall that numerous remote areas of Europe , especially small archipelagos in the South such as the Aegean Islands , face serious water supply and drinking water problems and that methods such as desalination are extremely costly .
The question is therefore clear : do you intend and are you favourably disposed towards the idea of promoting a debate on direct Community support for water supply schemes in remote areas ?
( RO ) Given that on 3 February Hungary and Romania were appointed Priority Area Coordinators for environmental protection in the Danube region , specifically for restoring and maintaining water quality , I would like to ask you when these coordinators are going to implement this priority action , because this will enable us to guarantee the quality of drinking water .
Thanks to the projects given as examples , we have investments not only for building wastewater treatment plants but also for developing methods and tools for protecting drinking water sources .
It is therefore important for us to discuss the implementation of the EU Strategy for the Danube Region .
( DE ) My question also relates to the Strategy for the Danube Region .
We , of course , want to dramatically improve the quality of the water in the Danube .
Do all Member States plan to draw up an action plan in this regard that will gradually also take into account the sewerage works coming from the tributaries , so that we will also have cleaner tributaries and there will be an improvement in water quality in the Danube right down to the estuary ?
Do all the Member States concerned intend to draw up action plans ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Thank you very much for the questions , and the questions , too , indicate that this is a very important subject for the European Union , and I believe that we do not spend anywhere near as much time discussing these issues as they deserve .
By the very act of submitting conclusions and directing attention to , for example , the water problems caused by extreme weather conditions , the Hungarian Presidency intends to pave the way for the European Commission to be able to submit the best possible proposals in this 2012 ' water blueprint ' to the then presidency and to the Council .
Mr Papanikolaou mentioned the problems of the islands in the Aegean Sea .
I believe that this is very important to the people living there , and it is just as important in Southern Italy or Barcelona - we may all remember that there was such a shortage of drinking water in Barcelona that fresh water needed to be transported there by tankers - , and therefore , these all demonstrate that it is vital for us to address these issues .
By formulating Council conclusions we provide inspiration to the Commission , and I trust that when , for example , the debate about the multiannual financial framework begins , we will need to formulate them in such a way as to enable us to direct funds in the best way possible to the common problems of the European Union .
Mrs Ticau and Mr Rubiks both asked their questions about the Danube strategy .
If you will allow me , I would like to answer them together .
It was to our great satisfaction that Commissioner Hahn presented the action plans in early February in Hungary .
There are 13 action plans , and as regards the questions you raised here concerning both the drinking water base and sewage treatment , there are so-called action plans for the issues of all kinds of floods and droughts , and each of these is led by two countries .
I believe that this is a very good way to also strengthen regional cooperation along the Danube strategy .
What is more , the participants include eight EU Member States and six third countries , and it is very inspiring that we have such a comprehensive strategy that allows us to take concrete steps in all these matters .
True , there are no new funds allocated to this purpose , but I am convinced that , within this framework , existing projects can be reorganised , and through the reinforcement of cross-border cooperation we will be able to achieve a far more effective outcome than if all countries were making attempts on their own .
It is impossible to engage in individual measures over a river that connects us all .
We may , of course , still have excellent plans , if we do not implement these , and I therefore very much hope that we can discuss these in Council configurations now , while still in the term of the Hungarian Presidency .
We did give the process the initial push at the General Affairs Council on 31 June and are intently monitoring how the work is coming along .
The work is progressing quite well , also at working group level , and towards the end of the Hungarian Presidency we will be able to adopt the strategy at the General Affairs Council ; the European Council will be able to assure us of its support in this regard , and then it will be up to us to implement it as fully as possible , from sewage treatment to the preservation of our drinking water base .
Subject : Participation by disabled persons and their representative organisations in decision-making affecting disabled persons
The European Disability Strategy 2010-2020 , published by the Commission , will affect the lives of 80 million disabled people in the EU .
The Commission has identified eight key areas : accessibility , participation , equality , work and training , social protection , health and external action .
The EU institutions and Member States are to implement this strategy together .
In accordance with the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , Member States which adopt decisions affecting disabled persons are required to closely consult with and actively involve persons with disabilities , through their representative organisations .
Unfortunately , there is no provision for such consultation in the new disability strategy .
Has the Council taken any specific measures to ensure that the principle of ' no action on disability without the disabled ' enshrined in the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is observed ?
Furthermore , how does the Council view the proposal to establish a disability committee , answerable to the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council ( EPSCO ) and chaired by the country holding the Presidency of the European Union ?
Does the Council agree that this would make for closer involvement by the Commission and Member States in the implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , I too am very happy that we could still find time for this question .
The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is an appropriate and effective means of promoting and protecting the rights of persons with disabilities in the European Union , and is accorded great significance by both the Community and its Member States .
The Council would like to remind the honourable Member that it has already affirmed on multiple occasions that , if we intend to meet the needs of persons with disabilities and wish to ensure their equal participation in society , it is important for us to involve them in forming the decisions and policies that apply to them .
In its resolutions adopted in 2008 and 2010 , the Council consistently urged that persons with disabilities and their organisations be involved in policy-making .
We recall that the Council also adopted a directive which stipulates the prohibition of discrimination based on disability in employment and at work .
The aforementioned directive also provides for membership and participation in employees ' and employers ' organisations , meaning that it is a specific measure adopted by the Council with a view to ensuring that persons with disabilities are actually able to participate in decision making .
The Commission also has a new disability strategy .
To our great satisfaction , it was published in the autumn , and focuses primarily on the implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
The Hungarian Presidency intends to submit draft conclusions to the Council in connection with this strategy , with a view to adopting it in the final stage of the Hungarian Presidency in June .
As regards the creation of a separate disability committee , to this date the Council has not received any proposals to be examined in this respect .
In this context we recall that the Council can only act in its legislative capacity upon proposals submitted by the Commission , however , we of course always keep an eye on Parliament , but this is how legislation works in the EU .
( LT ) Mr President , in January of this year at a meeting in the European Parliament initiated by the European Disability Forum , the Vice-President of the European Commission Viviane Reding stated that some European Union Member States do not support the Council Directive on equal treatment between persons irrespective of religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation .
Therefore the anti-discrimination Directive is one of the most important issues in the field of human rights , especially in terms of guaranteeing the rights of the disabled .
Does Hungary , the country currently holding the Presidency of the Council of the European Union , plan to take any specific actions as regards adopting and reviewing this directive , and what specific measures will you take to clear the way for this directive ?
( HU ) Minister , thank you very much for your answer .
I would like to encourage the Council to pay attention to the importance of the involvement of people with disabilities .
This issue also has a bearing on the work of Parliament , as regards the ability of the Members to become involved in this process , since it is we who represent the people , so to speak .
I would like to congratulate the Presidency on addressing the issue of disabilities at a high level until the end of the trio .
My question is whether subsequent presidencies also intend to address this , the matter of disabilities , at the same level .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Thank you very much for the supplementary questions .
As regards the first question by Mrs Blinkevičiūtė , which concerns the developments related to the anti-discrimination directive , well , I could tell you things like ' now we will solve it , ' because , for what it is worth , I could say that , but I will not say such things .
We all know how painfully slow the progress of this draft legislation has been over the past three years .
We , too , are planning to make progress , of course .
In order to be able to do so and retain our credibility , we are trying to focus on the very part of this directive that concerns disabilities .
We are therefore planning to discuss the disability aspects in two rounds and hope that we can convince the Member States to make progress at least in this respect .
As such , we are not aiming in every direction , but instead wish to focus our attention on this issue .
I have to say that this is very difficult .
Member States often refer to financial issues and financial difficulties .
The former government of my home country was also forced to request an extension in order to be able to implement EU and domestic policies , for example in the field of removing barriers , and in times of crisis and austerity all this is difficult for the Member States .
However , I believe , especially considering that we committed ourselves to making this a human-centred presidency , that we indeed have to make progress in this very important issue - because as Mr Kósa is always saying , this does not only concern persons with disabilities , but many others , from young mothers to the elderly , many more than those we call people with disabilities - that is to say , it is very much the responsibility of the Council to achieve progress in this matter .
Mr Kósa asked how we can better involve Parliament , or how can we work together .
I believe that Mr Kósa , as the President of the Disability Intergroup , is doing an excellent job and maintains very good relations , not only with the Council and the Presidency-in-Office , but also with the Commission .
As we can see in several issues , if Parliament is playing a guiding role - and I am convinced that Parliament is playing a guiding role in disability matters - then the Commission and the Council can do nothing but follow its guidance .
These can therefore indeed be incorporated into Commission proposals , which are then submitted to the Council .
Thinking of the Roma strategy , the report by Mrs Lívia Járóka , which was adopted this Monday in the LIBE committee , has a good chance of being incorporated into the Commission 's proposal , and be then submitted to the Council .
I would therefore recommend this route , and I would welcome it if this excellent cooperation could continue .
We will send answers in written form to the questions we had no time to answer .
That is right , but I am going to allow Mr Chountis a supplementary on this question .
( EL ) Mr President , I do not want the question I tabled to be debated .
I appreciate the effort you are making and I do not want to upset the order .
I just have one comment , which does not concern or affect the President specifically and I shall be brief .
I just want to say that , because we have a problem with the question of parliamentary control , as you know full well , there have been three occasions in plenary when we did not have questions to the Council and the procedures ultimately reduce the time available .
Please could you therefore discuss with the Bureau how this time can be ring fenced .
Thank you very much for the effort you have made .
I do not wish to run over time , nor do I wish my question to be debated and I thank the Minister who was ready and waiting .
Mr Chountis , I am aware of your complaint , which I completely support .
However , it is not the Bureau that makes the decisions about the timing of debates , the content of debates or speaking time - it is the Conference of Presidents , bizarrely , which always tries to put too much on the agenda .
It is the Bureau Members , including myself , who have to deal with the problems this creates and clean up the mess .
I apologise to everyone who was not called .
As Mrs Győri quite rightly says , any questions she has not had time to answer tonight - and those which she has answered she has answered very ably - will be answered in writing .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 20.55 )
Opening of the sitting
Situation in Egypt ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Implementation of the EU strategy for the Danube region ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
EU guarantee to the EIB against losses under loans and guarantees for projects outside the EU ( debate )
The first item is the report by Mr Kalfin , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council granting an EU guarantee to the European Investment Bank against losses under loans and guarantees for projects outside the European Union - C7-0110 / 2010- .
rapporteur . - Mr President , the current mandate of the European Investment Bank for its operations outside of the European Union expires at the end of October .
The European Parliament and the Council have to agree on the conditions for its extension beyond that date .
Parliament has discussed the issue very thoroughly over several months .
During that period we discussed many ideas and tried to listen to the opinions of many stakeholders .
We held dozens of meetings , both outside and within Parliament , between the political groups working on the text .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank very much all my colleagues from the political groups , and the administration , for their dedication , their work based on the highest professional standards , and their endeavouring to achieve a broad consensus on a mandate for the European Investment Bank that will make a difference in fulfilling the EU 's objectives .
I also thank very much the European Investment Bank and the Commission for their constant support and advice , which was very valuable for our work .
Now we have a draft decision to be voted by Parliament which provides for more coordination between the European Investment Bank and the other EU bodies , for more transparency and stakeholder participation , and for a better monitoring and reporting system : a decision that will improve the visibility of the impact of the bank 's activities .
With this decision , we shall start elaborating the common EU position with the Council .
The draft decision preserves the very successful profile of the European Investment Bank as a top-rated financial institution and investment bank .
At the same time , being an EU institution , the European Investment Bank is expected to contribute better to the goals of the Union through its specific means and tools .
The changes proposed are based on accumulated experience and on the understanding that the profile of the European Investment Bank as a top-rated investment bank should not be jeopardised .
Parliament proposes much better coordination between the External Action Service , the Commission and the Bank in implementing the EU 's external policy objectives .
The European Investment Bank will have to devise development and environment impact parameters and report on their completion .
It will indirectly contribute to the eradication of poverty and to climate change mitigation in the developing countries , and stimulate small and medium-sized enterprises and the development of local communities .
The monitoring and reporting systems guarantee more transparency , better access to information and increased possibilities for the stakeholders to give their opinion at an early stage of the consideration of the projects .
An additional sum of EUR 2 billion will be released for use in environment-related projects .
This should contribute to the efforts of the European Union partner countries to finance efforts to implement climate-related policies .
Let us hope that this new instrument will create incentives for the potential recipient countries to commit more to the climate-related goals of the European Union .
Parliament suggests , also , an increase in the ceilings of the EU guarantees to be used by the Bank .
At first glance this is a very difficult decision , because it is extremely sensitive for the Member States .
Any increase in the ceilings means effectively a 9 % contribution to the Guarantee Fund , but on the other hand this is an extremely good instrument creating leverage and attracting more funding institutions to the EIB projects .

The proposed increase in ceilings amounts to about EUR 1.7 billion , and would allow the bank to at least maintain the intensity of its activities in the pre-accession countries , and especially in the Mediterranean region .
In recent years , at the request of the Council , this financing has been intensified .
Therefore , the EU has to make an additional effort to support the economies of the countries of the Western Balkans and North Africa , especially in these times .
This would not involve substantial costs , whereas the benefits of achieving the EU 's objectives in these regions would be very high .
We ask the European Investment Bank to develop a stronger capacity for assessing and reporting on development , environment , and the human rights aspects of their projects .
It will have to ask loan promoters to consult local stakeholders before deciding on projects .
We reconfirm the good practices of the bank in avoiding working with partners incorporated in non-cooperative jurisdictions and using tax havens .
We propose to establish a working group that will suggest better cooperation and blending of the funds from different donors by the middle of 2012 .
A working party will analyse current practices as regards the disbursement of development assistance by the EU and the Member States , in order to increase its efficiency and the visibility of Europe as the major development assistance provider in the world . ( debate )

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Kalfin , and other Members of this Parliament for their constructive approach to the proposal , which highlights the significant interest Parliament shows in the European Investment Bank 's activities .
I believe that Parliament has now achieved a balanced report which will provide a solid basis for the upcoming negotiations with the Commission and the Council .
Last April , the Commission issued a legislative proposal to amend Decision 633 / 2009 / EC following a mid-term review of the application of the EIB external mandate .
It is now essential to make a timely decision allowing the EIB to pursue its external work until 2013 , while at the same time enhancing the mandate to ensure that EIB investments outside the EU are increasingly aligned with EU policy objectives , in particular in the areas of climate change and development .
As regards today 's vote , several amendments put forward are acceptable to the Commission .
Those amendments relate to , firstly , the request to enhance the development aspects of EIB activity and , secondly , the call for an increase in the regional ceilings of the general mandate .
This could , inter alia , allow the EIB to maintain a reasonable level of activity in certain regions , notably pre-accession .
It should also be instrumental in helping the EIB to take part in our joint efforts to provide support to Tunisia and Egypt in the democratic transition process .
Thirdly , the general request for more transparency , better reporting and better efficiency .
On the other hand , additional negotiation will be needed in the context of the trialogue for other amendments .
Those points relate to , firstly , the restriction from eligibility under the climate change mandate of countries deemed by the Council not to have committed to meeting appropriate climate-change-related targets .
Secondly , there are some amendments aimed at establishing the regional operational guidelines as delegated acts , which would not allow them to be operational and flexible general orientations as we initially foresaw them in the Commission proposal .
Thirdly and finally , there are some amendments which relate to longer-term issues such as the creation of an EU platform for cooperation and development , or the reflections on longer-term perspectives for cooperation and development financing , that are not strictly related to the implementation of the current mandate .
We should be careful , because the negotiation on these amendments might delay the adoption of the decision , and we might consider not engaging in lengthy and complicated negotiations in the framework of this decision .
Trialogue between the institutions will start on the basis of the report adopted today .
The common aim is to have the decision adopted before the summer in order to pre-empt any risk of non-decision by October 2011 , which would cause the suspension of EIB external activities after that date .

Mr President , I should like first of all to thank Mr Kalfin for the excellent work we have been able to carry out together and , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , for which I was the rapporteur , to thank my colleagues Mrs Hautala , Mr Lambsdorff and Mrs Giannakou .

As he has done so himself , I am not going to review the positive points of the report and the proposal defended by Mr Kalfin on the climate change mandate , the increase in human resources , the attention paid to social and development aspects , the environment , human rights , the shift in focus of the guarantee towards countries that need it most , and a stronger link with EU policies .
Parliament is united on all these points - let me make that clear - and it must remain so during the difficult negotiations that , as I have just heard , await us with the Council .
I would like to draw attention to two shortcomings at this stage .
I regret that neither the need to now prepare the EIB for microcredit nor the need to already begin the debate on the post-2013 ceilings has been taken on board , even though the Committee on Foreign Affairs voted for both of these things in the consensus reached by all the political groups .
That is why the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament decided , with the consent of Mr Kalfin and of the other rapporteurs , to table amendments in plenary on these two subjects .
Lastly , there is one crucial point to which I should like , politically speaking , to draw your attention and which has been the subject of debate for years .
When the Berlin Wall fell , we were able to react not only with the enlargement project , the practical arrangements of which some may question , but which is undeniably necessary , but before that , we established the EBRD so as to be able to support the necessary economic and democratic transition .
The European Union , and also the EIB , as the power behind it , is the largest provider of funds to the other side of the Mediterranean .
At the same time , however , we know that the payment of those funds will not continue beyond one programming period - in other words , beyond 2013 , as I mentioned just now - and that the discussions that we are having today show that there may be difficulties in the future .
There is a project - already adopted by the European Parliament and endorsed in the report on the Union for the Mediterranean - which is referred to in the Kalfin report being debated today , and it is the creation of a Euro-Mediterreanean codevelopment and investment bank .
This would be a practical way , beyond rhetorical statements , of acknowledging the European Union 's will to support the major democratic movement taking place on the other side of the Mediterranean , and I hope that this will be seriously addressed and that steps will be taken , in the coming months , to promote the creation of that bank .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( NL ) Mr President , the rapid rate of economic growth in developing countries is passing huge swathes of people by .
Even in African countries , economic growth sometimes hits double figures , as is evident in major cities , such as Addis Ababa .
However , inequality is growing just as rapidly .
It is women and farmers , especially , who are not being given enough opportunities to develop their livelihoods .
One of the major barriers is access to financial services .
Private banks simply have more confidence in traders making quick profits than they do in women and farmers .
Public banks have an irreplaceable role to play here .
With this legislative resolution , the EIB is therefore taking an essential step .
The bank is no longer granting funds for just dams and roads , for large infrastructure projects of European companies .
That arm of the bank 's operations needs to continue but , of course , with procedures which will allow all local stakeholders to be heard , according to the clear criteria of sustainability and social justice .
Tax havens should not be given any chance in these projects .
What is new is that the EIB will now also work to help small business owners in developing countries by opening the door for loans .
That can be done via local banks , via microfinance institutions , although we need an additional amendment there , and via cooperation with Member States ' development banks .
The EIB should be given further scope to develop its expertise internally , with sufficient staff .
However , with this new dimension to its operations , the EIB is an indispensable tool for the European Union 's development policy , with a clear commitment to equal opportunities in developing countries and to sustainable economic growth .
I would like to thank the EIB , my colleague , Mr Ivailo Kalfin and all the rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - Mr President , up to now the professionals who run the European Investment Bank have operated the Bank with a culture of financial probity .
Loans have been made , and guarantees provided , on a prudent basis , and that is why the European Investment Bank has had very few bad loans on its books .
However , what this report aims to do is to dilute the professional culture of the European Investment Bank and expand its remit to encompass a series of policy objectives .
The Commissioner made this very clear .
A relaxation of the commercial criteria on which the Bank has operated up to now will inevitably result in the guarantee being called on .
Now this will cost the taxpayer , and I have to question , once again , whether the hard-pressed taxpayers of Europe and the UK really want their money to be used to advance purely political objectives outside the EU ?
Mr President , the purpose of the guarantee offered to the European Investment Bank , based on this report , is to develop social and economic structures and reduce climate change in third countries , while also promoting democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
This is why I regard as positive the suggestion to increase the general mandate offered to the bank , given as well that the countries which this guarantee is intended for include accession candidate countries and those which have signed partnership agreements with the European Union .
However , to be able to meet its responsibilities better in third countries , the bank needs substantial resources and more specialist staff .
In this context the EIB must consider promoting certain projects of strategic importance to the European Union , such as the Nabucco pipeline and other major road , maritime and energy infrastructure projects .
Finally , I would like to stress the need for the bank to carry out some monitoring of the financed projects , both during their execution and at completion so as to verify compliance with social and environmental criteria .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Kalfin , for the work he has done .
Today 's vote renews the EU guarantee to the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) against losses on loans for investment in projects outside the European Union .
This measure is of even greater significance in the current economic context , which is characterised by profound changes not only in the markets but also in production methods and approaches to the economy .
While on the one hand the EIB is playing a crucial role for the European Union , on the other the Union is strengthening its political and economic presence beyond the borders of the 27 Member States .
A compromise has been reached with the other political groups to amend the Commission 's original text .
The discussions , which took a range of opinions on board , were constructive both within the Committee on Budgets and during the preparations for today 's sitting .
The topics characterising the negotiations and political debate were : support for local small and medium-sized enterprises ; maximisation of synergies in the field of development cooperation , so as to avoid duplicating our efforts in southern countries and wasting resources ; the nature of the EIB , which remains an investment bank that provides loans , competes on the international markets and does not provide unsecured funding ; the geographical range of the EIB 's investments , which have been extended to countries such as Libya and Iraq , but not to countries such as Belarus , in which respect for human rights as enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights must be a minimum requirement for action to be planned .

It looks very likely that the work done in Parliament will very quickly succeed in getting the Council 's and the Commission 's agreement .
With regard to the work done , the rapporteur will table an oral amendment to increase the appropriations guaranteeing the EIB 's investments in the Mediterranean region .
Such investments may help to stabilise the Mediterranean , not least in view of the problems associated with the streams of migrants in recent weeks .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Member . - Mr President , I would ask the speaker to consider how much all this costs the taxpayer .
( IT ) Mr President , what specifically is the questioner referring to , the whole operation or one particular point ?
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Kalfin , who has done a sterling job .
He worked together with both the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) and the shadow rapporteurs from the five different committees in Parliament that were involved .
I really think they have achieved an excellent result .
The financial crisis shows how very important it is to have stable public institutions responsible for granting credit in crucial investment areas when the private financial market is fluctuating .
Therefore , we are now discussing the creation of new financial instruments in many different contexts , but also the development of the instruments that we already have , in this case the EIB 's activities outside Europe .
I would very much like to highlight three points that I hope will gain a hearing both in this Chamber and in the Council .
The first concerns a greater degree of consistency between the EIB 's activities and the guidelines for the EU 's development and foreign policy .
The second relates to an increase in the ceiling for projects to combat climate change , and my third point concerns increased loan ceilings which require increased guarantees from the Member States .
The majority of the EIB 's activities are directed towards Europe , but if we count the number of countries receiving loans , most of them are actually developing countries .
Therefore , we are voting today , among other things , on the demand for a more stringent evaluation of projects and the demand for the EIB to carry out , in advance , a thorough assessment of whether the investment really will contribute to the achievement of our development goals .
I really do call on everyone to support these demands .
In order to achieve this , we also need to increase the transparency of the EIB 's activities in those countries covered by the external mandate .
As things stand , we often have long , complicated chains of financial transactions that make transparency very difficult .
We are also pressing for even greater attention to be paid to the EIB 's own rules against activities in tax havens .
A sound financial system is a prerequisite for a functional economy in vulnerable parts of the world .
I am therefore pleased that we can now also give our support to the oral amendment , which I hope will gain the support of everyone and which will give us more resources to be able to provide to countries like Egypt and Tunisia .
This report represents an important step in a direction that I hope even the Council will support in the forthcoming negotiations .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent and professional work on this report .
There was good cooperation between the groups , and I think the result is a very good one .
My fellow Members on the other side of the Chamber have expressed fears that we are about to jeopardise the good work that the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) has done up to now .
I think these fears are completely unfounded .
The fact is that we are now evaluating the mid-term mandate that we have and we will take the bank in a better direction .
While it is good to remember the new and sound ideas , of which there are quite a few and which it is good to make use of at this stage , it is also good to remember , on the other hand , that sooner or later we will have to start negotiations on the EIB 's mandate for the next financial framework , in other words the one that will start in 2014 .
At that stage we will have to decide in what direction we want to take the bank , what new tasks we can envisage assigning to it and in what way the new tasks are to be fulfilled by means of the possible provision of new financial resources for the bank .
That is important to remember .
In this context , I would like to mention two details .
The first is something that Mr Färm mentioned , namely the fact that it looks as though we will be able to agree to increase the resources that the EIB can use in North Africa , which I think is very positive in view of the political situation that exists there .
That is precisely why the EIB should have an external mandate , namely to enable us to act in line with the Union 's objectives .
I would also like to emphasise something that I am sure Mr Graf Lambsdorff will also mention , namely that the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe was eager for us to be able to use the EIB 's external mandate to lend money to Belarus .
This is part of the policy we want to pursue and the principles we uphold in the European Union and which must in principle be respected by our important instrument , the EIB .
In summary , I think that we worked well with the political groups and that the rapporteur has done a splendid job in finding solutions that mean we will most likely receive very broad support for the report when we vote on it in just over an hour 's time .
I think that is a good basis for our negotiations with the Council .
I hope that the European Council is willing to view the European Parliament 's good ideas for amendments in a positive light .


on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to add my thanks to Mr Kalfin for his ambitious report and I would like to remind you once more that it was the European Court of Justice that demanded that the external mandate be approved under the codecision procedure .
In other words , this is about greater rights for Parliament - and as self-confident Members of the European Parliament , of course we welcome that .
The European Union has set itself a whole range of praiseworthy aims in the Treaty of Lisbon : to conserve natural resources , to fight poverty and to work for democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
It is therefore only right that the EIB acts as an instrument that works towards these aims , that it does not work against them but that instead everything is put in place to ensure that these aims are achieved with the assistance of the EIB .
In particular , we are talking about environmental infrastructure , better water supply and sanitation , and more funds for health and training , because we know for sure that these things contribute to securing the future in third countries and make a very important contribution to combating poverty .
From a green point of view , the optional mandate in the area of climate change is also very positive .
An additional two billion is to be mobilised and , if we take our own objectives in the area of climate policy seriously , then naturally we must work with the EIB in this area .
I find it equally pleasing that Mr Kalfin has now proposed that the EIB should also assist with economic development and democratic change in the Mediterranean area - particularly now in Tunisia and Egypt .
We therefore consider these amendments , which we will shortly be voting on , to be right .
We have a great interest in seeing greater transparency at the European Investment Bank .
The Commission must now submit a report every year .
That alone , however , is not enough ; what we want is real transparency .
We would also like to see NGOs and other qualified bodies being involved in decisions before they are taken .
We believe that this transparency will contribute to acceptance of the EIB and does not undermine it .
With all the good ideas that have been put forward here in this House we also hope that the Council will not lag behind , but that it will support this ambitious political stance of the EIB and of Parliament .
We therefore hope that the procedure will be completed quickly , so that we can make policies together for the benefit of citizens of third countries too .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , when guaranteeing loans of this kind for projects inside or , indeed , outside the EU , we need to remember that they are not without financial consequences .
While it may seem like a good way of making EU money go further , we must be very careful to ensure that the appropriate risk-management controls are in place to manage these kinds of loans and the balance-sheet implications they pose .
As parliamentarians we need to be fully aware of the liabilities to which we are exposing the EU budget and , therefore , Member States ' budgets .
Oversight systems and transparency will be crucial when using the balance sheet for leverage , as has been shown by the financial crisis , where banks were not always fully aware of the extent of their liabilities .
We must learn the lessons from the finance industry and be sure that we know precisely what the EU is guaranteeing and what appropriate levels of democratic oversight are being maintained .
Fundamentally , we must be sure that those individuals at the EIB and the Commission who are tasked with managing these financial products and making such wide-ranging decisions have the appropriate expertise to manage what they are dealing with .
This is taxpayers ' money .
We need to spend it carefully .
Mr President , I believe that what we are discussing here today is both the extension and clarification of the mandate of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) linked to a system of guarantees that are required for its financing operations .
I believe that the extension or clarification of the mandate that is being proposed is along the right lines .
It will enable the EIB better to meet its own goals regarding cooperation and development aid .
As long as the EIB and the European Union wish to remain in thrall to credit rating agencies there will be a problem with guarantees ; that much is clear .
There are those who say that perhaps this increases the risk and that we should therefore be careful when we invest in health , in education , in combating poverty , and in the Millennium Development Goals , because none of those are particularly lucrative ; something else needs to be said instead .
What needs to be said is , let us discuss our relationship with credit rating agencies .
Let us also discuss something else , right now : how is it possible to be so careful regarding the guarantees that the taxpayer would have to give for combating poverty , and so forgetful of the way in which the European Union did not try to regulate the private banks or prevent the financial crimes in which they have been involved for all these years , and which are now being paid for with millions of unemployed ?
That is actually how this question should be put .
In any case , there is a problem , about which I have reservations .
My reservations are very straightforward : firstly , we have a European Union that has been employing double standards in international politics .
In fact , there is no reason , from a human rights point of view , why the EIB should be financing projects in Libya but not in Belarus .
When it comes down to it , what are the criteria ?
We must be very clear about this because I also have reservations about a second issue : the European External Action Service has a very broad mandate , which includes military operations .
My question is , do these aspects overlap , and how is it that the EIB cannot be easily diverted from its own goals and from the mandate for which it was created ?
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the European Investment Bank uses public funds from the nations of Europe to guarantee loans , either to financial intermediaries or to the ultimate recipients in 74 countries .
When compared to other international institutions performing similar functions , the EIB 's reputation is not one of transparency , and the public disclosure policy still does not cover appraisal reports .
In particular , in the case of EIB lending which is meant to go to SMEs via intermediary banks , the public still does not know where the money is going .
This report fails to demand disclosure by those intermediary banks .
Bearing in mind that the EIB is making loans that are guaranteed by the EU , whose budget is financed by the European taxpayers , I encourage you all to vote against this report , which fails to adequately protect taxpayers ' interests .
( NL ) Mr President , the EIB supports the foreign policy of the European Union , in particular the development policy .
So reads the report of Mr Kalfin , my fellow member from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
However , the delegation of the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) does not want the EU to have any foreign policy whatsoever and definitely no bank performing the role of politician .
The EIB is active outside the EU , no idea why , but the EIB budget is guaranteed by the EU budget and funded by the taxpayer .
There are some really wonderful countries that are receiving these EIB funds , such as the Palestinian territories , Gaza , Libya , Cuba , Venezuela , Turkmenistan and the Maldives .
Not one of these countries is exactly a shining example of democracy .
Now , however , the Commission wants to increase the EIB ' s financial ceiling .
Of course , that also means that we will be investing in climate change in these countries .
Can you imagine ?
In Gaza , in Cuba ?
This is material for a new Mr. Bean film , but it is actually happening !
The PVV will fight this proposal tooth and nail and will , therefore , also be wholeheartedly voting against it .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) ) .

( NL ) Mr President , while the Earl of Dartmore does not understand the difference between loans and subsidies , while Mrs Andreasen should give the EIB 's annual report another read , what Mr Hartong has not understood is that Europe is not an island in the world and that , if we want peace and stability , on our continent too , we have to invest in other countries .
This is not only funded through subsidies , but primarily , and this is a better solution , through loans .
I am sure you will back me up on that , Mr Hartong , will you not ?
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Berman is undoubtedly aware that politics is about political choices .
We therefore choose to invest our taxpayers ' money in a much cleverer way , in the foreign policy of the Member States , rather than in the foreign policy of the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work that has been done regarding the external mandate of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) .
The Union 's financial arm today plays a very important role in terms of the political commitment that Europe wants to put across concerning the countries on the southern shores of the Mediterranean .
Creating lasting democratic institutions requires a great effort from the people , and Europe , which has been working with the EIB in these regions for many years , can give them valuable support during this transition period in setting up infrastructure and strengthening local businesses .
The report on which we are voting today proposes raising the ceilings with which the bank operates outside the Union by almost EUR 2 billion .
This decision will enable the bank to see through some important projects that are threatened by a lack of funds but which are also strategic for the stabilisation of the Mediterranean region , as well as for the countries preparing to join the Union .
A high level of coordination between the European Commission , the new External Action Service and the EIB is needed , however , in order to achieve these aims .
I believe it is very important to develop joint governance for these three players in the countries of the Union in which it operates , and I am therefore looking forward to the creation by the Commission and the EIB of a platform to examine - together with Parliament and the Council - how best to address the challenges of the Union 's external policy with financial instruments and innovative methods .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the shadow rapporteur of the European Investment Bank 's discharge , I and my fellow Member , Mr Audy , treat the European Union guarantees provided for the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) as a very important issue .
The European Investment Bank is a key actor in financing projects of major significance both inside and outside the European Union , and its role will continue to grow .
At the same time , based on the effective provisions not one European institution has the right to supervise the EIB , and we would like to change this in the future to avoid this being an obstacle to later growth .
Loans granted to countries outside the EU require greater attention and care than projects to be realised within the EU , not only because of what has just been said but also because the degree of control that can be exercised over external developments is far less than is the case for investments within the EU .
The solution for this is that these projects require much better preparation .
At the same time , external projects are mainly directed at strategically important but politically not always stable regions .
As a member of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , I wish to shed light on the energy issue from among the projects being realised in these regions .
More than 50 % of the external investments financed by the EIB are directed at the states of the Eastern Partnership and Russia .
The security and progress of these countries serve the interests of the EU directly , as this is where the decisive part of the natural gas imports and a significant amount of the electricity imports of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the Baltic come from .
Thus it is indispensable for the EIB to focus on supporting projects which directly or indirectly result in an increase of security and the security of supply .
Thus I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Kalfin , - whom I wish to congratulate - that in the area of loans outside the EU closer cooperation must be encouraged between the EIB and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development as well as the World Bank .
Significant synergies can be achieved .
( DE ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon makes new demands of European Union foreign policy and development policy .
One has been mentioned here : coherence .
In other words , our various instruments , the European External Action Service , the European Investment Bank and the Commission must act in a consistent manner .
The Treaty of Lisbon also provides for greater parliamentary control , greater transparency and joint decisions on these matters .
All of this will enhance the quality of the debate on foreign policy , particularly if we have greater transparency as a result of the participation of the relevant committees - primarily the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Development - in this House .
One result of this transparency is that this Parliament has resolved to remove Belarus from the list of countries in which the European Investment Act can act without first having another debate here in this House .
Are human rights being respected ?
Have opposition politicians been released ?
Does the state respect the property of its citizens ?
Is there freedom of the press ?
Are entrepreneurs able to act freely ?
Are there free trade unions ?
In our relationship with such an important neighbour - one which is located directly on the border of the European Union - these are all matters which need to be debated first , before the European Investment Bank becomes active there .
I am very pleased that the House has taken up this suggestion and I call on the Council to do the same .
Yesterday we had a debate on Egypt .
We debated the instruments and what we could do .
Baroness Ashton called for the ceiling applied to the European Investment Bank to be raised .
Parliament is happy to pursue this .
We need to improve how we work together with Egypt and Tunisia , with North Africa .
That is only right .
It is also a good example of how this Parliament can react quickly .
The same is now required of the Council , which must act accordingly .
I believe that our foreign policy instruments , especially if they are market-oriented , together with the loans from the European Investment Bank can do a lot to assist with development and economic growth in North Africa .
That is precisely what is needed .
If there is growth there , if there is democracy there , then we will also have fewer migrants arriving at our borders .
If I may specifically address our fellow Members from the extreme right , I would like to say that your arguments are really far too rudimentary and simplistic - if not primitive .
( FI ) Mr President , the European Investment Bank has excellent aims , including poverty reduction and the notion that the bank 's operations must be in harmony with the EU 's external relations objectives .
For this to be genuinely verifiable , it is very important that the bank 's activities are transparent .
With this in mind , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance tabled Amendments 6 and 7 , which emphasise that all assessment documents must be made public and , in addition , that all documents pertaining to different projects must be available to the public .
I would like to point out that , since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Investment Bank , like all other EU agencies , has been bound by the Regulation on public access to documents .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Investment Bank is de facto a European Union institution , because it is , after all , funded with money provided by the taxpayers of the European Union 's Member States .
It is imperative , therefore , that it be a bank which is completely transparent and which shows how it operates , and that it does so in absolutely every detail and particular .
I would like to stress very strongly that as a representative of a country which borders with Belarus , I am personally in favour of the European Investment Bank blocking every possibility of extending loans or credit which supports the Lukashenko regime .
We must show that human rights to the east of the European Union are as important to us as human rights in Africa or Asia .
However , I do agree with the fellow Member who said that we should not apply double standards towards Libya and Belarus .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of this report is to agree on Union guarantees for the external investments of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) .
Many of the EIB 's investments are in countries that in the last few weeks have been at the heart of historic changes , with the toppling of authoritarian regimes by popular uprisings .
The report seeks to extend Union guarantees also to other countries about which we have misgivings because of their lack of internal democracy .
I believe it would be contradictory to move in that direction and wonder whether it might not instead be more useful if the EIB were to increase its investments within Europe , by financing small and medium-sized enterprises to a greater extent , for example , a hope that Commissioner Tajani himself expressed in this Chamber on Monday .
Lastly , I am very disappointed to note the inclusion of Turkey among the pre-accession countries .
I confirm that we in the Lega Nord will never - and I mean never - agree to any concessions in that respect on this or on any other front .
( BG ) Mr President , you can see straight away that a lot of effort has gone into preparing this report , so that the European taxpayer 's money can be dished out to so many different countries , including , of all places , Turkey .
If Mr Kalfin , when he was minister , and his fellow-ministers had been so diligent in defending the rights of Bulgarian citizens , I think that their party may still have been governing Bulgaria .
As to the essence of the report , I would like to give my wholehearted agreement with what Lord Dartmouth said .
It turns out that an English lord has more social responsibility than the socialist Kalfin .
We have been elected by the citizens of Europe and we must use the money raised from them through taxes , to first solve their problems and when we have solved their problems , then give money to Turkey and other countries outside the EU .
( EL ) Mr President , I too would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Kalfin , on his excellent report .
There is no doubt that the current economic crisis has seriously highlighted the important work of the European Investment Bank in the European Union .
The role of the European Investment Bank is also important , albeit less well known , outside the EU , in supporting the EU 's external action through its external mission that we are debating today .
The proposals contained in the report : firstly , to increase transparency ; secondly , to introduce the flexibility clause for possibly reallocating regional resources ; thirdly , to align EIB activities with EU external policy ; fourthly , to extend the list of eligible countries and , fifthly , to increase the financing ceiling , are positive proposals which are both very useful and necessary .
I agree with and support these proposals , because they also improve the efficacy of the work of the European Investment Bank and , at the same time , improve the positive image and the interventionism of the European Union itself in the world .
( NL ) Mr President , if things are as they seem , the role of the European Investment Bank will become more and more important .
The most important thing , as far as I am concerned , is that this bank 's triple A rating should never be put at risk by any tasks which it might have to undertake .
If we look at the debates about financial perspectives , it appears that the amount of money Member States will make available will not be much higher than is currently the case .
I think that we , therefore , need to consider in particular how we can use the European Investment Bank in order to achieve some of Europe 's objectives .
We have actually done that in the past , and what I always find particularly important is : what has been the multiplier effect of the guarantees we have issued to the European Investment Bank ?
I think that it would therefore be useful if the bank produced a report indicating which have been the most successful guarantees and what it is that the multiplier factors apply to the most .
This will enable us , when preparing financial perspectives , to make better choices as to which funds we should use as guarantees for the European Investment Bank .

( PL ) Mr President , optimism is engendered by the fact that in recent years Union policy on and support for external relations have been extended and strengthened by new financial instruments , such as the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance and the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
There is no doubt that in its activities the European Investment Bank should place particular emphasis on the integration of transport and energy networks , such as the Nabucco gas pipeline project , for example , and other gas pipeline projects , which are of particular interest to the European Union .
In our work as part of the Eastern Partnership , we must not forget that the principles of democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights must be upheld in all countries of the partnership , including Belarus .
However , until the authorities there understand that respect for human rights is something which has to be one of their most important responsibilities , finance from the European Investment Bank simply cannot be given to Belarus .
Mr President , I have no difficulty with the European Union investing in projects outside the European Union , particularly in aspects like combating climate change .
However , as an Irish MEP , I find it ironic that we are discussing here this morning how the EU can guarantee against losses on the loans and guarantees for projects outside the European Union , while the same EU is trying to make a profit on loans to Ireland under the bailout system - a profit of almost 3 % , which equates to EUR 5 billion .
This is not sustainable , it is not fair and I do not think it is legal .
It is also unbelievably difficult to understand how we are being charged 5.8 % , when loans to other countries within the European Union were set at 3.2 % .
I just want to say that under the new government we will be demanding a renegotiation ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Mr President , the extension of the mandate of the European Investment Bank for a further period confirms that the current partnership between the European Union and the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) brings positive results in fulfilling the political objectives of the EU through the instruments of the EIB .
One part of the new mandate is the increase in the EIB 's budget guarantee , which covers risks of a public or political nature associated with EIB operations outside the European Union .
For activities such as these , it is extremely important to ensure fiscal moderation and internal discipline , in order to ensure that money put into activities in support of the political objectives of the European Union brings the appropriate results in relation to the fiscal volumes .
It is therefore necessary to have a good and transparent mechanism for continuous monitoring of the activities supported .
Transparency in handling financial ...
( PL ) Mr President , in my opinion , European Investment Bank activity outside the European Union should take place in accordance with the values which are held in the Union itself and with the principles established as part of the European neighbourhood policy .
In the current situation , in my opinion , the European Union cannot allow Belarus to be included in the group of potential beneficiaries of European Investment Bank loans .
If the regime in Minsk wants to use European Investment Bank funds , it must respect the principles of democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
The European Union should present a consistent position on this matter by introducing both political and financial sanctions .
( FR ) Mr President , the European Investment Bank is an intergovernmental instrument .
The Member States provide a guarantee within the Union , and the European Union provides a guarantee outside the Union .
It is absolutely vital for the Bank to retain its triple A rating ; that guarantee is extremely useful .
Moreover , one day , the Union will have to become a shareholder or partner of the Bank so that the intergovernmental and the Community aspects can be aligned .
My proposal is to focus the discussion on the repayment of that guarantee - the 29 billion .
The repayment would amount to some EUR 100 million , and at the same time we could provide a subsidy to the EIB depending on the projects it presents to us .
With regard to guarantees , I would draw attention to the fact that , with the Stability Fund - EUR 60 billion - and the 30 billion , we have practically a year 's budget pledged by the European Union as a guarantee .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Kalfin , on a superb report , which in my opinion fully represents the position of the European Parliament .
Extending the mandate for a guarantee for the European Investment Bank is very important , and I hope the conciliation procedure will achieve complete success .
I also welcome the proposal to increase the amounts covered by the guarantee in relation to the Union for the Mediterranean .
As regards the recent events which have taken place in the region - in Tunisia and Egypt or , for example , more recently in Libya - I am of the opinion that we should support the democracy which is coming into being there .
On the other hand , I also think it would be a good decision not to extend loans to Belarus - previous speakers have referred to this - where , as the recent presidential election and related events have shown , democracy and human rights are not respected .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are facing a new wave of implementation of EU funds via the EIB .
I am therefore taking the floor because I want to sound a note of warning .
At present , the EIB has liabilities of EUR 20 billion in the EU budget .
If these were to become due , we would have a problem .
I would therefore suggest that we need to verify the future implementation of EU funds via the EIB very carefully and precisely .
The EIB does not have even 500 employees in third countries ; the European Commission has 3 700 .
It remains the case that the Commission would actually be much better placed to control the EU 's funds itself , rather than via the EIB .
In my view there are numerous aspects of the true motivation for mandating the EIB that remain unclear .
I would entreat this House to stop believing that we can allow the profits of others to be privatised and the losses to be socialised .
We are going to have to justify this to the taxpayers and voters in our home countries .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would just like to make some brief comments .
First , I would like to underline the importance of following the timetable .
The trialogue between the institutions will start on the basis of the report that will probably be adopted today .
The common aim is to have the decision adopted before the summer in order to pre-empt any risks of non-decision by October 2011 , which would lead to the suspension of EIB external activities after that date .
So I would underline that this is an extremely important issue .
I can also say that the EIB has been active in many countries which have become very important .
The Egyptian portfolio is one of the largest in the EIB .
From the start of its activities , the Bank has provided financing of more than EUR 4.3 billion , mostly to the private sector .
I would also like to clarify that the Bank and the budget are two different things .
The Bank is operating with shareholders ' money , in this case capital paid in by the Member States .
The Bank must be responsible for ensuring that all money lent is paid back .
It is part of banks ' culture that they are evaluated by ratings .
It has already been mentioned twice here that the EIB has the highest rating .
These ratings must not deteriorate .
That is very important .
The professionalism of the Bank must ensure that this rating , which is also a symbol of European finances , is maintained .
Regarding how the EIB is controlled , there is a board .
The Commission and all Member States are members of the board .
The EIB can be investigated by OLAF and , of course , the Court of Auditors gives its opinion about the EIB .
So there are democratic mechanisms and the Bank must operate within this framework .
The EU guarantee only covers sovereign and political risks and it has never created a loss for the EU budget since its creation in 1960 .
The EIB is a solid institution .
Of course there is a large variety of choice in decision-making - whom to lend to and how to lend - and so these political guidelines discussed here today , and your opinions , are highly valued .
They will definitely be taken into account .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I have just three points .
First , the European Investment Bank is a European institution .
It is part of the Lisbon Treaty .
As such , it should be one of those helping to achieve the goals of the European Union , be these inside or outside the Union .
I would draw the attention of the people who said that the Bank should not have involvements outside the Union to the fact that the European Union has an external policy and the European Investment Bank might be helpful in achieving its goals .
Second , the European Investment Bank is a financial institution which is top-rated .
It is a very stable financial institution and all the amendments that we tabled were targeted at keeping its stability on the market .
At the same time , this is not in contradiction with the possibility of reporting and assessing the development and the climate impact of European Investment Bank projects .
Again this is not increasing the risk ; this is increasing the transparency of the Bank .
I appreciate very much what the Commissioner said .
He is right : I expect we touched on some sensitive issues that have been discussed in the Council where no decision has been taken so far , including the blending between EU loans and the grants from the Bank , and how to make European development aid more efficient .
The European Union is the largest donor - not only as a Union but as regards the Member States - with very low visibility .
We have two alternatives : either not to touch this issue because it is sensitive or to try to work with the Council to work out a better option and to increase the efficiency of all the funds spent by the European Union .
Thank you very much for your support .
I would expect a very broad consensus and a very strong vote in Parliament , on the basis of which we can enter into negotiations with the Council .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
This report focuses on several aspects of the activities of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) .
Some of its activities are directed towards meeting EU development policy goals in countries that have difficulty obtaining finance on the capital markets on reasonable terms .
The EU is using the EIB , under this policy , to try and bridge the gap between the North and the South , as less developed countries inevitably have poorer access to financing to develop their economies .
I firmly believe it is right for EU instruments assisting third countries to be maintained and adequately expanded , as an expression of EU solidarity with third countries , and to fulfil the EU 's share of responsibility for the functioning of the global economy .
I consider the extension of the EIB mandate to include regional operational guidelines , which will be developed by the Commission in cooperation with the EIB , following consultation with the European External Action Service , to be a step in the right direction for meeting the external policy objectives of the EU .
I also think it would be beneficial to activate the EIB mandate for providing credit to Iceland , Belarus , Libya , Iraq and Cambodia .
Whilst loans have been extended to Iceland to support its economy , loans to the other countries have been granted on condition that the finance is used exclusively to support the development of democracy and human rights .
in writing . - ( HU ) The budget guarantee provided by the European Union to the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) ensures the bank 's stability and covers political or country-specific risks arising during the bank 's activity , primarily for countries and projects which could only access funds from the capital market with difficulty , if at all .
The Decision is about the renewal of the guarantee 's mandate .
It sets the ceiling for financing , lists eligible countries and defines the extent of the support available to them .
The system of regional objectives is replaced by high-level , comprehensive objectives covering all regions in accordance with the principles laid down in the Decision .
The European Commission , in cooperation with the EIB and in consultation with the European External Action Service , is developing operational guidelines reflecting the EU 's regional strategy for each region affected by the mandate .
Among developments , greater emphasis will be laid in the future on sectors such as health , education , environmental infrastructure , water , sanitation , the development of sustainable transportation , mitigating the effects of climate change , and adapting to them .
The special task of the Committee on Budgetary Control was to reinforce the budgetary control functions in the Decision .
In order to enhance transparency , the future disclosure to Parliament of all reports and information related to the EIB 's activity as well as the measurement of the concrete results of projects financed by the EU guarantee , and safeguarding the right of the European Court of Auditors to audit the use of funds from the EU budget are particularly important .
Commission expert groups and balanced representation and transparency ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :

the oral question by Mr de Jong , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , Mr Cashman , on behalf of the S & D Group , Mr Canfin , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , and Mrs Macovei , to the Commission on the revision of the framework for Commission expert groups and balanced representation and transparency ( B7-0010 / 2011 ) ;
the oral question by Mrs Lepage , Mrs Wallis and Mrs Ries , on behalf of the ALDE Group , to the Commission on the revision of the framework for Commission expert groups and balanced representation and transparency ( B7-0014 / 2011 )
Mr President , at the end of last year , the Commission revised the rules for its expert groups .
In the run-up to that revision , I was able to engage in good informal discussions with the Commission 's representatives .
Nonetheless , it is strange that the European Parliament has never been formally involved in this .
After all , transparency is a common concern of both the Commission and the European Parliament .
Can the Commissioner assure me that , in the future , we will have a formal dialogue on such questions before final decisions are made ?
In the last week , I again contacted all kinds of civil society organisations .
Unfortunately , they have not received any reassurances whatsoever that the composition of expert groups will be more balanced in the future .
In fact , they have received information about the creation of new expert groups .
I know from my own experience , from the days when I myself was working for the Secretariat-General of the Commission , that Directorates-General are small kingdoms .
However , if there is political will , then it must be possible for the Commission to decide to post on a single website all information about the new expert groups and about the accompanying notification procedures .
Will the Commissioner ensure this is the case or will he bow to the Commission 's official bureaucracy ?
All civil society organisations are facing a huge lack of resources .
That applies to the unions , consumer organisations and to representatives of SMEs .
They are having to make do with a small office in Brussels , in contrast to large companies which have the resources to hire professional lobbyists .
This means that , in the interests of workers , consumers and SMEs , people from outside Brussels , in particular , should be enabled to take a seat on expert groups .
However , this comes with a price tag .
The Commission 's website should indicate very clearly that travel and accommodation expenses will be reimbursed and , also , that a reimbursement scheme exists for other costs directly associated with work in expert groups .
NGOs are often not aware of this nor do the Commission 's officials bring this to their attention voluntarily .
For a self-employed person , for example , it is impossible without reimbursement to just drop their work in order to participate in an expert group in Brussels .
Such reimbursement should therefore be mandatory .
Directorate-General for Health and Consumers ( DG SANCO ) has a policy that experts who are recruited in a personal capacity should not be allowed to have any links to organisations which have a direct interest in the remit of a particular expert group .
I call on the Commissioner to make DG SANCO 's policy mandatory for all DGs .
Finally , I would like to hear from the Commissioner how it is possible that the Commission 's website lists Greenpeace as a participant in Implementing Geological Disposal of Waste - Technology Platform , while I am in possession of correspondence between Greenpeace and the Commission which suggests that Greenpeace 's application for participation was explicitly rejected by the Commission .
author . - Mr President , I should like to welcome the Commissioner to the world of politics , where no one is interested in what the Commission gets right , but is only interested in what it gets wrong .
This is a very good initiative , but Parliament , as Mr de Jong says , has some concerns .
We have to ensure that expert groups are open to wider groups that can at least apply to get onto these expert working groups , and obtain information on how to do so .
We need to instil confidence in the expert working groups .
To do that , we must have absolute transparency and , as has been said , they must not be dominated by big business , because this leads to the accusation of there being vested interests , and that undermines the work of the Commission and the work of the expert groups .
I say this as the rapporteur on the original regulation on public access to documents , which we implemented in this House in 2001 .
As you well know , Commissioner , the whole principle of openness and taking decisions as closely to the citizens as possible emanates from the Amsterdam Treaty .
We put this into practice with Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 , which is currently under revision .
I would have thought that this would have presented a good opportunity for the framework programme on expert groups to be introduced into the regulation - the recast proposal of 2008 , which interestingly Parliament does not accept .
You will notice that Mrs Macovei is in the Chamber .
She has a great history of challenging for greater openness and transparency .
Most political groups attach high importance to this .
I would like to know why Parliament was not consulted .
Is the Commission going to open a website giving greater information as to how citizens ' representatives and civil societies can become engaged ?
If not , why not ?
As I said at the very beginning , Commissioner , welcome to the world of politics , where everyone is obsessed with what has not been done rather than with what has been achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have given my backing to this oral question because I think it is of the utmost importance for the European Commission , and the European Union in particular , to be transparent and irreproachable where lobbying is concerned .
As you know , Brussels is the international lobbying capital , before Washington .
There are more lobbyists in Brussels than in Washington , and one of the ways in which they exert their influence on the Commission is through these famous expert groups .
I am a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
You have , for example , a group of banking experts .
Ninety-five per cent of the members of that expert group are bankers , and not just any bankers : only bankers from finance and investment banks , money market banks , and all the major US banks - J.P. Morgan , Bank of America and Goldman Sachs - are represented in it .
On the other hand , there are no NGOs or trade unions in that expert group .
The idea that the Commission should be advised only by investment bankers , and US investment bankers at that , with regard to changing banking rules seems totally surreal to me after the financial crisis we have gone through .
Hence there are some very precise questions and some very precise points in this oral question being put to you : are you going to change the composition of these expert groups ?
Are you going to ensure that the minutes are made public and that conflicts of interest are avoided ?
In the European Parliament , in fact , this is a completely transpartisan issue .
There are left-wing MEPs , right-wing MEPs , Green MEPs and liberals who are very interested in these issues .
Why were we not involved earlier in the reforms that you have introduced ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I fully support what my fellow Members , and in particular Mr de Jong and Mr Canfin , have said .
I can only regret that Parliament was not consulted before a final decision on the review was taken .
The issue of transparency and expertise is one that we debate on a very regular basis , in particular within the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , where my experience in my field is somewhat comparable to that which Mr Canfin has just demonstrated .
I should like , Commissioner , to emphasise two points .
The first concerns the balance of the groups .
This is an extremely important issue .
The composition is very imbalanced : there are many very large companies , very few SMEs , and above all the industrial sector but not civil society .
The fact is , the weight of the groups clearly has an impact on the decisions that the Commission has to take , since it relies on the experts ' reports .
If those expert reports were of no interest , they obviously would not be consulted .
Consequently , restoring the balance so that it is representative of European society is absolutely vital , and I do not see any proposals in these new rules that favour either SMEs or civil society .
The second question concerns the selection of external experts .
It is absolutely vital that we know , or at the very least that you know , exactly who is who and where those people who are talking to you come from .
If experts present themselves as independent when in reality they are representing a lobby , the expertise they provide clearly cannot be regarded as a conclusive piece of information .
Extremely strict supervision and monitoring of declarations of interest is therefore absolutely vital to ensure that , if an expert is consulted as an industrial expert , things are at least clear .
If he is consulted as a teacher when he is actually the representative of an industry , then things are no longer clear and they are not acceptable .
I think that the issue of conflicts of interest is crucial .
We have another example of this in the shape of a major problem at the Medicines Agency , which I believe we will have the opportunity to discuss again .
Therefore , I beg you , Commissioner , please restore our faith in the experts , as their opinions inform the decisions that are taken .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , of course , I do not know how much you know of the history of this issue , but I am particularly pleased to replace my colleague , Maroš Šefčovič , in replying to this question , because for the last five years it has been my domain .
I was responsible for this area and am very pleased to tell you what has really been changed .
It was an expert groups issue and , of course , unfortunately I have only three minutes to reply to your question . I will try to do my best .
As we mentioned , the new framework for Commission expert group was adopted in November 2010 .
It provides that , when defining the composition of these groups , the Commission departments concerned shall aim to ensure the balanced representation of relevant areas of expertise and areas of interest , while taking into account the work to be carried out and the specific expertise required .
The new framework for Commission expert groups provides for clearer and stronger horizontal rules on how to manage conflicts of interest .
According to these rules , the relevant Commission services shall inform experts who are appointed in a personal capacity that , by accepting to be members of the group , they commit themselves to acting independently and in the public interest .
These rules , which apply to all expert groups , constitute the Commission 's sole policy on this matter and are requirements that all services must fulfil .
In October 2005 , in an example of good cooperation with Parliament and Jens Bonde , MEP , the Commission launched an online public register of expert groups which provided valuable information on different aspects , such as the group 's mission , tasks and composition .
Since 2007 , the Commission has been gradually publishing the names of expert group members , whether formally or informally established .
This goes beyond the commitment made by the Commission in the 2005 framework for expert groups , which applied only to members of formal groups .
In 2009 , the composition of expert groups was fully disclosed in the register .
Thus , in principle , the names of all members of expert groups are available .
This was a very strong requirement that Parliament imposed in 2005 and it has been complied with .
Following the adoption of the new framework for Commission expert groups , the Commission drew up a new version of the register in December 2010 .
This new version enhances transparency by providing new and more accurate information , notably on the type of entities listed and the procedures used to select members .
Furthermore , the new register increases transparency on the activities carried out by each group by allowing Commission departments to either publish relevant information in the register , or to provide a link from the register to a dedicated website where information can be found .
Finally , the presentation and readability of data encoded in the register has also been improved .
Given the huge amount of information to be treated , the transition from the old to the new version of the register is still ongoing .
Thus , some of the data still needs to be validated .
The transition needs to be completed over the next few months .
Moreover , because for five and a half years I discussed these issues with various civil society organisations and Members of Parliament , I would ask you not to mystify the experts .
There is no arithmetical link between the composition of expert groups and a decision .
The decision is the Commission 's political responsibility .
Parliament 's committees have the same political responsibility when they meet in the presence of the same lobbyists .
Do not forget that in 2005 we also launched a transparency register , then called the ' lobbyist register ' and now the ' register of interest representatives ' , which has now developed into a joint register with Parliament .
That is a great step ahead .
So something has been done .
Things do not look so bad .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
I am glad that I am speaking after him .
I would like to say that we would rather look to the present and the future than back to the past .
We would rather see bigger steps being taken towards transparency .
I join with my colleagues on this question and recall that Parliament has asked the Commission to take action to ensure the balanced representation of interest groups in the membership of expert groups .
As the Commissioner mentioned , we have a revised framework .
In our view , however , there are still major shortcomings which undermine people 's confidence .
I will mention some of them .
Procedures to detect and eliminate conflicts of interest are missing .
We need a procedure to detect and eliminate these .
It is not enough to send a letter to the experts asking them to decide if they have a conflict of interest or not .
Professional secrecy clauses have been extended beyond Commission staff to include members of expert groups so that , instead of moving towards more transparency , we are moving towards more secrecy .
The lack of transparency persists with regard to the disclosure of expert groups ' documents .
Next , small and medium-sized enterprises and civil society organisations are not properly represented .
Safeguards against industry dominance are insufficient .
There is a risk of ' corporate capture ' of expert groups .
So we ask for all information about the existing expert groups to be placed on a website in a timely manner , including information about membership and members and all calls for applications .
I take this opportunity to insist again on the need for transparency concerning EU fund beneficiaries .
Finally , I would like to say that transparency ensures good governance and trust in the institutions .
If we want people 's trust , more - and full - transparency is the only way to go .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , we know that there are many clichés concerning European decision-making .
The first one is that it is not transparent , but the EU is a tricky political system even for those who understand its functioning .
Standard definitions hardly apply , therefore .
Transparency and simplicity should be a basic aim for all actors in the EU .
Our political system is sufficiently difficult on its own ; we are not here to make it more difficult .
Finding a legislative proposal somewhere on an EU website should not require special skills , so the user-friendly website the oral questions mention is not just an option - it is a must .
Another accusation is that the role of lobbying is unclear , and the role of big business is disproportionately strong .
I know that lobbying can be useful for the Commission , as lobby groups often think up important points and provide information or even whole , ready-made , policy solutions .
Here again I believe that transparency is a must and I am hopeful that this will be reflected in the future lobby register .
When it comes to expert groups , they should be seen for what they are : another playing field in which participants can put their interests forward .
If the composition of those expert groups is biased , then expert groups merely provide one more opportunity for interest groups to succeed .
However , these players are usually already good at putting their interests forward without the additional help of public authorities .
I can only repeat my colleagues ' question : is it obligatory or not for the Commission to obtain balanced advice ?
Mr President , it is obvious that transparency in the work of every official body should be guaranteed in every democratic society .
This is needed for good decisions to be made objectively and to take account of all of society or the whole country or organisation which will be affected , and not some particular interests .
Therefore there is all the more reason why we should stress , whenever possible , that bodies connected with the European Union or the European Commission , as well as all other bodies which perform an official function , and this includes the European Parliament , should work as transparently and as openly as possible .
This means the proposals that expert groups , too , should work in line with these requirements and with as much openness and transparency as possible are fully justified and warranted .
This is necessary to eliminate possible conflicts of interest and to eliminate possible activity on behalf of particular interests when we do not know of this and when these actions may influence decisions which are important for the whole European Union .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , last October this Parliament introduced six new directives giving the EU powers to regulate the UK financial industry .
On 7 February , I submitted a written question to the Commission advising it of one aspect of the UK Companies Act 1976 .
Section 27 of the Act gives a significant exemption to just one company , the Bank of England Nominees Limited .
This exemption means that the identities of the shareholders of the Bank of England are kept secret .
I have asked the Commission if this exemption contravenes EU law and if the new regulatory bodies will have the power to require the disclosure of the names of the Bank of England 's shareholders .
Of course , I and my party do not want any EU law , but the Commission and the British Government do .
Presumably then , the Commission should ensure that its law is equally , consistently and transparently applied throughout its empire .
( DE ) Mr President , I am delighted that you are here today , Commissioner , because your efforts over the years for which you were responsible for this area achieved widespread recognition .
Nonetheless , you know from your own experience that there is still a very long way to go .
It is vitally important that people who sit on expert groups are subject to a procedure and that sanctions can be imposed on them if they make incorrect statements .
It is outrageous that people can claim to be independent when in reality they are clearly not independent .
There must be sanctions for this ; otherwise , what we have is a paper tiger .
My second point is the issue of who is being represented ; you will be familiar with this from the business world .
Here , in particular , it must surely be in the interests of the Commission to open up the groups at last to representatives of civil society .
Looking at what has been achieved in respect of the financial scandals and the economic crisis it is clear that a great deal of poor advice has been given .
This is something that we need to work on urgently .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to thank the group of Members for raising this urgent issue .
The issue of experts does not only concern the economy .
The Commission does not respect the principle of impartiality and balance in other fields either , and the resulting composition of expert groups is one-sided and does not represent the interests of all citizens .
The first example I would like to give is that , according to Eurostat , 90 % of EU citizens are in favour of families consisting of a wife , a husband and their children .
The Commission , however , selects only experts from organizations such as the European Women 's Lobby or the Family platform , which seek to break this family model .
The Commission has , in contrast , long rejected those women 's organizations and experts who , just like the majority of EU citizens , do not agree with one-sided feminist theory .
Another example is the Agency for Fundamental Rights , created and financed by the Commission .
The experts of this agency support a one-sided policy agenda , without trying to reach balance and objectivity .
This is evidenced by the speeches of its Director in this Parliament .
Even the European Commission has distanced itself from the attitudes to freedom of religion and conscience promulgated by the chairman of this agency 's independent panel of experts , because it was drafted by lobbyists for pro-abortion organizations .
I believe that if an official European expert agency elevates political interests above professionalism and impartiality , it should be abolished .
I could mention many more such cases .
I would therefore like to add my voice to the questions that have been submitted to the Commission by the Members .
I would like to ask the Commission to throw open the windows of the cabinet of experts , because the air in there is not clean , and this applies not only to the field of economics .
( FR ) Mr President , the cooperation and consultations of experts put in place by the European Commission really must be irreproachable from the point of view of transparency , because this is a dangerous exercise .
Indeed , members representing an interest , who are chosen according to their specific tasks and their type of expertise , may represent the same interests without , however , reflecting the general interest .
The Commission must therefore be particularly careful to ensure that they are representative , but even more so , it should encourage contradiction .
I find it unacceptable that these members should include numerous NGOs that have similar interests and a similar scope .
The working papers , acts and agendas of meetings should also be made public so that they can be consulted by the general public , elected representatives and entities for which the group 's work does not have immediate implications but which will be affected from time to time .
The unclear content of the expert groups ' work cannot possibly lead to reliable results , and here I am thinking in particular of the expert groups coming under the DG Sanco .
Lastly , I believe that , in an effort to ensure the transparency of its operations , the Commission must involve Parliament in reviewing the supervision of its expert groups and similar entities .
As Article 9 of the Treaty makes clear , transparency is not just a matter for the European Commission ; it concerns the people of Europe , too .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in our daily parliamentary activities we realise that added value is given by access to selected information that supports our legislative role and our work of providing political direction .
We make use of outside human resources - although the Commission does so much more often - to supply us with analyses and guides to the current political , social , industrial and entrepreneurial situation .
Policy , however , is made up of decisions and choices , and these remain fully in the hands of politicians .
It is a matter of making choices that may be supported by expert groups endowed with a high degree of professionalism and specific levels of competence , who are capable of expressing their opinions objectively .
Hence there is a need to identify effective instruments and transparent procedures that will allow the Commission to fulfil its role with the support of these autonomous or independent expert groups .
We are aware that this is an extremely problematic aspect .
The 2010 plan is certainly a significant step forward , but much more needs to be done .
The experts ' impartiality and authority also depend on how autonomous they are and on how able they are to support political decisions fairly and loyally .
Publicity mechanisms , the web and other effective methods can be simplified even further in both the Commission and Parliament .

Therefore , the right of access is good ; transparency is certainly good ; the balance between the right to transparency and those things that cannot be handed over or passed on or made recognisable is good ; and the register of lobbyists that is to be set up soon is good .
However , we must emphasise once again that it is policy that is paramount .
If the policy is credible and competent , the experts ' role is one of consultancy and support .
The decision will always be made by the one who takes responsibility for it .
( SK ) Mr President , the European Commission has recently revised its framework document governing the operation of expert groups .
Given that we are all interested not only in the best possible functioning of the institutions of the European Union , but also in the transparent and fair creation and functioning of expert and advisory bodies , we would welcome a higher degree of openness on the part of the European Commission regarding implementation of the mechanism for the selection of experts for European Commission expert groups .
Reference was made here a few moments ago to the example of the European Medicines Agency , where the list of experts actually raises doubts as to the provision of independent expert advice .
Therefore , Commissioner , we should work together to prevent any doubts as to the expertise , balance and independence of our advisory bodies .
If we feel that the framework for expert groups still has certain shortcomings , despite the current revision , let us give the matter some thought and try to improve it even further .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Barnier has admitted that some of the Commission 's expert groups in the financial area are unbalanced and one-sided in their composition .
At present , 11 of the 25 expert groups in the financial area are dominated by the financial industry .
Some groups have more representatives of the finance industry than responsible officials .
Moreover , these representatives merely have to sign a preprinted declaration that they will act in the public interest if they see a conflict of interests .
Such ridiculous platitudes are hardly conducive to creating transparency and neutrality .
The situation where the reports of the European Food Safety Agency are concerned is equally concerning .
The statements on risks posed by genetic modification cite manufacturers ' reports and the involvement of genetic modification lobbyists is clear .
The Executive Director of the most important specialist EU authority on genetically modified plants is thus working for the industry-funded International Life Sciences Institute .
In other words , EU legislation that is primarily based on statements by banks and large groups is irresponsible and dangerous for EU citizens , and should therefore be stopped immediately .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , it really warms my heart to listen to this discussion .
In fact , it would be good to have some kind of memo about the history of this issue .
The Commission takes note of all these good ideas and advice on how to increase transparency .
I should point out that in 2005 we launched a transparency initiative which included the question of expert groups .
This was very largely my brainchild , as Mr Hans-Peter Martin has just recalled .
There have , of course , been huge changes in relation to this question , with all the websites and information now available .
But you should never regard the experts as some kind of decision-makers .
They are not decision-makers and they clash with each other .
It is the same issue as has just been raised in relation to genetically modified organisms .
One knows that it is not just industry that is concerned .
There are different groups of experts .
In the last months of the last Commission I also had responsibility for security , so all information about demonstrations came to my desk .
One of the last huge demonstrations was against the abolition of subsidies for tobacco producers .
So there are different views , but we are the decision-makers : the Commissioners and Members of Parliament and our Institutions .
Agencies also make decisions , as do the Council and the Member State governments .
Experts are not the decision-makers .
There is no arithmetical link .
Yes , I am in favour of greater transparency .
It is clear that some very high-level expert groups were set up only to quietly disappear because they were not able to give any advice as they held such contradictory views .
So let us work with this transparency register , which I also consider to be a great achievement , because experts and advisers are everywhere .
No politician survives without advisers .
Political groups have advisers and are approached by different interests , and finally it is for political decision-makers to take one stand or another .
There will always be subjects where the experts will say that now you must take this or that position .
This is a matter for the political decision-makers : Commissioners , parliamentarians , political groups , in accordance with the democratic system .
There is also the question of the composition of the expert groups .
Many issues have been raised about composition .
Who should assess whether their composition is balanced or not ?
The composition of the expert groups is determined by specific cases .
Some people may mistakenly want to enter these expert groups to be part of the decision-making process , but expert groups are not decision-makers .
Back in 2005 , as some of us remember , there really was an element of opacity and the Commission , together with Parliament , has introduced substantial changes in this regard .
By this I mean the transparency register , which registers representatives of interest groups .
This applies to lobbyists at Parliament and the Commission , and a lot of information is now available to assess how great their influence is and the composition of the expert groups .
Let us develop our response in this issue , but let us also not underestimate the efforts which have been made so far .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.45 and resumed at 12.00 )

1 .
Bilateral safeguard clause in the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement (
2 .
EU guarantee to the EIB against losses under loans and guarantees for projects outside the EU (
- Before the vote on Amendment 1 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , in the light of the recent developments in the countries of the Mediterranean and North Africa , the democratic changes and the consequences of those developments , including the migration flow towards the European Union , I would like to suggest an oral amendment to the report , with some figures .
The amendment is as follows : in annex 1 the new figure for item B ' Neighbourhood and Partnership Countries ' should read 13 664 000 000 , with the figure for the sub-ceiling for ' Mediterranean countries ' 9 700 000 000 .
The result of these changes would be a correction to the figures in Article 2 ( 1 ) ( 1 ) .
The correct figure for the ' maximum ceiling ' is now 29 567 000 000 and the correct ' General Mandate ' figure is 27 567 000 000 .
3 .
Free trade agreement between the EU and the Republic of Korea (
rapporteur . - Mr President , I know everybody wants to rush off , but I just want to thank the Commission and the shadow rapporteurs on this .
This is a ground-breaking free trade agreement , which is outstanding .
Parliament has a huge opportunity to support it and to put forward wonderful ideas for the future .
I put this fantastic agreement to the vote .
It is a roll-call vote .
It is carried .
Congratulations to Mr Sturdy .
4 .
Situation in Egypt (
5 .
Implementation of the EU strategy for the Danube region ( vote )
6 .
Rule of law in Russia (
7 .
World Bank energy strategy ( vote )
8 .
Europe 2020 (
- Before the vote on paragraph 10 :
( DE ) Mr President , on behalf of my group I would like to table an oral amendment to strengthen equal opportunities and the aspect of gender policy in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
I will read the text out in English - new paragraph 10 a :
' Insists that gender equality is a key target for achievement of the ambitions of EU 2020 .
Calls therefore for the full participation of women in the labour market and the full inclusion of female workers in vocational training . Calls also for an agenda to eradicate the pay gap that exists between women and men . '
( Applause )
9 .
Implementation of the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States (
10 .
Guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States (
11 .
Rising food prices (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
- Before the vote :
Mr President , the Figaro newspaper this morning reports that last week a journalist not only entered the European Parliament with an imitation gun , but was also able to get extremely close to Prince Charles , the next British Head of State .
Given the ongoing concerns about security in this House , can you assure us today that you are taking these matters seriously , and that the so-called review being conducted in secret by Parliament 's Bureau will not merely be a tinkering exercise , but a root-and-branch reform of security ?
Mr Karim , I can assure you that this matter is being taken very seriously .
According to my information , it is being discussed at the Conference of Presidents , so you can be sure Parliament is paying great attention to this problem .
It is a very serious matter .
In the light of recent developments , the text on the media law in Hungary , the vote on which was tabled for today , will have to be revised .
I therefore propose that this vote be postponed under Rule 177 ( 4 ) .
The decision on further action on this issue and on the necessary new deadlines will be taken at the meeting of the Conference of Presidents on Thursday , 3 March 2011 .
Who wishes to speak in favour ?
Who wishes to speak against ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , after the recent developments that are on the table at the Commission but not at Parliament , I feel that we have to postpone the vote on the resolution because it needs to be adapted to suit this new development .
So that was the proposal in favour .
Who wants to speak against ?
No one ?
Then we will proceed to the vote .
Who is in favour of postponement ?
Against ?
Abstentions ?
The proposal is carried .
The vote on this item is postponed .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of the vote
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to talk about the vote on the bilateral safeguard clause .
I support the adoption of the regulation on the implementation of a safeguard clause concerning free trade between the EU and Korea .
I also support all amendment proposals calling on the Commission to monitor the proper and timely implementation of this legal instrument in order to prevent serious damage to industries in the European Union , and to take account of the legitimate interests of Member States regarding the specific economic situation in certain sectors of manufacturing industry .
The Free Trade Agreement will affect the industrial sectors of Member States in different ways , and we therefore need the option of applying protective measures at the regional level in exceptional cases .
In my opinion , the regions concerned must have the option of applying measures to prevent a serious negative impact on the regional economy and employment .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to highlight the fact that last week six important Member States of the European Union - France , Germany , Italy , Spain , Poland and Portugal - stated that Europe needs to be less ingenuous .
The six countries are calling for a more effective and strategic defence of European foreign trade , because the very existence and development of the European economic and social model are at stake .
The six countries point out that the European Union has opened up 80 % of its market to third countries , while the other major developed economies have only opened up 20 % of theirs .
It is therefore claimed that there are asymmetries in foreign trade and the concept of reciprocity needs to be developed .
This problem has brought many of our small and medium-sized enterprises to their knees , because they are suffering from unfair competition that stops them from being competitive in the markets .
Mr President , I come from Prato , a town that was once considered one of the most important textile areas in Europe .
Today , unfair competition from Asia has turned it into a ghost town , because business in Prato has been utterly devastated .
All these reasons have led us to vote against this agreement .
( SK ) Mr President , in the framework of the revision of budgetary guarantees provided to the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) by the European Union , I support particularly those elements , which have been designed to boost the momentum of this institution .
From the standpoint of future prospects , it is primarily about strengthening and making better use of the external mandate of the bank in the period between 2014 and 2020 in terms of increasing the volume of loans and their quality .
I also support the intention of allowing the EIB to reinvest venture capital and special loan reflows from earlier operations into new operations of the same type for the benefit of partner countries .
In order to improve access to financial resources for poorer groups in the eligible countries , an additional grant of EUR 500 million should be allocated to the EIB immediately to finance micro-credits .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted against the report , since I find it unacceptable that we should be supporting investment in third countries instead of facilitating investment for European small and medium-sized enterprises , which really form the most important economic fabric of the Union .
I am firmly against the inclusion of Turkey among the pre-accession countries : I would point out that Turkey still illegally occupies part of the territory of Cyprus , an EU Member State .
Moreover , there is no guarantee of transparency when the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) grants Union guarantees and finance to third countries .
I would point out that European citizens contribute to EIB funds , which is why priority should be given to investment within Europe itself .
Many of the investments supported by the EIB are in countries where clashes and uprisings against the various regimes are taking place .
The report seeks to extend Union guarantees also to other countries , such as Cuba , that are known for their lack of democracy .

( IT ) Mr President , while we voted firmly in favour of the safeguard clause in the report by Mr Zalba Bidegain , whom I thank once again for his excellent work , we abstained on the trade agreement with Korea with some regret .
We did so with regret because , although this agreement does indeed open up an important new market for the Union , paving the way for further trade agreements in future with other economic partner countries of the Union , it is also true that many doubts and misgivings remain .
These doubts and misgivings affect major commercial sectors , especially the motor industry , and also textiles and agriculture .
Although Europe has not yet defined the regulation on the indication of country of origin for products from outside the European Union , we continue to offer countries privileged status for importing products into Europe without demanding rules to ensure true equality for companies or information for people that purchase the goods .
Our abstention confirms that we are in favour of a free market , but one that includes the necessary guarantees , whereas we are against the conclusion of trade agreements that do not sufficiently guarantee the rules of competition .
( SK ) Mr President , the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement will bring innumerable benefits to European industry , businesses , entrepreneurs and employees .
It will contribute to overall economic growth and open up effective new opportunities for European goods and services .
However , certain industries will be exposed to additional competition , and the EU should therefore ensure effective monitoring of the implementation of the agreement , the rapid settlement of disputes and the subsequent rapid safeguarding of the legitimate interests of European industry and European entrepreneurs .
It is obvious that strict compliance with labour , technical and environmental standards , as well as provisions on the protection of fair competition have to be ensured by both parties .
Goods and products placed on the European market must comply with all standards of the European Union , and I welcome the establishment of a monitoring committee for the motor industry , which should help prevent so-called hidden protectionism through new technical barriers to trade .
I am therefore in favour of granting final approval to the agreement in question , provided that a bilateral safeguard mechanism will be created as well , in order to prevent possible serious damage to Member State industries , or even the threat of such damage .

( GA ) Mr President , I voted for this Agreement ; I followed it from the beginning and was glad that it was accepted today .
At a seminar in Brussels last week , a credible economist said that this is one of the best Free Trade Agreements the European Union ever concluded .
At the same time , he said that 90 % of these agreements are not worth a pin .
Be that as it may , I welcome the opportunity it provides for agricultural products , especially whiskey , pork and dairy products .
I hope the opportunity will be grasped .
It is a great thing , too , that it contains a protection clause .
Because if things do not change as they ought , we can do a review .
Therefore , I am very pleased that it was accepted .
( DA ) Mr President , I think it is a really splendid agreement that has been finalised here today , and I only regret that there are some people who believed that they could protect inefficient European enterprises by saying ' no ' to this agreement .
South Korea is the 15th largest economy in the world and the third largest in Asia .
We will see better and better opportunities for exporting .
We have a country with respectable economic growth , a population of 50 million and increasing purchasing power .
The agreement will quite simply provide the opportunity for Europe , in some service sectors where we are extremely competitive , to now become even better : these include telecommunications , the environment , shipping and financial and legal services .
I would also just like to point out today that the EFTA countries have had a free trade agreement since 2006 , and this has resulted , among other things , in Norway tripling its exports to South Korea since 2006 .
Hence , this is a very good agreement for Europe and I have therefore voted in favour of it .
Mr President , Europe could do many things to support Egyptian democracy , and one of the most important would be to look at the events in Egypt as part of a genuine wave of democratisation .
In the space of a few weeks , a tyranny collapsed , and with it we have seen the collapse of a number of stereotypes such as the theory of a clash of civilisations .
No conflict of civilisations whatsoever is occurring in the Arab World today - exactly the opposite .
Egyptian youngsters are putting their lives at risk for the same values that we hold .
They are showing that democracy is a universal aspiration and that there are no cultures , religions or civilisations that are against it .
Nonetheless , an army of sceptics and doomsayers is at work today , diminishing or distorting the meaning of the Egyptian transition to democracy .
People are engaged in raising all sorts of doubts , describing the latest development as a ' coup d 'état ' as though these events have simply paved the way for an Islamic Government that will end up in another autocracy .
If we want to help the Egyptian people , we should be ready to counter these reactionary views of the unfolding of history .
( PL ) Mr President , Egypt is an important economic and commercial partner of the European Union .
Many people from Poland go on holiday to Egypt on a regular basis .
In recent weeks , we have witnessed a national rebellion in Egypt , which has resulted in President Mubarak stepping down after 30 years of authoritarian rule .
It is always right when the will of the people prevails , and the Egyptians deserve recognition for their victory .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution , and in doing so I expressed my hope for a rapid stabilisation of the political situation in Egypt and further development of good relations with the countries of Europe .
Not long ago , we witnessed shameful events relating to discrimination against Coptic Christians , and this makes concentrating EU diplomatic efforts on stabilisation and law and order in Egypt an essential condition for mutual relations to develop properly .
It is also necessary to make every effort to ensure that the coming elections are held in a way which does not attract criticism and which is in accord with democratic standards .
( DE ) Mr President , we enthusiastically support the movement for democracy in Egypt , but it is important to realise that free elections are not enough .
We need an integrated approach in order to give the people prospects - a kind of Mediterranean Plan , a kind of Marshall Plan for North Africa and Egypt .
This will involve giving people social prospects , strengthening education policy , strengthening small and medium-sized enterprises , ensuring that criminality and corruption are combated and above all , initiating close cooperation in the area of energy policy , where in the area of solar energy North Africa and Europe have a lot to offer each other .
We have yet to complete the real major tasks .
Egypt 's democrats have completed the first phase of the work ; now it is up to us to step up to the mark .
Mr President , the situation in Egypt is still developing , but in what direction is it moving ?
While we have rightly expressed our support for the popular desire for an open society , we should be aware of the complex , and yet unsolved , problems in Egypt and in the Middle East .
The situation in Egypt could be adequately described as a revolt in waiting for a revolution .
A new generation has brought novelty to Egypt , but social media skills are not enough .
Egypt is still mired in backwardness , anti-Semitism and extreme practices .
The EU has yet to formulate a proper policy towards the new developments in North Africa .
Egypt needs our support , but we need an Egypt ruled by law and human dignity .
Our task is just beginning .
Let us not forget the last message to come from Iran , where the Parliament has noisily called for the execution of opposition leaders .
This proves that we should be well prepared , and stand our ground .
( FI ) Mr President , the motion for a resolution is good , and it adopts a position in favour of democratic and peaceful forces of change .
Perhaps , though , it is worth remembering and acknowledging that for 30 years the EU and the West have supported Mubarak .
It is stability that has been important for the EU .
That means equilibrium and the supply of oil , and , in addition , the fact that money has been made out of the arms trade .
Now the EU needs to find ways , including financial measures , to boost its support for civil society actors , both in Egypt and in other undemocratic countries in Africa and the Arab world .
I think that it is something of a setback that this resolution makes no mention of the arms trade between countries of the EU and Egypt and other undemocratic countries .
The arms trade ought to be in line with international agreements on human rights and humanitarian treaties .
( SK ) Mr President , Egypt is at the beginning of its democratisation process .
I believe that all of the victims who lost their lives during the revolution should be atoned for through positive progress towards democracy .
Europe should certainly assist Egypt in this , and I believe that we will find ways of preventing Egypt from taking one direction in a totalitarian manner , for instance through an extreme step toward a militant Muslim movement which does not respect democratic rules and which would hinder democratic elections and the application of civil society .
I believe that Egypt will uphold its international agreements with its neighbours , including Israel , even under these new conditions , and that it will be a society which treats all of its citizens fairly , including non-Muslims , and including Christians .
( DE ) Mr President , this motion for a resolution represents another important step in the right direction , but no more than that .
However , as Commissioner Hahn proposed , people are now talking about a strategy for the Danube region rather than a Danube strategy , because this is not just about cleaning up the river - as important as that is - but is about cooperation across a major region that extends from Bavaria and Baden-Württemberg through the former Austria-Hungary and across large parts of the Balkans .
I am pleased that , at our request , Bohemia and Slovenia are also included , even though they are not situated directly on the Danube .
To this end I would also like to see included in the future projects such as the main railway line from Strasbourg to Bratislava and Budapest , TEN 17 and other projects that may not be located directly on the Danube , but which cross it repeatedly and are of strategic importance for the Danube region .
I particularly welcome Articles 36 to 40 , which deal with culture and the involvement of civil society , because without these the strategy for the Danube region will not be a success .
( PL ) Mr President , for many years , it has been clear that the legal system in Russia is not infrequently in conflict with the standards of international conventions and human rights .
The majority of cases which come before the Court of Justice and here in Strasbourg are brought against Russia .
The independence of the Russian courts is , therefore , the subject of a great deal of doubt .
Recent events , such as the trial of Mr Khordorkovsky and the arrest of demonstrators are clear examples of this .
Mysterious murders and beatings only serve to further reinforce the impression that Russia is a lawless country .
I hope the motion for a resolution we have adopted today will make it easier for representatives of European Union bodies to take up these thorny issues in diplomatic relations with Russia .
I would like to express my anxiety concerning the Russian authorities in relation to the dramatic situation on human rights and the restrictions placed on civil society there .
I appeal to international institutions to put diplomatic pressure on the Russian authorities to bring about a restoration of the rule of law and respect for human and citizens ' rights in Russia .
Mr President , I voted for this resolution .
However , as a result of compromises , paragraph 8 has become too ambiguous and non-committal .
The EU must take concrete measures to show that it is serious about the need for a real improvement of the rule of law situation in Russia .
While economic and political contacts need to be continued , a clear signal should be sent to those state officials who are considered responsible for grave breaches of law that they are not welcome in the capitals or tourist resorts of Europe .
Against this background , I do not consider it proper to officially invite President Medvedev to address the European Parliament until he has lived up to his promises to improve the rule of law situation in Russia .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that we have finally adopted the resolution on this very important topic .
I have been a close observer of political developments and the situation as regards the rule of law in Russia for many years now .
Most recently , I had a chance to visit Russia with an official delegation of the Human Rights Subcommittee in September last year .
During the visit I had a first-hand opportunity to observe how the rule of law is upheld in Russia when attending the trial of the former Yukos boss , Mikhail Khodorkovsky , and his business associate , Platon Lebedev .
The trial of Khodorkovsky and Lebedev is only the most conspicuous of many examples of the selective application of the rule of law in Russia , which means that there is no genuine rule of law .
If Russia wants to be a strategic partner of the EU it must follow a path of comprehensive modernisation .
Any modernisation plan will be a failure if the rule of law is not vigorously developed in Russia .
( DE ) Mr President , the miniscule signs of the beginnings of the rule of law in Russia are disappearing and the country is not only not moving forward , but is sliding back .
The man responsible for this is Mr Putin .
It is Mr Putin who is bringing about this deterioration in the rule of law .
We need to realise that he is not the solution to the problem , but rather is a major part of the problem .
President Medvedev has yet to prove - and here I agree with Mr Kelam - that he is not simply the charming face of Mr Putin , the slightly more friendly face , but that he is actually attempting or in a position to consolidate the rule of law somewhat more in this member state of the Council of Europe , which is after all obliged to ensure the rule of law under the European Convention on Human Rights .
To this extent we need to be highly critical ; naturally we must maintain a dialogue , but we also need to ensure that the rule of law prevails .
It is shocking that the court that sentenced Mr Khodorkovsky has now publicly stated that it was ordered by Moscow to hand down this verdict .
That has nothing whatsoever to do with the rule of law .
( RO ) Mr President , I voted for this motion for a resolution .
However , as the final text made no mention of the role of cohesion policy , I signed an amendment on this , along with fellow Members from the other political groups , which was also voted on today .
The Structural Funds and the basic principles of cohesion policy , such as an integrated approach , multi-level governance and real partnership , are key elements in achieving the EU 2020 Strategy 's objectives , which also means that they must be fully integrated into it .
I agree that we need an ambitious social agenda which will include combating poverty and social exclusion .
However , to be able to create sustainable jobs , we need to have primarily a competitive economy , which is precisely the role played by cohesion policy .
Therefore , if we continue to deprive cohesion policy of the attention it is due , we will record the failure of the EU 2020 Strategy in the coming years .
( IT ) Mr President , we will still have to suffer the damage caused by the financial crisis for a long time .
The brake on the real economy caused by financial malpractice must be released as quickly as possible to enable the single market to resume its development .
The Europe 2020 Strategy does not appear to us to be the most appropriate one for delivering the growth we are hoping for .
Structural obstacles - such as weak governance , the intergovernmental method compared to the Community method , percentage and numerical targets analogous to those used in the old Soviet five-year plans , and programme forecasts that give no assurance of ever being achieved - remind me of all the flops we have endured , of which Lisbon will not be the last , without realising that our absolute priorities should be to create jobs and tackle unemployment .
We need impetus , effort and stimulus , which unfortunately I do not find in the proposed strategy .
' Release ' needs to become the watchword , but it is also vitally important to define rules to prevent the creation or strengthening of monopolies and to ensure that the ones benefiting are the people and the economy as a whole , and not some financial or political group that is more ruthless than the rest .
Mr President , the rapid rise in food prices has been a burden on the poor in developing countries , who spend roughly half of their household incomes on food .
This calls for an integrated response from the international community .
The wholehearted involvement of the EU in issues of global food security is urgently required .
The resolution approved today is a first step in the right direction .
The resolution states that the right to food is a fundamental human right and makes several useful recommendations .
However , we need to go ahead with further proposals .
We need to change the aspects of CAP international aid policies that are not in line with the task of increasing global food production , in full respect of environmental concerns , food safety and labour standards .
( PL ) Mr President , food is also of strategic importance for the European Union .
Food has to be produced , and so it is also important for labour markets .
I would like to focus in particular on an industry which , alongside others , is also a source of food production - fishing .
The fishing industry is one which supplies the EU and world market with a substantial amount of food .
However , the European Union is the greatest importer of fish products from other parts of the world .
Excessive liberalisation of this market may lead to its collapse , and as a consequence to the loss of this source of food in Europe .
Therefore , attention should be paid to this aspect of common policy .
( FI ) Mr President , this is an extremely important issue .
Right now , there are a billion starving people in the world .
Since the EU set its target to eradicate hunger and poverty , things have in fact gone in the opposite direction .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution and I would hope that the EU High Representative , Baroness Ashton , will make food security and all its various aspects one of the priorities of the EU 's foreign policy .
Obviously , too , Parliament and the EU as a whole should support her in this .
It is important that people should have food , that people should be able to buy food , and that , here in the EU , we should obviously also discuss the need to end the food scandals .
( PL ) Mr President , a billion of the world 's people are suffering hunger .
In 2008 , rising food prices caused riots in 30 countries .
Today , we have a similar situation .
This situation has been caused , in addition , by the general economic crisis , and it is now even more necessary to make a concerted effort to find fair ways of distributing food products on a global scale .
Food prices are rising , but farmers ' profits are falling .
This , too , should be stressed very strongly .
Unfortunately , it is being forgotten in the European Union that the common agricultural policy is principally a policy intended to secure the supply of high quality food at a suitable price to all European consumers , with a guarantee of a decent return for farmers .
We must not allow further elimination of instruments which regulate the market and maintain stocks at suitably high levels , and this includes cereal stocks .
It is also essential to put an end to speculative activities in the market .
It is reprehensible that capital groups are condemning millions of people across the world to suffer hunger .
Written explanations of vote
I voted for this report because the safeguard clause provides for the possibility of re-imposing the most-favoured-mation rate when imports increase to such an extent - either in absolute terms or in relation to domestic production - that they could undermine industry in the European Union , which is in direct competition with imported products .
I therefore agree with the introduction of this safeguard clause , and recall that following the Treaty of Lisbon the European Parliament has powers of codecision with the Council .
An effective regulation should serve to provide an assurance if the Free Trade Agreement with the Republic of Korea should fail .
in writing . - I voted for the Zalba Bidegain report on a bilateral safeguard clause in the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of South Korea because it adequately protects the increase in trade with Korea that is brought about by the Free Trade Agreement .
The bilateral safeguard mechanism will permit the EU to revert to the prior MFN rates of duty if this agreement even threatens to damage our industry .
This Free Trade Agreement opens up our service industry , agriculture and manufacturing industries to increased access to the large and growing Korean market .
This is an extremely important vote for the European Union 's new international trade strategy .
In fact , the Free Trade Agreement with South Korea is the first example of a new generation of agreements that aim at lowering trade and non-trade barriers and expanding investment prospects in the partner country .
As soon as it was signed in October 2009 , the agreement was received with fierce criticism from the European motor industry , which felt it was being severely penalised by certain clauses conceded to the Korean partner , duty drawback in particular .
Those concerns have now been partly dissipated , not least due to Parliament 's work on the attached regulation on the safeguard clause annexed to the agreement and to a clarification by the South Korean Government on the amendments to internal legislation on carbon emissions .
Today , therefore , we confirmed the vote of the Committee on International Trade in order to allow the procedure to be completed , given that the Council has already agreed to it .
in writing . - ( LT ) On 23 April 2007 , the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with the Republic of Korea with a view to concluding an EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement .
The agreement incorporates a bilateral safeguard clause that provides for the possibility of re-imposing the most-favoured-nation ( MFN ) rate when , as a result of trade liberalisation , imports increase to such an extent and take place under such conditions as to cause , or threaten to cause , serious injury to the EU industry producing a similar or directly competing product .
For such measures to become operational , the safeguard clause must be incorporated into EU law , not least because the procedural aspects of the imposition of safeguard measures , as well as the rights of interested parties , need to be specified .
The proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council that is before us constitutes the legal instrument required for implementation of the safeguard clause in the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement .
I would stress that legislative work on this regulation should be confined to issues relating to its implementation , without unilaterally altering fundamental provisions of the agreement and adopting measures that go against its spirit .
For instance , no changes should be made to the type of safeguard measures applicable , to the length of time for which they may apply or to the period during which the safeguard clause may be brought to bear .
in writing . - UKIP wants the UK to leave the European Union and retain friendly trading links through a UK-EU Free Trade Agreement , similar to that with non-EU Switzerland and Norway .
I voted in favour of this EU-South Korea Free Trade Agreement as it can be a model and a template for a future UK-EU Free Trade Agreement , and because it demonstrates that tariff-free and favourable trading access to the EU can be achieved without the UK ( or South Korea ) being a member of the EU .
This is especially true in the case of the UK , which would be the EU 's largest single trading partner .
A UK-EU Free Trade Agreement would be likely merely to replicate existing trading arrangements with the UK as a member of the EU , and would therefore require far less negotiation ( e.g. over tariff reductions ) than did the agreement with South Korea .
in writing . - UKIP desires to leave the European Union and retain friendly trading links through a UK / EU Free Trade Agreement , similar to that of non-EU Switzerland and Norway .
I voted in favour of this South Korea / EU Free Trade Agreement as it can be a model and a template for a future UK / EU Free Trade Agreement , and as it demonstrates tariff-free and favourable trading access to the EU can be achieved without the UK ( or South Korea ) being a member of the EU .
This is especially the case for the UK , which is the largest single trading partner with the EU .
A UK / EU Free Trade Agreement would be likely merely to replicate existing trading arrangements with the UK as a member of the EU , and would need therefore far less negotiation ( e.g. over tariff reductions ) than those with South Korea .
I voted for this report because I believe that the bilateral safeguard clause can guarantee that industry in the European Union , which produces a similar or directly competing products would not be damaged as a result of trade liberalisation by the Republic of Korea .
This clause should also function as an instrument to which European industry can turn to prevent serious losses , or to enable it to adapt to unfavourable situations , resulting from the volatility of the international market .
In relation to the conclusion of the process of adopting the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and Korea , the European Commission has drafted a proposal for a regulation on a safeguard clause that would ensure the reintroduction of customs tariffs if increased imports of a specific product put the related industry at serious risk .
The number of amendments of which the Commission 's proposal has been the subject seems to reflect a certain lack of clarity in its wording , as well as the Members ' desire to protect various interests .
I hope that the resolution that we have adopted today will contribute to improving the original text , and that the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and Korea will be established in a way that enables a significant increase in trade between the two markets , as is expected .
I am hopeful that the aforementioned agreement will be fruitful and that the safeguard clause - which it is hoped will be clear and capable of functioning effectively whenever needed - will never need to be enforced .
This report concerns a proposal for regulation of the European Parliament and the Council , which applies to the bilateral clause of the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and Korea .
This agreement was concluded on 15 October 2009 and includes a safeguard clause guaranteeing the reinstatement of tariffs when imports increase to such an extent as to damage industry in the European Union ( EU ) which produces competing products .
In order for it to be possible to apply this measure , it is necessary for it to be incorporated into EU legislation .
I hope that it will be an effective clause , which can be implemented with minimum bureaucracy .
I welcome the adoption of this proposal , which introduces increased guarantees for European companies , and I hope that the European Union will receive periodic reports to assess compliance with these safeguard mechanisms .
Our position in the vote on this report should be considered in the light of the profoundly negative assessment that we have made of the signing of this Free Trade Agreement .
The establishment of this clause represents , above all , recognition of the devastating consequences of the liberalisation and deregulation promoted by the agreement .
Moreover , it does not remove the dangers and concerns that this agreement involves and raises regarding the future of various sectors of economic activity , particularly in some Member States , such as Portugal , and in the regions that are most dependent on those sectors .
The particular goal of the bilateral safeguard clause is to enable the EU to re-impose most-favoured-nation ( MFN ) customs duties if it is proven that liberalisation resulting from the agreement could cause serious injury to EU industries .
We have serious doubts as to whether this mechanism will be enough to protect small producers or small and medium-sized enterprises , which will find it very difficult to stay afloat in a liberalised market ; to prevent the decimation of their production capacity and , consequently , the loss of many jobs .
It is significant that the possibility is being raised of mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to alleviate the impact of this agreement .
The solution ought to be to prevent the consequences that are currently being anticipated , not to remedy them in this way .
in writing . - ( DE ) The vote by the European Parliament in favour of Mr Zalba Bidegain 's report on the bilateral safeguard clauses represents an important step in the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Korea .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his involvement in the trialogue negotiations between Parliament , the Council and the Commission and emphasise the importance of these safeguard clauses for the European economy .
They allow a temporary raising of duty in order to protect the European economy from excessive growth in imports .
I am a clear advocate of such safeguard clauses and I therefore voted in favour of the report .
During this sitting , this House has expressed its opinion on the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement and has adopted the report on the bilateral safeguard clause of said agreement .
My opinion and my vote on the latter are positive .
The fact that I supported the report , however , does not prevent me from offering the advice that greater attention should be given to the farming sector .
Korea is in fact known to be keeping in force certain laws that contain major plant-health restrictions , which severely constrain our agricultural producers .
It would be beneficial to update these safeguard clauses in that respect as well because , although it is a fact that agricultural trade with Korea is worth approximately EUR 1 billion every year , it is also true that removing or at least limiting those barriers would enable us to defend our products and farmers in the best possible way .
Otherwise , they could be placed in a less favourable position than their Korean counterparts .
in writing . - I welcome this regulation , which incorporates a bilateral safeguard clause into the EU-South Korea Free Trade Agreement providing for the possibility of re-imposing the most-favoured-nation ( MFN ) rate when , as a result of trade liberalisation , imports increase to such an extent - in absolute terms or in relation to domestic production - and take place under such conditions as to cause , or threaten to cause , serious injury to the EU industry producing a similar or directly competing product .
For such measures to become operational , the safeguard clause must be incorporated into EU law , not least because the procedural aspects of the imposition of safeguard measures , as well as the rights of interested parties , need to be specified .
The proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council for which I voted provided the legal instrument required for implementation of the safeguard clause in the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement .
On 23 April 2007 , the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with the Republic of Korea with a view to concluding a Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) between the European Union ( EU ) and this country .
The agreement was initialled on 15 October 2009 .
The bilateral safeguard clause incorporated into this agreement , which provides for the possibility of re-imposing the most-favoured-nation ( MFN ) rate when , as a result of trade liberalisation , imports increase to such an extent - in absolute terms or in relation to domestic production - and take place under such conditions as to cause , or threaten to cause , serious injury to the Union industry that produces similar or directly competing products , is very important for maintaining healthy competition that is not damaging to either party .
However , for practical effects to be achieved , the aforementioned safeguard clause must be incorporated into European Union legislation , since not only do the procedural aspects of the application of the safeguard measures need to be specified , but also the rights of the interested parties .
The proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council under consideration constitutes the legal instrument for implementing the safeguard clause in the EU-Korea FTA .
I think the bilateral safeguard clause of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement is insufficient , and it will not be effective in dealing with the disastrous and dramatic consequences that will arise from the signing of the Free Trade Agreement .
Various sectors of the economy , such as textiles and agriculture , will be seriously damaged by this agreement , and the very fact that this clause needs to be included is proof of that .
I was therefore unable to support this instrument , because although I feel that it could alleviate a small proportion of the negative consequences of the signing of the Free Trade Agreement that I am opposed to , I consider it to be insufficient and ineffective .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Free Trade Agreement between the EU and North Korea contains a bilateral safeguard clause under which the most-favoured-nation duty rate can be reintroduced if , as a result of a liberalisation of trade flows , a product is imported in such increased volumes - either in absolute terms or in comparison with domestic production - and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause significant damage to a branch of the economy in the EU that produces equivalent or directly competing goods .
The report contains important proposals for ensuring that this safeguard clause can actually be implemented in serious cases in order to avoid substantial damage to EU industry .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
The report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council implementing the bilateral safeguard clause of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement is , in my view , an important instrument designed to defend European production in sectors that are currently in danger of incurring serious difficulties because of the rise in imports from Korea .
This situation , a consequence of the entry into force of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement , should provide for all customs barriers to be gradually and fully removed on a bilateral basis .
I therefore voted in favour of this proposal , since its adoption is a necessary condition for the above-mentioned agreement to enter into force as planned on 1 July 2011 .
Safeguarding the free trade agreements between the two parties is essential for an increase in products made in Europe .
I voted for this report because I consider the introduction of a bilateral safeguard clause to the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union ( EU ) and Korea to be very positive .
This clause provides for the possibility of re-imposing the most-favoured-nation ( MFN ) rate when , as a result of trade liberalisation , imports increase to such an extent - in absolute terms or in relation to domestic production - and under such conditions as to cause , or threaten to cause , serious damage to the Union 's industry producing similar or directly competing products .
I hope that the final draft of this mechanism will be clear and that actioning it will be easy and free of bureaucracy .
I hope that the European Commission will monitor the implementation of this agreement and check compliance with this safeguard mechanism .
in writing . - We seriously regret that MEPs have unquestioningly approved this problematic trade agreement .
The far-reaching EU-Korea FTA sets a dangerous precedent for future EU trade policy , going far beyond mere tariff elimination to include sweeping market access provisions at the expense of social and environmental standards .
Among the more odious provisions of the agreement , the EU succeeded in pushing Korea to massage its rules on CO2 emissions from vehicles in order to allow European car makers to export more big gas-guzzling cars to Korea .
This arm-twisting by the EU , which has undermined the environmental integrity of Korea 's vehicle emissions rules , is nothing short of scandalous .
Worse , the EU is trying to spin this environmental loophole as allowing Europe 's car industry laggards to ' compete fairly ' in the Korean market with smaller , cleaner and more efficient Korean cars .
I supported this report because I believe that the bilateral safeguard clause of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement is an effective tool for defending European production .
In fact , it is predicted that this agreement 's entry into force in July this year is liable to leave the European internal market in difficulties .
The gradual removal of customs barriers on a bilateral basis will in fact result in a significant increase in imports from Korea .
I am pleased to note that it will be possible to introduce specific measures even when the increase in imports into Europe is concentrated just in certain areas .
This provision takes up the Italian request to introduce a genuine ' regional safeguard clause ' , applicable only in certain regions of the European Union .
Shutting ourselves off from the international market today is a mere pipe dream : it is not only impossible but it would also be damaging .
It assumes , however , that any opening must be balanced and gradual and takes account of the European Union 's internal requirements .
Protecting jobs remains a priority for Europe , as does the quality of the products placed on the market .
It will only be possible to build economic relations of benefit to both parties if these fundamental criteria are respected .
We are in favour of the bilateral safeguard clause of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement because it mitigates the damaging effects of this instrument .
The purpose of this clause is to make it possible to suspend or reapply tariffs if it is believed that trade liberalisation has seriously damaged our industrial system .
The safeguard clause may only be applied for a maximum of 10 years from the removal of customs tariffs .
The introduction of this clause does not , of course , make us change our vote against the text of the Free Trade Agreement , which in any case will result in severe economic damage to our businesses .
In the same way as I gave my support to the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement , I also voted in favour of the proposal for a regulation implementing its bilateral safeguard clause .
In my view , it is a vital addition to the agreement , because it guarantees the reintroduction of customs duties in the event of a detrimental increase in imports of a particular product , and in this sense responds to the fears that we expressed during the debates held prior to its conclusion , in September 2009 .
The reimposition of the most-favoured-nation rate can be requested by the Member States , the European Parliament or European associations representing the industry concerned , thus ensuring that companies have a real opportunity to react .
I am voting for this regulation because of the elements introduced in the new decision .
The European Investment Bank ( EIB ) can invest in projects essential to the EU : in particular , in combating climate change , in developing social , economic and environmental infrastructures , and in local business sector development .
Another element of this regulation that I consider to be pertinent is the fact that the EIB can support EU presence in third countries through foreign direct investment , contributing to the promotion of new technology and to knowledge transfer .
However , I consider it opportune to review the annual evaluations regarding access to loans , so as to promote transparency and speed up bureaucratic procedures .
In short , the EIB can contribute effectively to EU development cooperation objectives .
Fair and balanced distribution across the regions for the allocation of financing is crucial .
Small and medium-sized enterprises should be a good way to stimulate economies to fight against unemployment .
in writing . - I voted against the Kalfin report on granting EU guarantees to the EIB against losses under loans and guarantees for projects outside the EU .
I am not satisfied with the level of transparency in lending to SMEs via intermediary financial institutions .
It is not enough that only the EIB knows who gets these monies .
These are very large loans that are being used ostensibly to further EU policy abroad and the taxpayer , who is the ultimate guarantor , has the right to know who the recipients are .
Some of these loans go to worthy causes but , in this day and age , the taxpayer must know what is being done in his name and why .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this text because I think it is important for the EU to support the EIB with the aim of extending the funding of investment projects in third countries in order to achieve the European Union 's foreign policy objectives .
Activating the mandate of EUR 2 billion to fund measures to combat climate change offers significant potential support for countries in the Eastern Partnership , such as the Republic of Moldova .
The Republic of Moldova is the poorest country in Europe and is severely affected every year by flooding disasters , which inflict significant losses on it .
Therefore , the development of EU projects in this state coincides perfectly with the Union 's priority to eradicate poverty .
In addition , we must support the reform efforts which this country has recently undertaken .
At the same time , one main objective of EU foreign policy , in accordance with Article 21 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union , is independence .
The EU 's energy independence will be guaranteed by the implementation of the Nabucco project .
Consequently , the development of economic and political relations with the main suppliers , Iraq , Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan , is vital , and this decision contributes to this .
This decision aims to keep the mandate of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) in place , specifically as regards the guarantee provided by the European Union against losses resulting from loans and guarantees for projects outside the European Union .
Under this decision , the EIB 's mandate is also expanded in terms of competences , with new elements introduced that aim to direct the EIB 's activities toward investment in projects that contribute to combating climate change , to developing social , economic and environmental infrastructure , and to developing the local private sector , in particular small and medium-sized enterprises ( SME ) .
I want the EIB to continue with the excellent work that it has been doing , supporting numerous projects undertaken since it was set up .
This report is on a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council granting a guarantee from the European Union ( EU ) to the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) against losses under loans and guarantees for projects outside the European Union .
The EIB 's mandate expires in October .
In addition to financing projects in the European Union , since 1963 the EIB has undertaken financing operations in outside regions , so contributing to the implementation of EU external objectives as regards cohesion and development policy .
Therefore , so that there would not be a vacuum after October 2011 , the parties initiated a series of meetings aimed at a consensus that would enable its adoption by the European Parliament and would not interrupt the aid granted by the EIB after that date .
I agree with this proposal because it reflects better cooperation between the EU and EIB ; it contributes to the struggle to eradicate poverty ; it stimulates small and medium-sized enterprises , as well as local communities ; it introduces greater transparency ; it promotes sound practices at the EIB ; it increases funding for projects combating climate change ; and it makes countries that do not pay attention to environmental issues ineligible .
The decision of Parliament and of the Council intends to grant a European Union ( EU ) guarantee to the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) against losses under loans and guarantees for projects outside the EU .
The objectives of these EIB projects , currently being carried out in a number of countries on different continents , focus on development cooperation and aid .
Where these objectives and the projects that serve them relate to genuine cooperation , taking into account the interests , priorities and specific conditions of the countries where they are taking place , we value them , naturally .
Nevertheless , whilst this financing for local development projects is positive , we cannot fail to be very critical of the attempt - clear in Article 1 - to make them subordinate to or conditional on the guiding principles of European external policy , ascribing secondary importance to the real development needs of third countries , limiting their capacity for administration and legitimate options , interfering with and pressuring their political decisions , and threatening their sovereignty and independence .
I am taking advantage of the vote on this report on EIB financing of projects outside the European Union to denounce a very serious matter to which European shipbuilders have drawn our attention : that a public bank is financing the construction of vessels in Korea by a shipyard which charges rock-bottom prices and which benefited from a public bail out a few years ago .
While it may not seem all that illogical for the European Investment Bank to support , through its loans and guarantees , the Union 's external policies , it is completely unacceptable for it to undermine European economic interests and contribute to the deindustrialisation of our countries .
The Commission and the Member States must react .
In addition to its core mission of financing investment in the European Union , the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) has , since 1963 , undertaken financing operations outside the EU in support of the EU 's external policies , particularly in the field of development cooperation .
The aim of the proposed EU guarantee for the 2011-2013 period is to allow the EIB to finance investments outside the EU without affecting its credit rating .
The proposal also contains a number of new elements , for example activation of the EUR 2 billion ' optional mandate ' for combating climate change in line with the Europe 2020 Strategy , the introduction of new horizontal goals , and the expansion of the group of countries eligible for EIB loans .
The proposal also calls for greater transparency , the evaluation of concrete results and the involvement of the European Court of Auditors in auditing the transactions in question .
The proposal rightly includes arrangements for the EIB to act in such matters in accordance with the principles of aid effectiveness outlined in the European Consensus on Development and also Article 208 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the Paris Declaration of 2005 and the Accra Agenda for Action of 2008 .
Overall , I believe that the report submitted by my colleague Ivailo Kalfin provides a detailed analysis of the given issues , makes reference to the relevant EU legislation and also contains relevant recommendations with respect to monitoring the effectiveness of the proposed guarantee , and I therefore recommend approving it in its proposed form .
in writing . - I voted for the Kalfin report on the new external mandate of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , providing for an increase in its budget from EUR 27.8 billion to EUR 29.567 billion until the end of 2013 and expanding its fields of competence to climate change action and the advancement of development goals for countries outside the EU .
I believe the EIB should focus much more attention on social problems and building capacity in the countries in which it operates .
The European Union provides the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) with a budgetary guarantee to cover risks of a political and sovereign nature in connection with its loan and loan guarantee operations for projects carried out outside the EU .
This EU guarantee is an effective means of combining EU budgetary funds with the EIB 's own resources , while ensuring that the EIB 's financial health is not affected .
The EIB has made great progress in implementing its mandate : it has strengthened its coordination with the Commission and shifted its focus towards support for the EU 's political objectives .
The development of its external action will now have to be reflected in an increase in the volume and quality of loans and a diversification of new recipients ( local authorities ) .
The EIB should immediately be given an additional EUR 500 million mandate for microcredit financing to increase access for the poorest people to bank finance in eligible countries .
On the question of internal organisation , the EIB should gradually be encouraged to divide up all its external activities on a geographic basis so as to better adapt to the specific requirements of each area and promote the participation of partner countries .
The EIB has not fulfilled the minimum conditions to assure us that its investments will be socially , environmentally and even ethically responsible .
The repeated scandals concerning the financing of offshore subsidiaries do not seem to worry the Commission , any more than dictatorships do , provided that , as in Libya 's case , they are financially worthwhile .
As for environmental and social issues , they are of no interest to this report .
It proposes that we support such harmful projects as Desertec and Invest in Med .
I voted against this text .
In addition to its core mission of financing investment in the European Union , the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) has , since 1963 , undertaken financing operations outside the European Union in support of the Union 's external policies , enabling the EU budget funds available to the external regions to be complemented by the financial strength of the EIB for the benefit of recipient countries .
In so doing , the EIB contributes to the general guiding principles and policy objectives of the European Union , including the development of third countries and the prosperity of the Union in the changed global economic climate .
The EIB operations in support of the Union 's external policies must continue to be conducted in accordance with the principles of sound banking practices .
The majority of its operations in external regions have benefited from an EU budgetary guarantee administered by the Commission with a view to supporting the EU 's external action , and enabling the EIB to finance investments outside the EU without affecting its credit standing .
This additional guarantee makes it possible for the EIB to continue with its investment policy , which is of great benefit to the world economy .
To support the EU 's foreign policy the European Investment Bank also finances projects outside the territory of the EU , such as in the area of development cooperation .
The guarantee fund established in 2009 is intended to guarantee the liquidity of the EIB in the event of payment defaults .
Following the assessment and evaluation , the list of countries eligible for EIB financing was expanded - with a corresponding adjustment of the financial framework .
I am not entirely in agreement with all of the amendments proposed and I therefore abstained from voting .
This report is about a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council granting an EU guarantee to the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) against losses under loans and guarantees for projects outside the European Union .
In fact , the EIB also finances projects in outside regions , contributing to the realisation of EU external objectives as regards cohesion and development policy .
This proposal reflects better cooperation between the EU and EIB ; it contributes to the struggle to eradicate poverty ; it stimulates small and medium-sized enterprises , as well as local communities ; it introduces greater transparency ; it promotes sound practices at the EIB ; it increases funding for projects combating climate change ; and it makes countries that disregard environmental issues ineligible .
I am voting for this report and I support the strengthening of the EIB 's external mission , which I would like to see accompanied by enhanced parliamentary oversight , in order to uphold the democratic legitimacy of the EIB 's operations .
The EIB should step up its reporting back to Parliament on all aspects under its external mandate , from overall policy to practical implementation , including assessment of social , environmental and human rights criteria .
in writing . - Article 208 of the Treaty of Lisbon states that the EU must ' take account of the objectives of development cooperation in the policies that it implements which are likely to affect developing countries ' .
This is a commitment from the EU to avoid policy choices that undermine its salutary work in the field of development cooperation and , indeed , to pursue actions , across the policy spectrum , that will benefit developing countries . This applies to all EU institutions , including the EIB .
The vast majority of eligible countries under the EIB 's external mandate are developing countries .
Consequently , it is fundamental that the underlying objectives of the EIB 's external mandate should explicitly target poverty reduction .
In addition , the EIB must align its external activities with the European consensus on development .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe it draws attention to a subject that is very seldom in the news .
In addition to its core mission of financing investment in the European Union itself , the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) undertakes financing operations outside the European Union in support of the EU 's external policies .
This allows the EU budget funds available to the external regions to be complemented by the financial strength of the EIB for the benefit of beneficiary countries . In so doing , the EIB contributes to the general guiding principles and policy objectives of the European Union , including the development of third countries and the EU 's prosperity in the changed global economic circumstances .
The EIB 's operations in support of the Union 's external policies must continue to be conducted in accordance with the principles of sound banking practice .
The goal of the document in question , voted on today in the European Parliament , is to ensure the granting of an European Union guarantee to the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) against losses under loans and guarantees for projects outside the European Union .
The ceiling set for the EIB under this guarantee is EUR 27.8 billion for the remainder of the current period , 2007-2013 .
In addition to this aspect , Parliament 's proposal seeks certain amendments to improve the EIB 's work outside the EU , such as the activation of EUR 2 billion available for combating climate change .
Improving access to EIB financing for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SME ) , increasing the transparency of its operations , and introducing greater flexibility in terms of risk-capital investment are other new measures proposed by Parliament .
The intention is also to replace the current system of regional objectives with a programme of horizontal objectives , and to implement a mandate for relations with countries such as Iceland , Libya , Iraq and Cambodia .
I support the European Parliament 's position and the external activity of the EIB , although I would stress the regrettable fact that financing projects outside the European Union often harms competitiveness within the EU in cases of direct competition .
in writing . - ( DE ) Through its financing outside the Union the European Investment Bank makes a contribution to the realisation of EU foreign policy .
I voted in favour of Mr Kalfin 's report , because I particularly welcome the EUR 2 billion for the areas of climate change mitigation and adaptation as well as the express promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Moreover , the report calls for comprehensive obligations in respect of information and transparency for citizens , Parliament and the Commission .
The rights of Parliament have been taken into consideration , which is something that I also consider to be absolutely essential .
in writing . - ( SK ) The European Union has a commitment to solidarity , which arises directly from our Christian heritage .
Even those who would like to eliminate Christianity from the public space recognize that the EU must contribute to development aid .
This solidarity , however , is directly derived from Christian teachings on the dignity of every human being and the moral imperative to help those in need .
The European Investment Bank ( EIB ) has become an important instrument of the Union for eradicating poverty in less developed regions .
As such , its primary purpose is to provide assistance , and to this end it needs financial guarantees .
On the other hand , it should remain a bank , that is , an institution , which does not spend the funds entrusted on it , but invests them effectively .
I therefore voted in favour of the report on providing a guarantee to the EIB .
I am voting for this recommendation as the South Korean market offers new trade opportunities , not least in the agricultural and service sectors .
The Republic of South Korea is currently one of the most profitable export markets for EU farmers , with annual sales in excess of EUR 1 billion .
As regards services , specifically financial and legal , telecommunications , environmental and maritime transportation services , it is estimated that the volume of transactions will increase by 70 % .
Moreover , the Free Trade Agreement stipulates an effective and clear safeguard mechanism in the interests of EU industries , contributing to the growth of European industry .
in writing . - I voted for the Sturdy report recommendation on the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of South Korea because it will increase trade and is advantageous to the United Kingdom and the other twenty six European Nations .
The most important factor in this agreement is the safeguard clause without which I could not have voted for it .
The bilateral safeguard mechanism will permit the EU to revert to the prior MFN rates of duty if this agreement even threatens to damage our industry .
The agreement opens up our service industry , agriculture and manufacturing industries to increased access to the large and growing Korean market .
This is an extremely important vote for the European Union 's new international trade strategy .
In fact , the Free Trade Agreement with South Korea is the first example of a new generation of agreements that aim at lowering trade and non-trade barriers and expanding investment prospects in the partner country .
As soon as it was signed in October 2009 , the agreement was received with fierce criticism from the European motor industry , which felt it was being severely penalised by certain clauses conceded to the Korean partner , duty drawback in particular .
Those concerns have now been partly dissipated , not least due to Parliament 's work on the attached regulation on the safeguard clause annexed to the agreement and to a clarification by the South Korean Government on the amendments to internal legislation on carbon emissions .
Today , therefore , we confirmed the vote of the Committee on International Trade in order to allow the procedure to be completed , given that the Council has already agreed to it .
The Free Trade Agreement between the EU and South Korea will yield immediate , general benefits for many economic sectors in the EU , even though it will highlight the vulnerability of some .
Furthermore , it will establish strict dispute resolution and safeguard procedures and provide monitoring intended to ensure that European companies have an adequate degree of security .
The Korean market obviously offers significant opportunities for EU goods and services , but has remained until now relatively closed off due to high tariffs and costly non-tariff barriers .
The agreement will succeed in quickly removing almost EUR 2 billion worth of EU export duties levied annually on exporters of industrial and agricultural products .
It will generate immediate , substantial savings in several economic sectors .
The benefits will become even more evident in the agricultural and services sectors as Korea is one of the most valuable export markets in the world for EU farmers , with annual sales in excess of EUR 1 billion .
Against this background , all that remains for me is to welcome the adoption of the EU-Korea Agreement in the European Parliament , and I hope that there will be as many such free trade agreements as possible , starting with Canada and the US and ending with the BRIC states .
South Korea is the fourth most important market for the European Union 's exports outside Europe .
However , European exporters faced tariff barriers and regulatory obstacles when trying to take their products into the country .
The current Free Trade Agreement is the most comprehensive one ever negotiated by the Union , lifting charges on almost all products and expanding the range of services covered by it .
It is positive in all senses and enables both parties to make significant gains .
European exports to South Korea are expected to increase by more than 80 % .
I hope that European companies , and those of my country in particular , will be able to take advantage of the opportunities that will emerge from the opening up of this market .
Three years ago , the European Parliament adopted a resolution aiming to improve the European business sector 's access to foreign markets .
We are now being called on to adopt a Free Trade Agreement that , in practice , makes it possible for the European Union 's companies to access the South Korean market - which , as we know , is important for Europe - by increasing exports and so creating jobs .
As the first in a series of trade agreements to be established following the Treaty of Lisbon and the first use of codecision powers , this represents significant innovation as regards bilateral respect for International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) standards , compliance with legislation on public procurement , the transparency of state aid and the implementation of sustainable development .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which represents a set of new opportunities for the European Union - previously closed off due to the tariffs being applied and which defends business interests with the added value of the ' safeguard clause ' ; in other words , the re--imposition of customs duties .
Having voted against it , we view the adoption of this report with concern .
We have many times decried in Parliament the disastrous consequences of the liberalisation of world trade for many economic sectors , particularly in some Member States , such as Portugal , and the regions most dependent on these sectors .
In this case , the following sectors are of particular concern : textiles , automobiles and related components , and electronics .
However , the agreement also covers agricultural products , promoting intensive , environmentally unsustainable production models ; models that are at odds with local production and consumption , which are needed to safeguard food sovereignty and safety .
We are faced with the largest free trade agreement concluded by the European Union in many years , which is now intended to function as a first step in concluding a ' new generation of bilateral new business agreements ' .
The Commission 's analysis of these agreements is always in terms of millions of euros earned by economic groups and multinationals .
It is important to do the same for the number of jobs lost , which the rapporteur assumes is inevitable ; for the number of small and medium-sized enterprises which have gone bankrupt ; or even for the number of tonnes of CO2 emitted because of the increased flows of energy and goods that these agreements involve .
It is interesting to see where the EU 's much-vaunted environment / climate commitments stop in these cases ...
I voted in favour of the report on the safeguard clause that accompanies the Free Trade Agreement with Korea , even though it seems inadequate and its implementation uncertain .
On the other hand , I voted against the agreement itself .
Opening our borders without protection to imports that are in direct competition with our products is suicidal , particularly in the automotive sector .
The explanatory statement in the Sturdy report , which claims that this will have only a minimal effect on employment while at the same time anticipating the large-scale mobilisation of all the European Union 's instruments so as to lessen the impact of job losses , is both extremely inconsistent and extremely cynical .
in writing . - ( DE ) In voting through Mr Sturdy 's report the Members of the European Parliament have sent out a clear signal .
We have today approved by a large majority the most extensive Free Trade Agreement negotiated by the EU to date .
That represents a clear YES to the European economy and a clear YES to Europe as a base for economic activity .
With EUR 1.6 billion of duty saved and a EUR 19 billion increase in the volume of trade , the benefits are obvious .
In particular , the agricultural sector can expect to save EUR 380 million in duty .
This opens up new export opportunities for our domestic farmers .
I voted in favour of the entry into force of the Free Trade Agreement .
in writing . - I warmly welcome the approval of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement .
The deal is expected to more than double bilateral trade in the next 20 years .
Import duties will be eliminated on 98 % of all products and other non-tariff barriers will be removed over the next five years .
The Agreement includes important social , labour and environmental standards , and I hope the implementation of these will be closely monitored .
I would like to add some comments in respect of my own position regarding the process for drafting the Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) between the EU and the Republic of Korea , and the accompanying fears and expectations of the industries affected and other parties .
This dramatically changes the long-standing trade rules between the EU and Korea .
Only in the long term will it be possible to make a realistic assessment of the impact of the agreement .
It is only the findings and calculations made over a longer period of time that will reveal the economic situation of the two parties , the bilateral improvement in the trade balance , or the contribution made to improvements in the social situation .
The total volume and range of mutually-traded products must be monitored and assessed closely and in a coordinated manner , together with their certified quality and verifiable place of origin .
Any direct application of the previously-mentioned safeguard mechanisms based on the bilateral safeguard clauses of the EU-South Korea FTA would be a very sensitive matter , and the result could contrast sharply with the euphoria surrounding the adoption of this agreement .
This Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) is designed to provide EU businesses with a wide variety of economic sectors with extensive and broader access to the South Korean market through a series of unprecedented tariff liberalisations .
Being the first step in a new generation of bilateral FTAs , this agreement contains important innovations such as a chapter on sustainable development which obliges both parties to respect core International Labour Organization standards and creates a peer review based system to deal with complaints for non-compliance , as well as establishing several working groups and monitoring committees to ensure quality implementation and conciliation .
I welcome this FTA because it is the most comprehensive ever negotiated by the European Union .
I reject and regret the establishment of a Free Trade Agreement between the EU and Korea , as I consider that , being one of the major trade agreements signed by the EU in recent years , it deepens the negative consequences of the global liberalisation of trade by responding to the multi-millionaire interests of the big European multinationals without taking into account the serious economic , social , employment and environmental consequences of it being adopted under the terms given .
Therefore , as the rapporteur acknowledges , this agreement will mean the irreversible destruction of numerous jobs for thousands of workers in Europe , in very sensitive economic and strategic sectors such as agriculture or the textile industry .
This agreement is another step backwards in terms of the need to move towards food sovereignty and security , which requires the EU to promote and make a firm commitment to local markets and agricultural products .
This agreement forces European farmers to compete with agricultural imports for which the production methods have not been required to comply with the most basic workers ' rights or to comply with minimum health and quality standards .
I took care to familiarise myself with the agreements , and I consider that many of its clauses are incomplete and superficial .
In this context , there are parts that could be interpreted ambiguously .
For example , the rules on public procurement let the most important questions , associated with competition and abuse , go begging .
It is , of course , essential to increase the process of cooperation with the Far East .
Nevertheless , superficial and imprecise wording leads one to suspect that this work has not been brought to a conclusion .
I voted against .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and its Member States and the Republic of Korea .
Firstly , in order to achieve more effective cooperation between the EU and Korea it is important to remove existing trade barriers , which have hitherto isolated the Korean market .
The entry into force of this agreement will create favourable conditions for economic growth and the creation of new jobs .
A favourable business environment will be created for growing , competitive EU companies to access South Korea , where many new opportunities are opening up for EU trade and services , increasing companies ' volume of trade and reducing export costs .
Given the predicted future development of trade between the EU and South Korea , this will save a lot of money collected from customs duties , particularly in the chemical , industrial and pharmaceutical sectors .
Furthermore , it will ensure fair competition in the car manufacturing , consumer electronics and textile sectors , where Korea has a comparative advantage over the EU .
In addition , liberalising export tariffs will be of great benefit to the agricultural and services sectors .
I welcome the fact that the agreement pays significant attention to sustainable development .
The Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) concluded between the EU-27 , on the one hand , and the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) , on the other , aims to improve European companies ' access to the South Korean market through a series of unprecedented tariff liberalisations .
I voted in favour because the agreement is overall very positive and enables both parties to make significant gains , with European exports to South Korea expected to rise by more than 80 % .
I hope that Portuguese companies too can make use of this window of opportunity , specifically in the agricultural and services sectors , areas in which the advantages are particularly impressive .
In fact , South Korea is currently one of the most profitable export markets in the world for European Union farmers , with annual sales in excess of EUR 1 billion .
The FTA will fully liberalise almost all the EU 's agricultural exports , enabling the agricultural industry to save EUR 380 million ; I cannot fail to welcome this .

in writing . - We seriously regret that MEPs have unquestioningly approved this problematic trade agreement .
The far-reaching EU-Korea FTA sets a dangerous precedent for future EU trade policy , going far beyond mere tariff elimination to include sweeping market access provisions at the expense of social and environmental standards .
Among the more odious provisions of the agreement , the EU succeeded in pushing Korea to massage its rules on CO2 emissions from vehicles in order to allow European car makers to export more big gas-guzzling cars to Korea .
This arm-twisting by the EU , which has undermined the environmental integrity of Korea 's vehicle emissions rules , is nothing short of scandalous .
Worse , the EU is trying to spin this environmental loophole as allowing Europe 's car industry laggards to ' compete fairly ' in the Korean market with smaller , cleaner and more efficient Korean cars .
I voted in favour of this recommendation because I feel it takes a balanced view of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement .
Until now the South Korean market place has remained relatively closed off due to high tariff levies and costly non-tariff barriers , but it will soon be able to offer significant new opportunities for EU goods and services .
The Free Trade Agreement will quickly remove EUR 1.6 billion worth of EU export duties levied annually on EU exporters of industrial and agricultural products , with the comparable figure for South Korean exporters standing at EUR 1.1 billion .
It will be important , however , to carefully monitor the volume of goods coming from that country , so that we can make use of the safeguard clause in the event that it increases excessively and threatens European jobs .
We strongly oppose this Free Trade Agreement with the Republic of Korea because it would present our Korean competitors with undue competitive advantages .
Korea could easily export cars , for instance , and European manufacturers would find themselves at a disadvantage , since 95 % of the cars purchased in Korea are manufactured there .
The removal of tariff barriers would play against the interests of our productive sectors .
The only clause that can be applied to mitigate the disadvantages is the one that can lead to the adoption of emergency measures .
Temporary emergency measures , such as suspending the tariff cuts , can be adopted in the event that serious damage is caused to European producers .
I voted in favour of the conclusion of the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Korea because it will genuinely benefit European businesses .
Indeed , their exports to Korea should increase by almost 40 % , and exports of industrial and agricultural products will be exempted from customs duties amounting to some EUR 1.6 billion per year .
What is more , it will be possible to limit any adverse effects on the European economy thanks to the implementation of a safeguard clause .
Lastly , this agreement crowns the new generation of free trade agreements in that it contains a chapter on sustainable development which commits the two parties to respect ILO conventions , as well as provisions laying down conditions for the genuine involvement of civil society .

in writing . - I want to congratulate the two rapporteurs - Mr Sturdy and Mr Zalba Bidegain - for guiding us through the complicated adoption procedure for the Free Trade Agreement itself , as well as the important safeguard clause .
The EU-South Korea FTA is the most comprehensive and ambitious agreement of its type that the EU has concluded so far .
It covers many areas beneficial to EU producers and consumers , such as the elimination of tariffs on EU exports of industrial and agricultural goods , improved market access for EU services suppliers , the removal of non-tariff barriers in electronics , pharmaceuticals and medical devices , enhanced access to government procurement , protection of intellectual property rights , improved market access for EU car manufacturers and , very importantly and thanks to the safeguard clause , the protection of European car manufacturers against any imbalances that may occur in the sector in the future .
I hope this agreement will be a model for many other FTAs that are in prospect - with Canada , Singapore and MERCOSUR , for example .
At the same time , I congratulate Parliament on the use of its new powers , this being the first FTA to which we are giving our consent under the terms of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because the European Union ( EU ) needs to respond rapidly since Egypt can play a key role , both in efforts for peace in the Middle East and in reshaping mentalities in this region of the world .
In order to achieve this , I consider it essential that the EU review its neighbourhood policy .
We also need to mobilise and review current instruments so as to assist social , political and economic reforms , and strengthen cooperation with civil society organisations , inasmuch as events in Egypt and other countries have highlighted the need for policies and instruments that are more ambitious .
The EU 's efforts should focus on strengthening the rule of law , on good governance , on combating corruption , and on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , so as to ensure the creation of the proper conditions for a stable democracy to emerge .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , which I believe is fair and balanced .
The people of Egypt are seeing their legitimate expectations met .
Mr Mubarak 's departure is an essential condition , but it is not enough to ensure that Egypt embarks on a path towards democracy and human rights .
The transition is being overseen by the army , which has given itself six months to rise to this challenge .
During the 18 days of demonstrations that led to this result , Egypt suffered financial losses , and they are becoming worse each day .
The European Union must offer its support to Egypt so that the achievements of the revolution are not destroyed by a harsh economic and social crisis .
So far the EU has harnessed substantial resources under the European neighbourhood policy with little in the way of results , and this has not done much for the EU 's image .
However , our role remains crucial .
We should not criticise ourselves unfairly .
Revolutions are peculiar in that they always seem inevitable after the fact but impossible before it .
However , self-criticism is justifiable , and we are on the right track , since the Council and the Commission have demonstrated their desire to radically rethink the European neighbourhood policy .
The last few weeks have been historic .
In this sense , after Tunisia , what has just taken place in Egypt is a source of great hope , especially among young people .
The European Union must size up the situation and support the democratic process without prevaricating .
Furthermore , these events should be an incentive for us to overhaul our partnership agreements so that we do not remain on the fringes of the movement .
The European Parliament must strive to ensure that our words and deeds are aligned in a comprehensible and identifiable European policy towards Egypt and the whole of the region .
I would express my solidarity with the Egyptian people , and congratulate them on their courage and determination , especially the younger generations , in their struggle for their legitimate democratic aspirations .
I condemn the violence and disproportionate force used against the protesters .
I deeply regret the high numbers of dead and injured , and extend my condolences to the families of the victims .
There needs to be a dialogue with all the political and social forces that respect democracy , the rule of law , human rights and fundamental freedoms .
These are fundamental principles of the European Union and constitute a common basis for the development of the Euro-Mediterranean area .
I call for an independent enquiry into the incidents that led to deaths , injuries and imprisonments , and for those responsible to be brought to justice .
I call for the immediate and unconditional release of all peaceful protesters , prisoners of conscience and human rights defenders , both Egyptian and those from other countries , as well as journalists and jurists .
I call on the EU to revise its policy to support democracy and human rights , so as to create a mechanism for implementing the human rights clause in all agreements with third countries .
Firstly , I should like to say that I welcome the broad consensus achieved in Parliament on the joint motion for a resolution just adopted .
It is a show of unity regarding the fundamental values that we defend as a Union of peoples and countries , which I would not like to go unmentioned .
Secondly , I hope that the transition between Egypt 's old regime and its future democracy will take place peacefully , sensitively , and with broad-based agreement between the various political , civilian , military and religious players in this important Middle Eastern country .
Thirdly , I hope that this historic moment will serve as a positive response to the people 's true desires : freedom , democracy , and the combating of corruption , unemployment and social exclusion .
Finally , I would restate that the future of this region requires solid , tolerant democracies , which respect minorities and in which the state is pledged to all and not abused by the few .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on the situation in Egypt because I believe that the European Union should express its solidarity with the Egyptian people in their legitimate democratic aspirations and support a rapid transition to true democracy .
In order to achieve this , the EU must support Egypt in tackling the economic and social difficulties that it is experiencing , with a view to a lasting democratisation process that involves all of civil society .
in writing . - ( PT ) In the same way as when the Berlin Wall came down , the international community and press , and even the leading countries ' intelligence and security services , were taken by surprise by events that they were unable to predict , and which call into question many notions and theories on politics in the Middle East , as well as the region 's very stability .
Its strategic importance puts Egypt right at the heart of this change and whatever takes places there will have a decisive influence on the region 's other countries .
It is still far too early to say what direction will be taken by this force that led thousands of people onto the streets demanding the end of regimes that had been in power for decades in their respective countries .
Nevertheless , I believe that the European Union cannot be indifferent to its development or ignore what is happening on its borders .
We must seek to help those who are struggling to establish democracy and the rule of law , and who reject the dichotomy between militarised secular regimes or radical Islamist revolutionaries .
Last week , following a number of days of popular unrest , we witnessed the resignation of President Mubarak of Egypt , who had governed the country for more than 30 years .
I would join the European Union in congratulating the Egyptian people , who fought hard for democratic change .
The EU now has a great task in monitoring the political and social transformations in Egypt , not least the revision of the Constitution , and the holding of free and fair elections without human rights violations .
However , it also has the obligation to support the Egyptian people with funding , so as to promote the necessary economic development .
I agree with this motion for a resolution and hope that the transition from a dictatorial to a democratic regime in Egypt takes place quickly and peacefully , as it is a nation that could play a crucial role as a mediator with a view to establishing lasting peace in the Middle East .
Although they just relate to the circumstances , the words in this motion for a resolution that refer to ' solidarity with the Egyptian people ' , that welcome their ' courage and determination , especially that of the younger generations ' , whilst firmly supporting ' their legitimate democratic aspirations ' are positive .
The majority of the European Parliament , which until now pointed to Egypt as an example of stability in the region , is now obliged to applaud the actions of the Egyptians aimed at breaking from this ' stability ' .
The demonstrations by Egyptians that led to Hosni Mubarak 's resignation are an example of the immense possibilities for democratic victories by groups alienated by capitalism , and by the forces and regimes that serve it .
The Egyptian people have demonstrated with great tenacity and combative unity that it is possible to achieve resignations , and move forward towards winning political and democratic freedoms , even in a country profoundly dominated by imperialist interests , particularly those of the United States , Israel and the United Kingdom .
Until it is finally overthrown , imperialism will never admit defeat or give up .
Despite their fine words , the forces that defend their interests in Parliament are counterattacking , assuming the right to interfere and , hypocritically , wanting to give lessons on democracy through their political ' parties and foundations ' .
After Tunisia , now it is Egypt 's turn , with further protests spreading throughout the Middle East .
Now that the geopolitical map of the Mediterranean and probably the balance of world power are changing , the European Union needs to bring its foreign policy up to date by reviewing and improving its strategy for providing political and financial assistance for democratic transition in countries , including support for the organisation of free elections .
The European Union should take action to support the Egyptian people with every financial assistance instrument as well as initiatives to promote democracy and defend human rights .
Similarly , we need to monitor the situation that has come about in the Mediterranean , particularly on the Italian coast , where 4 000 landings were recorded in just four days .
These figures echo the exodus that took place on a biblical scale in the 1990s , when unseaworthy boats brought hordes of dispossessed people from Albania to the Adriatic coast .
The Italian Government 's declaration of a state of emergency is , in my view , an important and necessary decision , but it is only the first step , because there is a real fear that Egypt and Algeria may be affected after Tunisia .
This is a problem that Italy is not in a position to cope with alone : it is therefore up to Europe as a whole to examine countermeasures , to take direct action , and to provide hope at home for those who are tempted to set off on the wave of feeling that is sweeping through the Maghreb countries .
in writing . - The EU and particularly the European Parliament took too long to respond to and address the warning signs of political and social turmoil in Egypt - leading ultimately to the geopolitical debacle of the last three weeks - and this in relation to a region that is very close to it and despite the fact that stability in the Mediterranean basin is essential for political well-being , economic strength and security in Europe itself .
At this point there is a dire need for strong leadership from the European institutions : leadership that must be coupled with a pragmatic , integrated and holistic approach geared to restoring stability and security to the region .
It is up to the EU to be proactive and aid in Egypt 's political transition to a democratic system of governance .
Following the unprecedented wave of revolutionary movements currently sweeping through the countries of the southern Mediterranean and which , in Tunisia and Egypt , have led to the fall of the government , the European Union must rethink its vision and its relations with those countries .
Although it was a little late in coming , the joint motion for a resolution that we adopted today , Thursday 17 February 2011 , was necessary , because it sends a strong message to the Egyptian people , by showing them that the European Union supports them in their aspirations and is ready to assist their efforts to turn their country into a democracy and to support them in their economic development .
The events in Egypt may be termed historic , as they involve the crumbling of a particular political model that has permeated the whole country for two decades .
This has happened , unfortunately , at the cost of a considerable number of people injured or killed during the demonstrations and clashes for the sake of the freedom they so desired .
Through this motion for a resolution , this House wishes to extend its solidarity to the Egyptian people and to praise the courage and determination of the young protesters , who have certainly played a key role this month .
With President Mubarak 's resignation , Egypt finds itself in the position of a free country , but one that is entirely in need of reconstruction .
The European Parliament 's intention is to be able to come to their aid by appealing , for example , for talks between the political parties to be set up as soon as possible in order to find the best way to combat corruption and violations of the principles of freedom of expression and freedom of information , so as to lay the foundations for the rule of law .
We are also calling on the High Representative to promote the setting-up of a task force , with Parliament 's assistance , to help forge a new reality consistent with the principles of a democratic state .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution , although I cannot quite get the strong smell of hypocrisy , on the part of the EU institutions , out of my nostrils .
The Egyptian issue is very serious , bearing in mind the size of the country and its geographical position .
Cyprus has always maintained good neighbourly relations with Egypt and its potential contribution to developments should not be underestimated .
What is important is that the present crisis should result in the creation of a democratic regime and rule of law and the creation of a hardcore Muslim state that will destabilise the region should be avoided .
Egypt has always stood out in the Middle East for its positive contributions towards resolving problems in the area .
The European Union must continue to develop a genuine foreign policy that is consistent and effective with regard to its partners , and it is crucial that it speak decisively , with one strong voice , reiterating their call for the defence of human rights to become a reality .
Egypt is a key partner for the European Union in the Arab world , and plays an active and crucial role in supporting the Middle East Peace Process and reconciliation between all sections of Palestinian society .
We must therefore express our solidarity with the Egyptian people , support their legitimate democratic aspirations , and condemn all forms of violence as well as the disproportionate force used against protesters , while lamenting the high numbers of dead and injured .
Having reached this point , the Egyptian authorities must put an immediate end to further violence , as it is not a solution for any of the problems expressed by the Egyptian people in their protests The Egyptian authorities and the security forces now have an obligation to ensure the security of all citizens and their property , as well as to protect the cultural heritage .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution in order to show my unconditional support for the peoples who are fighting for their rights , and in this particular case for the Egyptian people in their fight against authoritarianism and the deplorable political , social and economic conditions that they have been subjected to for the last 30 years by the regime led by President Mubarak .
I also support the strong condemnation of violence and the use of force against peaceful protests .
Despite my support , I do not agree with a large proportion of the resolution , as I deplore the European Union 's interfering attitude and its desire to take charge of the transition towards democracy .
I believe that the Egyptian people alone are responsible for defining their future , and that they should be able to do so without the intrusion of external players , who in many cases are only seeking to defend privileges acquired with and through the support of the illegitimate authoritarian regime .
I also deplore the fact that the resolution does not include clear , firm self-criticism of the European Union , as through its current neighbourhood and trade policies it has supported and made possible the Mubarak regime in recent years .
As Khaled Hroub wrote , the Arab spring has shown that freedom and dignity are aspirations shared by all human beings , all nations and all peoples .
We must not forget that the initial requests made by the populations that revolted were social : the people of Egypt , like the people of Tunisia for that matter , are requesting a better distribution of wealth and a future .
The populations are being driven to change their living conditions for economic , social and political reasons .
They want a ' fair ' and democratic State in which there is a fair distribution of wealth and they have access to healthcare and education .
The only way to respond to this is to organise elections , more or less in a hurry , even though the ( former ) opposition is very unorganised .
The people 's political rights must be guaranteed , but so must their economic and social rights .
Therefore , the European response must consist in building a democracy but also economic development , so as to help as many people as possible .
The EU should introduce a policy for genuinely supporting the democratic process and should play a leading role in this matter .
Before expressing solidarity with the Egyptian people , we must understand what gave rise to this process .
According to data in my possession , radical Islamists are behind this destabilisation .
I am decidedly against chaos in the Arab world .
I am opposed to financial aid for any kind of extremism or disorder .
Parliament has been overhasty in announcing financial support for the protesters , many of whom were openly displaying anti-Semitic slogans .
Members ' callous and emotional spasm could be interpreted in the Arab world as an incitement to disorder .
The Iraq war and the dual power situation in Pakistan are enough .
We must be considered and pragmatic when it comes to Islamic countries .
I voted against .
The EU needs to revise its naïve expectations of Arab efforts to achieve democracy .
Amongst all the celebrations of the ' Arab spring ' , Brussels now needs to acknowledge that the changes in Tunisia and Egypt are not only devouring hundreds of millions of euros in local aid payments , but are also becoming apparent to the citizens of Europe in the form of thousands of economic migrants who have already come to Europe .
After all , the people of Tunisia and Egypt took to the streets not just to achieve democracy and freedom of speech , but also and above all because they want greater prosperity .
Such prosperity will not come about overnight , and therefore we can expect a further increase in the stream of economic migrants leaving North Africa .
Some more of these will come to Europe , particularly since there has been a real explosion in the population of Arab countries over the past two to three decades .
The EU will also be judged by whether it continues to respect democratic elections when Islamists come to power .
In Egypt the Muslim Brotherhood , which could potentially win 30 % of the vote , is the only well-organised opposition force ; the EU should have no illusions here , but should instead give serious consideration to how it will deal with an electoral victory by Islamists .
Since the text essentially takes these circumstances into account , I have voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( DE ) The motion for a resolution welcomes the reforms in favour of democracy , the rule of law and social equity in Egypt .
It calls for emergency rule to be lifted , for government to lead responsibly , for corruption to be combated and human rights and basic freedoms to be respected in Egypt , including freedom of conscience , religion and thought , freedom of speech as well as freedom of the press and the media .
The aim is a rapid transition to a peaceful , democratic and pluralistic Egypt .
I therefore voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
Recent events in Egypt and Tunisia have shown that the idea that society in Arab countries is not capable of accepting democracy is erroneous .
Working on this mistaken assumption , the European Union - and almost all other global political forces - placed the stability of the region above the right of the people of the Arab world to decide their own future .
That policy has proved mistaken .
It is to be hoped that the effects of that mistake will not be too serious .
We must , today , take action to mitigate these effects .
Mistakes , unfortunately , have to be put right .
One step resulting from this motion for a resolution should be the freezing of assets belonging to Egyptian leaders responsible for the embezzlement of state funds in Egypt .
Therefore , I appeal to all Member States to do to everything possible to achieve this .
The next few months will be decisive for Egypt .
The European Parliament should give every possible assistance to Egypt 's nascent civil society and democratic institutions .
Support for free and democratic elections should be a priority .
For the next few years , we should be guided by one objective .
Democracy in Egypt is an excellent long-term investment , which will bring dividends both to the citizens of Egypt and to the people of Europe .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the situation in Egypt in order to give full voice to the European Parliament , which - in line with the statements by Baroness Ashton , President Van Rompuy and President Barroso - applauds the courage of the Egyptian people and extends its solidarity to them .
The European Union will now have the task of monitoring the situation and seeking to support political dialogue through the neighbourhood policy , in order to guarantee a transition to democracy and free elections while avoiding a slide into fundamentalism .
Egypt plays a key role in supporting the Middle East peace process , and the army has promised to continue to play this role , respecting the balance of power and the stability of the region , during Egypt 's transition to democracy I also believe that the EU should take action to protect itself against any potential mass exodus from the North African coast , by helping Egypt with all the necessary resources .
I voted for this motion for a resolution and would highlight Parliament 's firm support for reforms aimed at democracy , the rule of law and social justice in Egypt .
I hope that it will be possible to lift the state of emergency , and that good governance , the fight against corruption , and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms will soon become the reality in Egypt ; in particular , freedom of conscience , religion , and thought , freedom of expression , freedom of the press and mass media , freedom of association , women 's rights , the protection of minorities , and the fight against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
Egypt is a country with thousands of years of history , which deserves to open a new , democratic chapter in its history .
I voted for this motion for a resolution , and echo its expression of solidarity with the Egyptian people , who , prompted by legitimate aspirations of democracy , freedom and better living conditions , have opened up a new phase of political transition in Egypt .
I hope that the conditions will now be created for Egypt to make progress with the political , economic and social reforms necessary for social justice , and for the establishment of a robust and tolerant democracy that respects human rights and civil liberties ; I also hope that the country will be guaranteed total support in this .
The wave of protest that has swept through Egypt in recent weeks and resulted in the resignation of President Hosni Mubarak , marks an important stage in the country 's political transition .
By lending my support to the European Parliament 's joint motion for a resolution , I wish to express my solidarity with the Egyptian people and to pay tribute to their courage and their determination in fighting for democracy .
I think it is crucial for the EU and the Member States to actively support a swift transition to democratic governance , in particular by establishing a ' task force ' involving the European Parliament so as to respond to the requests made by Egyptians carrying out that transition .
Furthermore , the events that have taken place in Egypt and Tunisia , and which are still taking place at the moment in other countries , show the need for Europe to review the European neighbourhood policy ( ENP ) so that the assistance that it provides to its partners is strictly dependent on respect for human rights and democratic principles .
The review of this policy must be accompanied by the introduction of a set of political criteria that neighbouring countries should meet in order to obtain a superior status in their relations with the EU .
Today , it has to be said that everyone recognises that Mr Mubarak was a dictator , whereas only a month ago few people , including in the European Parliament , stood up to assert that fact .
It is therefore vital for the European Commission and the Council to call into question the realpolitik they have been practising for years in these parts of the world , both in Egypt and in Tunisia , just as it is crucial to question the ambivalence of the relations that the EU maintained with the dictators who have been ruling these countries for decades .
The financial assets not only of Mr Mubarak and his associates , but also of his family , must be frozen .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because of the exceptionally important part that the recent demonstrations in various Arab countries in North Africa and the Middle East have played in institutional , political and economic change in the area .
The wind of change is again blowing on the groundswell of strong popular demand for freedom and real democracy , as a basis for achieving better living conditions for the whole population .
It is a fundamental objective of the European Union to promote respect for democracy , human rights and civil liberties , and it constitutes a common ground for the development of the Euro-Mediterranean area .
The priority will now be to establish a government chosen directly by the Egyptian people in free elections , which , with international support , can tackle the transition period towards full democracy , when the Coptic Christian communities will no longer be the victims of current events and all religious communities can live in peace and freely profess their faith throughout the country .
in writing . - ( SK ) I voted for the joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Egypt , because , for anyone in public governance who puts the human dignity of the individual above all else , democracy is the best possible form of government , and that applies both in Europe and in Egypt .
However , I could not help thinking of Iran , where the overthrow of the corrupt , autocratic regime of the Shah led to the formation of a repressive Islamic Republic .
I could not help thinking about the elections in Palestine , where the first democratic elections resulted in terrorists and thugs being voted into government .
I also thought of Iraq , where six years after the overthrow of the dictator , members of the oldest Christian communities in the world are being harassed , expelled and killed .
I pray that everything goes well this time .
Egypt is at a crossroads , and I just hope that it chooses the path of freedom for all of its citizens , including the Coptic Christians .
I am voting in favour of this motion for a resolution , drawing attention to the importance of an approach that is simultaneously top-down and horizontal , whilst also involving all actors in developing a Strategy .
Experiences such as this one demonstrate that a coordinated approach is needed in order to use the available funds efficiently .
In this context , I would stress the importance of technical assistance for the implementation of actions and projects .
I would also remind you that this macro-region is of particular significance to Europe , since it can improve neighbourly relations with south-east Europe and encourage political and economic cooperation with the Balkans .
In order to evaluate this strategy 's effectiveness , I agree that its implementation should be analysed ; along with an analysis of the Baltic Sea Strategy , which could point to possible sources and methods of funding for pilot projects of other macro-regional strategies in Europe .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on the implementation of the EU Strategy for the Danube Region .
The Danube region , comprising 14 European countries and 115 million people both within and outside the EU , is an area where enhanced synergies between various EU policies - cohesion , transport , economic , energy , environment , culture , education , agriculture , fisheries , enlargement and neighbourhood policies - can be developed .
Importantly , the strategy should contribute significantly to improving multi-level governance and involvement of partners operating in the Danube region and civil society , and would ensure prosperity , sustainable development , job creation and security in the area .
I agree with the resolution 's call for the Member States and the regions to use the Structural Funds intended for the period 2007 to 2013 , in order to ensure as much support as possible for the implementation of this strategy , particularly by promoting the creation of new jobs and economic growth in the areas worst affected by the economic crisis .
The Danube region is Europe 's gate to the Western Balkans , and therefore I believe that the European Strategy for the Danube Region will not only be conducive to the improvement of neighbourhood relations in Central and South Eastern Europe , but will provide important added value in the EU 's Eastern European policy .
This will be an excellent opportunity for the entire Union to fortify its political and economic cooperation with the Balkans , and to contribute to the expansion and consolidation of European integration in the region .
The Strategy for the Danube Region is a European Union project which third countries bordering the river are also invited to participate in , with the aim of developing the Danube region 's huge economic potential .
The River Danube links 10 European states , six of which are European Union Member States .
All these countries are encouraged to cooperate in areas such as river transport , social protection and development , sustainable economic development , transport and energy infrastructure , environmental protection , tourism , culture and education .
In addition , it identifies common responses to challenges such as improving quality of life , boosting the competitiveness and attractiveness of the localities on the Danube and attracting investment in strategic areas .
I believe that better coordination is required between local and regional authorities and the organisations doing business in the Danube region in order to ensure job creation and security in this area .
I also support the economic and social development of the Danube region as a priority community area and the promotion of deeper regional integration in this zone , which would provide dynamic impetus for a wider European economic area .
I support the implementation of this strategy as the Danube region offers significant socio-economic potential within Europe .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of adopting the Strategy for the Danube Region .
This is the outcome of major efforts made by Romania and Austria right from the outset .
By promoting and supporting this project , which is now taking shape under the Hungarian Presidency , which I would like to congratulate , the Strategy will become a political , economic and financial priority .
Romania will coordinate four priority areas : river transport , tourism , culture and the management of risks produced by extreme phenomena .
At the same time , the new strategy will enable the new concept of territorial cohesion to be implemented , which is included in the Treaty of Lisbon .
The financial resources not used from the instruments featuring in the current EU financial framework can be used as part of the Strategy for the Danube Region for macro-regional projects .
I wish to emphasise the importance of cooperation with other partners , including NGOs and the private sector .
I would like to end by saying that Romania , as a coordinator , will monitor compliance with the obligations assumed by the states bordering the Danube , in accordance with the Action Plan .
in writing . - ( LT ) I welcome the Strategy for the Danube Region adopted by the European Commission and agree with its action plan which devotes most attention to four areas ( connecting the Danube region , protecting the environment , building prosperity and strengthening the Danube region ) , and takes into account the need to improve movement in the Danube region , energy security , social and economic development , cultural exchanges , security and civil protection .
Furthermore , I welcome the fact that this Strategy was prepared following lengthy consultation with stakeholders , including national , regional and local government institutions and representatives of the academic and business community and non-governmental organisations , because this is an important factor for its success .
It is necessary to establish a civil society forum in this region , which would bring together actors in the public and private sectors and would give them the opportunity to participate in the preparation of macro-regional strategies .
It is necessary to enhance the Danube 's cultural environment by promoting cultural dialogue , supporting university exchange programmes and youth projects based on transnational cooperation , fostering sustainable tourism , and protecting the historical and built heritage .
Cooperation in the area of cultural projects plays a vitally important role in supporting cultural dialogue and mutual understanding between the countries of the Danube Region .
It is important for the EU Strategy for the Danube Region to be adopted during the European Council summit in June so that its implementation can be launched as soon as possible .
However , it is just as important to attract the existing European funds for developing this region , amounting to EUR 100 billion , through the European Regional Development Fund , the Cohesion Fund and European Social Fund .
These funds will provide direct support to the strategy 's implementation .
If there are no definite projects which will use these funds , the strategy will become worthless .
The purpose of the Strategy for the Danube Region is to create jobs and boost economic growth in the crisis-hit regions .
Utilising the regions ' specific features could result in a much more efficient use of the Structural Funds and in creating added value at regional level , while the financial resources which have not been used could also provide a source of funding for macro-regional projects .
The adoption of the Strategy for the Danube Region is a natural outcome of the summit on this region which was held in Bucharest at the end of last year when a significant indication was given of the economic importance that the EU attaches to this river .
The River Danube links ten European countries .
The Danube also represents significant socio-economic potential , with over 200 million people living in the surrounding region .
The Danube region is an important focal point for EU cohesion policy programmes .
The Strategy for the Danube Region is focused on three priority areas : connectivity and communications ( including transport , energy , and the information society ) ; environmental protection and prevention of natural disasters ; and boosting the potential for socio-economic development .
In my opinion , the Strategy for the Danube Region should be implemented with a bottom-up approach by facilitating the movement of goods and upgrading infrastructure , and thereby improving general business conditions throughout the region .
The Strategy should not be a reason for setting up new institutions .
Its main purpose should be to strengthen coordination between the individual regional players .
For this reason , the Strategy should not be allocated any specific funds .
It is therefore necessary to insist that the Council-approved principle of the ' 3 NOs ' be applied : in other words , that there is budgetary , legislative and administrative neutrality .
In this respect , the macro-regional strategy should primarily be a tool for boosting the effectiveness of cooperation and making better use of existing resources .
It is also necessary to respond to criticism of the Commission 's intention to encourage shipping on the Danube by improving its navigability .
Critics say that engineering changes to the riverbed will cause damage to bankside vegetation and an overall deterioration of the environment in the surrounding area .
I welcome an integrated approach , which includes drawing up macro-regional strategies applicable to the entire European Union , in order to make regional policy more effective .
The Baltic Sea Strategy already provides a model for coordinating European Union policies and funding in geopolitical territorial units - macro-regions - defined on the basis of specific criteria .
I particularly welcome the adoption of the Strategy for the Danube Region and support the Action Plan that accompanies it , which satisfies the need to improve mobility , energy security , environmental protection , social and economic development , cultural exchanges , security and civil protection in the Danube region .
Like this regional strategy , I call for the Euro-African Atlantic Space also to be created , which would enable the deepening of relations between the south-west coast of Europe , the outermost regions ( OR ) and the neighbouring countries of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) Group of States .
This would also improve cooperation on issues such as transportation , energy security , scientific exchange , the development of tourism , security and the fight against illegal immigration .
in writing . - ( RO ) I think that the EU Strategy for the Danube Region offers a means of coordinating EU policies and that it will need to respond to the challenges facing this region .
We want a proper strategy based on new technologies , innovation and investment , one which , once it has been implemented , will ultimately improve the quality of life for all European citizens in the Danube region .
I voted for the resolution on the implementation of the EU Strategy for the Danube Region because it satisfies the need to improve mobility , energy security , environmental protection , social and economic development , cultural exchanges , security and civil protection in the region .
The Danube region has its own characteristic features and a particular historical importance which , as with the Baltic , justify a specific strategy from the European Union .
At the heart of this macro-region is its principal river , which is a waterway of particular importance in Europe .
Mobility , energy security , environmental protection , social and economic development , cultural exchanges , security and civil protection in the surrounding area can be improved through the intended increase in interdependence .
Given the countries that make up the Danube region , such a strategy can contribute to mending previous splits and prevent old disputes from being reignited , enabling increased European cohesion and opening the doors to future expansions of the Union .
I hope that investment in these regions will neither compromise nor reduce the support given to the outermost regions , whose very nature makes them deserving of special assistance and incentives .
This measure will also help European cohesion .
As a result of the European Council 's request to the Commission for a document to be drawn up setting out the EU Strategy for the Danube Region , on 8 December last year the Commission tabled a draft ' EU Strategy for the Danube Region ' , which included an Action Plan .
This region 's geo-strategic importance in a number of sectors - tourism , transport , the environment , energy , good neighbourliness , territorial cohesion , and so on - meant that Parliament was a key partner in setting out the strategy and must continue to be so throughout its implementation .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this motion for a resolution , in the knowledge that it will bring sustainable development to a region crossed by the European Union 's largest river , where almost 160 million people live , and whose environmental and heritage resources merit classification as a World Heritage Site by the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organisation ( UNESCO ) .
Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union acknowledges territorial cohesion as an objective of the EU .
The joint motion for a resolution , on which Parliament voted today , calls for that principle to apply also in relation to the Danube region .
Fourteen EU Member States are included in that region , including Germany as well as Romania and Bulgaria , and it is primarily for those countries that we call for the effective application of the principle enshrined in Article 3 .
Back in 2008 , Parliament urged the Council and the Council Presidency to draw up a strategic plan that would provide for and implement aid for that region , so as to give it the input it desperately needs to be able to enjoy a strong economy independent of other funding sources .
Three years later , we are again calling for the implementation of a policy committed to achieving smart , sustainable and inclusive growth ; we are calling for the promotion of the most disadvantaged areas , the development of which would result in improved environmental and social conditions .
My vote in favour of the motion for a resolution is merely a small gesture towards a region in need of European aid ; we cannot back away from it now .
in writing . - I welcome this Resolution which : points out that , from an ecological point of view , Central and South-Eastern Europe is one of the richest but at the same time one of the most vulnerable areas of Europe , characterised by an ecosystem of high ecological complexity and great value , therefore requiring a high level of protection ; welcomes the aim of the European Strategy for the Danube Region to create a liveable , sustainable and at the same time developed , prosperous Danube region by managing environmental risks , such as floods and industrial pollution , preserving the quality and quantity of water reserves and ensuring their sustainable use , and preserving biodiversity , landscapes and the quality of air and soils ; stresses that protecting the environment in the Danube basin is an important aspect which should stimulate responsible agricultural and rural development of the region ; calls for improvements to the ecological status of the Danube , and for measures to reduce pollution and to prevent further releases of oil and other toxic and harmful substances ; stresses that a good ecological status of the Danube is a prerequisite for all human activity along the river and recommends that the environmental targets should be considered in particular
With a population of 100 million spread across 14 countries , eight of which are EU Member States , the Danube region covers some of Europe 's richest and poorest regions , and can be defined as a macro-region with heterogeneous economic capacities .
Regional policies ' effectiveness equates to support for development , as well as to the application of strategies that will solve a series of local problems and will stimulate the economic growth of countries whose populations are linked to the river , so as to promote sustainable development .
That being the case , and as this Strategy - which is based on the three interlinked objectives of socioeconomic development , improved transportation , and support for alternative energy sources and environmental protection - and the accompanying Action Plan will contribute to promoting this region and minimising existing regional differences by better coordinating the efforts of the eight Member States in the region , I welcome its adoption .
The Strategy for the Danube Region aims to improve how this river is used as a transport route , which is likely to involve deepening the navigation channels .
In addition , the Strategy also covers the field of energy - which in some circumstances could include an expansion of hydroelectric power .
The Strategy is furthermore intended to be an important stimulating factor for the economy .
We must hope that the EU 's new flagship project that is the Strategy for the Danube Region will subsequently be given some observable and tangible content .
How much life will actually be breathed into this project will certainly depend , amongst other things , on how the tension between the objectives of environmental protection and drawing the Danube region together are resolved and whether the Danube will suffice as the common denominator for the implementation of this mammoth project .
I voted in favour of this project .
in writing . - ( BG ) I was happy to sign and vote in favour of the motion for a resolution of the European Parliament on the implementation of the EU Strategy for the Danube Region .
The Danube Strategy is a chance to unlock the potential for development and cooperation of many European regions in different fields .
I would like to concentrate on two very important aspects for me of the Danube Strategy : the development of tourism ; and maintaining security in the region .
As regards the role of the Danube Strategy in developing tourism , it can contribute to levelling out socio-economic differences in Europe , to create jobs and to encourage cultural dialogue and knowledge of the rich European cultural , ethnic and natural heritage in the region .
The Danube Strategy can help to maintain security in the region surrounding the Danube , and play an important role in controlling migration in and outside the Union and in the fight against crime .
In order to achieve real results , joint operations in sensitive areas such as security and migration are of primary importance .
That is why I welcome the strengthening of regional cooperation in these areas and ensuring a better institutional capacity in this regard .
in writing . - ( DE ) The EU Strategy for the Danube Region and its 115 million inhabitants offers an opportunity to accelerate cross-border cooperation as well as sustainable economic and cultural development in this region .
In June , the Council was supposed to establish a timetable and specific steps for its implementation .
At the heart of the strategy lie improvements to mobility , energy supply , security , protection of the environment and disaster management .
I hope it will bring about a new regional dynamic and that all the interest groups and stakeholders in civil society will be involved , so that the projects supported are used optimally .
We would also wish to see an initiative at macro-regional level for greater safety as regards nuclear policy in the Danube region .
This region in particular still has nuclear power stations that represent a risk to the environment and the population , yet in the environmental impact assessment procedure there is insufficient consultation or no consultation whatsoever with neighbouring states and regions .
There is a need to act here .
I very much welcome the fact that only funds that have already been made available in the Structural Funds ( around EUR 1 billion for the period 2007-2013 ) can be used within the framework of the Strategy for the Danube Region - in other words , that no additional funding is being allocated and that neither new institutions nor new legislation are needed .
I therefore voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
At the vote , today , I endorsed adoption of the joint motion for a resolution on the implementation of the EU Strategy for the Danube Region .
The idea of an integrated approach , including the creation of strategies for macro-regions that are EU-level strategies , is the best example of territorial cooperation , is a good way to increase the effectiveness of regional policy and should be supported and developed .
The Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region , which was adopted in the middle of last year , is a model of the coordination of EU policy and the financing of macro-regions - geopolitical territorial units defined on the basis of particular criteria .
The extensive Danube region , which includes 14 European countries and numbers 115 million people both within and outside the EU , required the creation of a single plan combining economic , environmental , social and cultural aspects ( these are also the four pillars of the strategy ) .
In the context of the need to carry out interim analyses of the implementation of the strategy , analogously to the report on the Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region , the resolution calls on the European Commission to prepare concrete instruments and criteria for evaluating projects based on indicators that allow comparisons to be made .
Parliament has also committed the Commission to analysing the first results and experiences in connection with the implementation of the EU Strategy for the Danube Region and , using the example of the two strategies ( for the Baltic and the Danube ) , to map out possible sources and methods of financing for macro-regional strategies .
In light of the countless considerations on the implementation of this strategy , I personally have decided to vote in favour , particularly in view of the fact that the Danube region , comprising 14 European countries and about 115 million people , is an area where enhanced synergies between various EU policies - cohesion , transport , economic , energy , environment , enlargement and neighbourhood policies - can be developed .
In my view , the strategy should therefore combine economic , environmental , social and cultural elements , since a macro-region such as the Danube would significantly increase the economic wealth of the whole European Union by stimulating employment and promoting integrated development .
I therefore believe that the unifying and integrative character of the strategy expresses the conviction held by all EU Member States that it could represent a significant contribution to overcoming past divisions in Europe and to the overall success and greater efficiency of Europe .
In 2009 , the European Council asked the Commission to draw up a European Strategy for the Danube Region bearing in mind that the Danube region comprises 14 European countries and 115 million people both within and outside the European Union ( EU ) : Germany , Austria , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Slovenia , Hungary , Romania , Bulgaria , Croatia , Serbia , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Montenegro , Moldova and Ukraine , and is therefore an area where enhanced synergies between various EU policies can be developed .
I cannot fail to welcome the adoption of the Strategy for the Danube Region by the European Commission or to support the accompanying Action Plan , which is based on four pillars : linking up the Danube region , protecting the environment , creating prosperity , and strengthening the Danube region .
The strategy satisfies the need to improve mobility , energy security , environmental protection , social and economic development , cultural exchanges , security , and civil protection in the Danube region .
I hope that the European Strategy for the Danube Region will be adopted by the European Council and that progress will be made with applying it as soon as possible .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Danube 's job is to provide the backbone for a macro-regional structure which features Länder , regions and Member States , along with countries which do not belong yet or at all to the EU , all in search of common prosperity .
The Danube is no longer blue , as in the title of Strauss 's waltz and , indeed , environmental protection projects are estimated at EUR 9 billion .
All the investments which will be made in the Danube Basin must be for smart systems based on state-of-the-art scientific and technological developments , with environmental protection included right from the system design phase ( ' green knowledge intelligent systems ' ) .
These investments mean the creation of new opportunities for sustainable economic growth and an improvement in quality of life , thereby developing natural / environmental assets and promoting the EU 's environmental policy , for example , creating an environmental factor management and control system , eliminating the adverse environmental impact in the event of natural disasters , protecting biodiversity , preserving and extending forested areas , parks and green belts in urban areas .
Support from the local authorities and citizens is extremely helpful , highlighting that internal dialogue is working and effective at every level , so that the Danube Strategy is a strategy for the European citizen .
in writing . - With this resolution , the EP : 1. welcomes the approval by the Commission of the Strategy for the Danube Region and supports the Action Plan accompanying it , focused on four pillars ( connecting the Danube region , protecting the environment , building prosperity and strengthening the Danube region ) and meeting the need to improve mobility , energy security , environmental protection , social and economic development , cultural exchange , security and civil protection in the Danube region ; 2. recalls that the European Parliament has been calling for this strategy since 2008 and calls on the Hungarian Presidency of the Council of the European Union and on the European Council to endorse the EU Strategy for the Danube Region by the June European Council and to start its implementation as quickly as possible .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because the Danube region , which comprises 14 European countries and 115 million people , needs to be managed through a joint , collective plan aimed at promoting it economically and culturally , so as to preserve its inestimable artistic and environmental beauty .
The Member States should now take advantage of the Structural Funds available for 2007-2013 in order to ensure maximum support for the strategy .
In particular , there should be a commitment to job creation , especially in areas most affected by the economic crisis .
If the Danube Strategy is underpinned by strong political commitment , it could then contribute to overcoming past divisions in Europe , thus taking a further step towards the true integration of Europeans .
If successful , the plan will have positive repercussions over a much wider geographical area , emphasising the region 's strategic position as Europe 's gateway to the Western Balkans .
The Strategy for the Danube Region is a European Union project in which third countries bordering the river are also invited to participate , with the aim of developing the Danube region 's huge economic potential .
The River Danube links 10 European states , six of which are European Union Member States .
All these countries are encouraged to cooperate in areas such as river transport , social protection and development , sustainable economic development , transport and energy infrastructure , environmental protection , tourism , culture and education .
In addition , it identifies common responses to challenges such as improving the quality of life , boosting the competitiveness and attractiveness of the localities on the Danube and attracting investment in strategic areas .
I believe that better coordination is required between local and regional authorities and the organisations doing business in the Danube region in order to ensure job creation and security in this area .
I also support the economic and social development of the Danube region as a priority community area and the promotion of deeper regional integration in this zone , which would provide dynamic impetus for a wider European economic area .
I support the implementation of this strategy as the Danube region offers significant socio-economic potential within Europe .
The Danube region comprises 14 European Union ( EU ) Member States and a total of 115 million people .
It is a very heterogeneous region where there is a great deal of mobility and a high level of interconnectivity .
This demonstrates that it is a suitable area for strengthening synergies between several policies , such as cohesion , transport , economic , energy , environmental , and even the enlargement and neighbourhood policy .
It is a rich region with strong economic capacities but that requires coordinated efforts in order for it to develop in a cohesive , integrated and sustainable way .
An integrated and coordinated strategy with a view to cooperation between the Member States and their regions seems a suitable way to achieve the goal of territorial cohesion .
In order to achieve that , it seems essential to me to involve all institutional and civil actors , specifically through participation in local and regional entities .
Implementing the strategy must also involve more efficient use of the Structural Funds and , above all , the possibility of putting financial resources not used in macro-regional projects to use .
I am voting for this motion for a resolution on the Danube and hope that similar strategies will be developed for other European macro-regions .
I am voting for this motion for a resolution because it deals with issues relating to the stability of legislation regulating the field of business , with the Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev cases , with the way that the Russian authorities combat terrorism , particularly in the North Caucasus , and with the human rights situation .
This resolution is important because it places an emphasis on the Partnership for Modernisation .
I am therefore voting for this resolution because I believe that the modernisation of Russian society involves implementing the rule of law .
I voted for this motion for a resolution because I advocate that full respect for human rights and the rule of law by the Russia Federation will improve its image and credibility in the world , in particular as regards its relations with the European Union .
It is important for the Russian Federation to respect the international commitments it has made , not least in the context of the Council of Europe , where it has committed to respect fully European standards regarding democracy , human rights , fundamental rights and the rule of law .
Although I share the concerns expressed by my fellow Members , I still cannot fail to note the enormous progress already made by Russia towards democracy and the rule of law .
Any impartial observer is bound to acknowledge that respect for human rights and individual freedoms has significantly improved in the present Russian State compared with the Soviet regime that preceded it ; a regime that still continues to shock us the more we find out about it .
While we are discussing the rule of law in Russia , I cannot fail to express my regret and to condemn vehemently those who are putting it at risk by attacking , wounding and killing innocent people in order to follow radical terrorist agendas .
I therefore express my sincerest condolences to the victims .
I hope that Russia will continue to distance itself from its brutal Soviet heritage , will increasingly converge with the European Union on respect for the rights , freedoms and guarantees of its citizens , and will take on its role as the European power that Peter the Great dreamt of .
Russia is an important partner of the European Union and should contribute to the establishment of sustainable cooperation based on democracy and the rule of law .
It is therefore important that there be no doubt regarding the Russian authorities ' defence of the rule of law .
Therefore , the Russian judicial bodies and institutions responsible for applying the law must exercise their obligations in a way that is effective , impartial and independent .
I condemn the attack on Domodedovo Airport and offer my condolences to the families of the victims .
I would stress the need for the Russian authorities to respond to this attack using a legal and moderate means , and to allow the Russian judicial system to operate freely and independently to try and sentence those responsible for the attack .
in writing . - ( LV ) With this motion for a resolution , Members wish to draw attention to the disquieting events in Russia , which , as a member of the Council of Europe , has undertaken to comply fully with European standards of democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
In truth , these standards are being ignored and crudely infringed .
A glaring example of this is the trial of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev , the former owners of Yukos .
This case has descended to the level of farce , and does not give the impression that there is one law and one system of justice for all in Russia .
Whereas efforts are being made to convict the opponents of Russia 's Prime Minister , Vladimir Putin , nothing is being done to solve the murders of Anna Politkovskaya and other journalists who have been killed .
The right to hold meetings is being withheld from those who think differently in Russia , and defiance of the ban can lead to imprisonment .
All of this is unacceptable .
We want Russia to be a democratic , economically developed and stable country that can be a reliable partner to its neighbours , the European Union and NATO countries .
Unfortunately , Russia 's leading politicians carry on a wholly different policy , which increasingly alienates Russia from other democracies .
If Russia wishes to become a member of the World Trade Organisation , its leading politicians must greatly change their attitude towards democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
in writing . - ( LV ) I supported the European Parliament motion for a resolution on the rule of law in Russia , drawing attention to infringements of human rights and fundamental rights , as well as to the threat existing in that country to the development of democracy .
I am pleased that Parliament , in adopting this resolution , recognises in principle that the rule of law and democracy do not exist in Russia .
Nevertheless , I should like to stress that the European Union policy towards Russia will be successful only when Member States pursue a common foreign policy .
Recent events , when France concluded an agreement to sell Mistral class warships to Russia , are evidence that Europe 's common foreign and security policy is a mere fiction .
The interests of France were more important than a common foreign policy .
The agreement was concluded despite objections by the Baltic States and comments by Russian generals about the potential of these ships , which was lacking in the war with Georgia .
Transactions of this sort undermine trust between European countries and testify to the success of Russia 's ' divide and rule ' policy .
The European Union can promote the rule of law in Russia only if the Member States place the common interests of all European countries above their own individual interests .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which condemns the fact that , in Russia , independent journalists , civil society activists , lawyers and human rights defenders have often been the victims of threats and acts of violence and in addition that the anti-extremist legislation and the new provisions of the law on the Federal Security Service ( FSB ) are unclear and , as a result , are often used to harass NGOs , religious minorities and media organisations .
I have read through the motion for a resolution on the rule of law in Russia .
I have three short comments .
First and foremost , I think that it is right that the European Parliament has used every opportunity to open up the issues of human rights and the quality of the rule of law .
We should do this more often , and with more countries .
My second comment concerns the format .
Our comments must be businesslike .
That means not just preaching to others in a paternalistic way , but also offering a helping hand .
Frankly , I have no idea how the critics of the Yukos oligarchs ' trial can be so certain that political pressure is being put on the trial process .
Attacking a verdict , and ignoring evidence that has been presented on tax evasion and other offences is surely a form of political pressure .
Why do critics automatically assume that the evidence has been falsified ?
I have numerous other similar examples .
Russia has two main problems associated with the rule of law .
The first is the fact that the country is undergoing a transformation of its law and legal culture .
That takes time and will not happen through the good will of the Kremlin alone .
The second problem is the unstable security situation and the lack of trust in the good intentions of some advisors .
How will the European Union help Russia in the fight against terrorism and the extradition of terrorism suspects who have found a safe haven in EU countries ?
How will the EU act against the violation of the political rights of so-called ' non-citizens ' in EU countries ?
It is not enough just to hand out advice ; we need to offer help as well .
I am convinced that Russia remains one of the European Union 's most important partners in maintaining world security and stability , and that EU-Russia cooperation must therefore be stepped up .
We must strengthen our commitment to working with Russia to respond to shared challenges in key areas , such as combating terrorism , energy policy and world economic governance .
The EU and Russia need to intensify negotiations on a new partnership and cooperation agreement that is comprehensive and binding , and which covers the areas of democracy , the rule of law , and respect for human and fundamental rights .
It is necessary to develop joint initiatives with the Russian Government aimed at enhancing world security and stability and , in particular , on common neighbours , in order to achieve a peaceful resolution of the conflicts in Nagorno-Karabakh , in Transnistria and in Georgia , in line with international law .
The rule of law is indeed under threat in Russia .
One could paraphrase Marie Mendras by saying that we are witnessing the catching up of history being thwarted .
Ever since the end of the Yeltsin era , we have witnessed a policy that consists in weakening all the public institutions .
Things may appear legal on the surface , but respect for the law has been suffocated by too many rules and regulations .
The Khodorkovsky and Lebedev trials are a typical example : the facade of the law is being maintained , but the law itself is being used for purposes other than its primary function .
Economic growth will not allow for the rule of law .
The economy for the economy 's sake leads to abuses , exploitation and partisan interests .
Wealth must make for freedom , encourage collective progress and enable every individual to flourish .
The market economy cannot be virtuous without a fair State , by which I mean a State that fully assumes its normal tasks in a fair and just way ; a State that can guarantee that its citizens have impartial access to all fundamental rights such as access to education , healthcare , justice , culture , administration and vital basic needs .
The joint motion for a resolution on Russia covers some important points that are existential issues for any democracy : independent courts , fast and fair trials and the effective prosecution of criminal acts .
To this extent I am in favour of the text when it talks of the need to remedy existing shortcomings in the Russian legal and justice system .
The condemnation of the terrorist attacks on Domodedovo airport is also important and demonstrates the EU 's solidarity with this important partner state .
However , the tone adopted in respect of certain pending or current court proceedings ( for example , in the Khodorkovsky case ) is wrong and undiplomatic .
If we talk of ' politically motivated trials ' or ' serious judicial questions ' then we are adopting the language of the Russian prime minister 's political opponents .
This becomes evident when calls are made for ' an independent judicial review ' of the verdicts .
It insinuates - based on no knowledge or prior investigation - that the whole of Russian justice is not independent and hands down ' wrong ' verdicts .
These ' judgments ' from outside without knowing the true facts are not meaningful , and moreover represent interference in internal affairs .
For this reason I abstained from voting .
In view of the talks between the European Union and Russia on the subject of human rights , and as the EU is still committed to strengthening and further developing EU-Russia relations , with respect for democratic principles and fundamental rights , I believe that Russia remains an important partner for the EU , in line with greater development of cooperation between the countries .
I voted in favour of the motion since I believe that intensifying the negotiations and the new partnership agreements with Russia will reinvigorate the Member States ' broad agreement in favour of democracy and the proper operation of the justice system .
I would also emphasise the fact that fully respecting human rights and the rule of law would improve Russia 's image and credibility on the world stage , particularly as regards its relationship with the European Union , by virtue of a strategic partnership .
Respect for European standards regarding democracy , human rights , fundamental rights and the rule of law is fundamental for all European peoples .
Respect for the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights must be fundamental to a policy of people being good neighbours and moving closer together .
I agree with this motion for a resolution 's call for the Russian State to apply measures to remedy violations in individual cases , including ensuring effective investigations and holding perpetrators accountable , as well as to adopt general measures to implement any judgments that involve political and legal changes , so as to prevent human rights violations from being repeated .
I should like the Council and Commission to offer Russia concrete assistance and specialised knowledge so as to increase the independence of the legal system and of the services responsible for applying the law , in order to improve the capacity of the country 's legal system for resisting political and economic pressure .
In particular , I should like to see the creation of a programme of judicial assistance that would contribute to the education and training of magistrates , public prosecutors and the judiciary , not least as regards human rights .
in writing . - With this resolution the EP : 1. reaffirms its belief that Russia remains an important partner for the European Union in building sustainable cooperation based on democracy and rule of law ; 2. strongly condemns the terrorist attack at Moscow 's Domodedovo airport and expresses its condolences to the families of the victims and its solidarity with those wounded in the attack ; underlines the need for the Russian authorities to respond to this attack in a lawful and measured way and to allow the Russian judicial system to work freely and independently to prosecute and convict those responsible for the attack ; 3. expresses concern over reports of politically motivated trials , unfair procedures and failures to investigate serious crimes such as killings , harassment and other acts of violence ; urges the Russian judicial and law enforcement authorities to carry out their duties in an effective , impartial and independent manner in order to bring perpetrators to justice .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because I believe it can strengthen the existing partnership and cooperation agreement with Russia .
Eighty per cent of foreign investment in Russia comes from Europe , and therefore strengthening this partnership would help Europe to implement a more competitive policy in all spheres of activity .
In terms of energy , over 45 % of our gas and 29.9 % of our oil is imported from Russia ; without it , kitchens and heating systems across half of Europe would stop working .
Given our shared interests in the economic , energy and security areas , a new partnership agreement with the Kremlin would guarantee Europe 's economy greater stability following the recent financial crisis .
Moreover , this resolution encourages Russia , as a member of the Council of Europe , to commit itself to complying fully with European standards on democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
Adopting a joint , consistent policy for promoting human rights would be a step forwards in asserting human rights worldwide .
It is strange how , on the subject of Russia , the European Parliament has lapsed either into indulgence or into what I would call an ' anti-Russia ' sentiment , motivated in the past by anti-sovietism and hence by dyed-in-the-wool anti-communism .
It is time to realise that the Berlin Wall fell more than 20 years ago and that the current regime no longer bears any relation to its predecessors .
Nevertheless , this is a regime that has nothing to do the rule of law and which constantly flouts the most basic human rights .
To my mind , there is no reason why Russia should be treated any differently from the other countries in the world .
At the very least , the attacks on freedom of expression and the poor administration of the judicial system there must be denounced .
This resolution is too indulgent towards the Russian Government , and particularly towards Dmitry Medvedev .
I therefore chose to abstain .
in writing . - ( SK ) I supported the motion for a resolution on the rule of law in Russia , although I think that this is not the last such resolution to be discussed and voted on in the European Parliament in relation to Russia .
It fills me with hope , however , that Parliament has found the political will to address critical words to a country on which Europe is largely dependent for the supply of raw materials .
Europe and Russia are destined to cooperate with each other - and not just in the field of manufacturing .
We are two facets of a single civilization ; our histories are two interpretations of the same set of values .
If this civilization is to survive , these two views of universal values have to converge .
I would be happy if our critical resolution was understood by the Russians as an effort to find common ground , and as a warning that some of the specific steps and approaches of the state authority are in sharp conflict with this value base .
I am voting for this motion for a resolution , the main objective of which is to reconcile the World Bank 's investments relating to energy with the development goals .
I agree that energy strategy should tackle and facilitate the transition to environmentally sustainable energy development , and that the World Bank should adopt an approach to private sector development that provides the greatest benefit to the poor whilst simultaneously combating climate change .
I find it regrettable that lending for fossil fuels continues to play a dominant role , despite the strategic objective being gradually to abolish financing for this type of project .
I also note with concern that there is still little oversight of the majority of multilateral financing that is awarded through financial intermediaries : these should be pursuing clear development objectives .
I call on the World Bank to reorient its current strategy from a large-scale , export-oriented energy model to small-scale , decentralised energy projects that respond more clearly to basic needs in rural areas .
Finally , I would express my total agreement with the need for the World Bank clearly to identify and publicly disclose the development benefits before financing is committed .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because the energy strategy should specifically address how access to energy can help lift people out of poverty , while facilitating the shift to an environmentally sustainable energy development path .
The World Bank should pursue an approach to private-sector development that delivers maximum benefit to the poor while tackling climate change .
Environmental and social factors , at both national and regional levels , must be taken into account in a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis of energy options .
It should be noted that fossil-fuel lending continues to play a dominant role in the World Bank 's overall energy portfolio , despite recent increases in lending for renewable and energy efficiency initiatives .
Fossil-fuel investments are also taking place through financial intermediaries , and this is not being accounted for by the Bank in its annual energy sector figures .
Also of concern is the fact that the Bank is continuing to make significant investment in coal-fired power plants , locking developing countries into coal-based energy for decades to come .
I voted against the report on the World Bank energy strategy for developing countries , mainly because a very negative amendment by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) was adopted , which alters an important point in the initial motion for a resolution .
To be precise , this change removes from the motion for a resolution the concern that the World Bank will include nuclear energy as a ' clean form ' of energy .
Thus , the motion for a resolution accepts the use of nuclear energy as a solution for reducing carbon emissions .
To conclude , therefore , not only is nuclear energy accepted ; the proposal is to promote it as a ' clean ' form of energy to combat climate change and reduce carbon emissions .
However , promoting nuclear energy directly conflicts with the demand for a world free of nuclear energy , be it for military or for ' peaceful ' purposes .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on the World Bank 's energy strategy because I think that it should support the transition to a route toward energy development that is sustainable in environmental terms in the least developed countries , whilst simultaneously contributing to European Union objectives regarding climate change and combating poverty .
According to the data in the motion for a resolution , 1.5 billion people are currently without access to electricity , four out of five of whom live in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia , and nearly 2.4 billion people still use traditional biomass fuels for cooking and heating , which is an unsustainable use of natural resources .
For this very reason it is crucial that the World Bank adopt a new strategy for financing energy projects , committing to providing efficient , accessible and clean energy as a means of reducing poverty and fostering economic growth .
In this context , when the World Bank finalises its energy strategy , given that it has previously committed to making half of its energy investments ' low-carbon ' , Parliament calls for clean energy projects to be prioritised and , especially , for a clear commitment to renewable energy , as a means of promoting sustainable development in underprivileged regions .
This motion for a resolution of the European Parliament , deals with the World Bank 's energy strategy for developing countries .
We can understand the importance of this subject if we consider that more than 1.5 billion people currently do not have access to electricity , which is a fundamental right of all citizens .
At a time when the World Bank is finalising its new energy strategy , a detailed approach becomes even more relevant .
In truth , and despite this subject having been debated more than 20 years ago , the results are in no way satisfactory .
We remain too dependent on fossil fuels instead of exploring alternative energy sources .
We are speeding up climate change and harming peoples who live in extreme poverty .
I therefore believe that the World Bank must review its policy of exploiting energy derived from fossil fuels - making aid to this sector more transparent - and encourage green energy so as to reduce , not just atmospheric pollution , but , above all , the dependence of developing countries on outside energy sources .
in writing . - I voted for the resolution , which welcomes the World Bank 's energy strategy and recalls that it should specifically address how access to energy can help lift people out of poverty , while facilitating the shift to an environmentally sustainable energy development path ; urges the World Bank to pursue an approach to private-sector development that delivers maximum benefit to the poor while tackling climate change ; and underlines that environmental and social factors , at both national and local community levels , must be taken into account in a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis of energy options .
Nobody doubts that access to modern energy services is a prerequisite for poverty eradication and economic development , or that in order to achieve this it is necessary that energy services be reliable , affordable , especially for the poor , and evenly distributed , so as to bridge the gap between urban and rural areas .
Well into the 21st century , some 1.5 billion people remain without access to electricity , four out of five of whom live in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia , mainly in rural areas , and nearly 2.4 billion people still use traditional biomass fuels for cooking and heating , causing severe health problems and the death of 1.9 million people per year from indoor pollution , as well as environmental damage resulting from unsustainable use of natural resources .
The World Bank should therefore prioritise small-scale , local access to energy , particularly in the least developed countries in Africa and Asia .
Around 1.5 million people worldwide , mainly in the developing countries of Africa and east Asia , still have no access to electricity .
In rural areas in particular it may be observed that the population for this reason frequently makes recourse to traditional fuels made from biomass , such as charcoal ovens .
However , it must be borne in mind that this presents a not inconsiderable risk to health .
The World Bank , which has undertaken to promote sustainable energy , should be called on to give priority to such regional projects rather than large-scale commercial projects .
This would firstly enable sustainable ecological energy production to be promoted , and secondly would also allow regional requirements to be taken into account .
To achieve both ecological and economic sustainability it would be desirable to give priority to small , alternative , local energy projects , since this could prevent having to buy in energy that is often expensive .
I am abstaining because I think we should wait to find out the strategy of the World Bank , which is expected to be announced midway through the year .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the World Bank 's energy strategy for developing countries .
Energy needs in developing countries are growing and it is therefore necessary to take into account energy efficiency and renewable sources of energy .
Energy services must be reliable , affordable and evenly distributed throughout society in order to combat poverty effectively and bridge the gap between urban and rural areas .
Given the needs of developing countries , the World Bank must diversify the energy portfolio and increase lending for renewable and energy efficiency initiatives .
I agree with the proposal that the funding allocated must above all promote a combination of energy efficiency and renewable energy .
Priority must be given to small-scale decentralised energy projects and to ensuring energy access for the populations of developing countries .
Attention is drawn to the fact that the World Bank must attach greater importance to the threat of biofuels to food supply .
Furthermore , there must be more stringent monitoring and control of the activities of financial intermediaries .
I share the concerns and agree with the suggestions set out by the European Parliament in this motion for a resolution on the World Bank 's energy strategy , for which I voted .
Given that access to modern energy services is a prerequisite for poverty eradication and economic development , and that the right to energy implies that energy services will be reliable , affordable and evenly distributed , so as to bridge the gap between urban and rural areas , it seems crucial to me to promote an investment policy based on the sustainable use of natural resources .
I therefore agree with the European Parliament 's recommendations to the World Bank in this area .
in writing . - We have finally voted in favour of the proposed resolution because Amendments 2 , 3 , and 4 , which intended to remove the phrase ' low carbon ' , have been adopted .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because access to modern energy services is a prerequisite for poverty eradication and economic development .
The right to energy means that energy services must be reliable , affordable , especially for the poor , and evenly distributed so as to bridge the gap between urban and rural areas .
The World Bank 's energy strategy takes that approach and must make a growing commitment to lifting people out of poverty , while facilitating the shift to an environmentally sustainable energy development path .
The World Bank should therefore pursue an approach to private-sector development that delivers maximum benefit to the poor while tackling climate change .
in writing . - ( SV ) I voted in favour of the report , which is a good one overall .
However , I do not support the view that nuclear power is a clean energy source .
I am voting for this motion for a resolution because the current crisis underlines concerns that the present mechanisms will not allow the crisis to be overcome ; , as the lack of coherence in achieving the five major objectives , not least as regards employment rates , is making this worse .
The Annual Growth Survey and the framework of the European Semester constitute key instruments , but they should not replace nor diminish the broad economic and employment policy guidelines .
We should commit to a series of measures that give visibility to the body of economic measures , which include a system of Eurobonds , a highly liquid public bond market , lower interest rates , and the creation of a European financial transactions tax to curb speculation .
We should not compromise the development or creation of jobs , so I propose a stronger role for the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development in supporting investments in infrastructure , technologies , and small and medium-sized enterprises .
I would also stress that the strategy for growth and jobs cannot be threatened by the current short-term vision of budgetary consolidation : due consideration must be given to public investment in its objectives .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution on the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The European Parliament expresses its conviction that the EU2020 Strategy should help Europe recover from the crisis and come out stronger , through job creation and smart , sustainable and inclusive growth based on five EU headline targets as regards promoting employment , improving the conditions for innovation , research and development , meeting our climate change and energy objectives , improving education levels and promoting social inclusion , in particular through the reduction of poverty .
I believe that the Europe 2020 actions are of crucial importance to the future prospects of all European citizens , delivering sustainable jobs , long-term economic growth and social progress , but I share the fears set out in the motion for a resolution that the Europe 2020 Strategy will not be able to deliver on its promises due to its weak governance structure .
It is important to note that for the Europe 2020 Strategy to be implemented successfully , we must close the gap between its declared ambitions , the resources available and the methodology used and must carry out reforms and ensure very substantial and early public and private investments in a wide range of projects .
The European Commission and the Council must make a major contribution here .
At the same time Member States should be encouraged to give the highest priority to tackling unemployment in their National Reform Programmes .
The Europe 2020 Strategy will only be implemented successfully if the EU and the Member States combine efforts .
The economic and financial crisis that we are currently experiencing has caused significant job losses in Europe .
The priority for the Europe 2020 Strategy and the European Employment Strategy is to create more and better jobs in Europe .
The aim is to transform Europe into a smart , sustainable and inclusive economy , whilst providing high levels of employment , productivity and social cohesion .
Europe must take collective action to overcome the current situation .
This motion for a resolution is a step in this direction , calling on the Commission and the Council , along with the European Parliament , to involve national parliaments , social partners and regional and local authorities in policies designed to restore jobs and growth .
To achieve this , the Community method needs to be reinforced and the European Semester adopted into the legislative governance package .
We welcome the emphasis on the roles of small and medium-sized enterprises , and of the Single Market in job creation .
Finally , we would stress the role attributed to the ' agenda for new skills and jobs ' in achieving these goals .
That is why I am voting for this resolution .
Before the European Council in March and the presentation by the Member States of their national targets in April , we gave our verdict on the EU 2020 Strategy .
That strategy is only a paper strategy at the moment , and the more time that goes by , the more likely it is that the failure of the Lisbon Strategy will be repeated .
That is why we must react : we must say ' yes ' to ambitious targets , but not without the budgetary resources to achieve them .
Targets must go hand in hand with real budgetary commitments , or else how can we produce anything other than a paper strategy ?
Whether it be during the negotiations on the next multiannual financial framework or in the debate on EU own resources , Parliament will have to make itself heard to ensure that the commendable targets of the EU 2020 Strategy are matched by appropriate funding options .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because the European Union Member States should be encouraged to give the highest priority to tackling unemployment and preventing long-term exclusion from the labour market in their national programmes and plans .
This should be combined with measures to ensure more job creation , better jobs and high levels of high quality employment in the medium and longer term .
I would like to stress that the Member States should pay more attention to tackling child poverty through appropriate measures so that children are not restricted in their personal development and are an equal and full part of society when entering professional life .
I welcome the flagships aimed at implementing the objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy , such as ' An industrial policy for the globalisation era ' , ' An agenda for new skills and jobs ' , the ' European platform against poverty and social exclusion ' and other initiatives .
I agree with the proposals on the ' European platform against poverty and social exclusion ' , but I would encourage more specific action to be taken to ensure social inclusion .
It is also very important to draw up a specific programme aimed at promoting decent work , guaranteeing workers ' rights throughout Europe and improving working conditions , combating inequality , discrimination and in-work poverty .
The Europe 2020 Strategy aims to ensure emergence from the crisis and to prepare the economy of the European Union for the next decade .
It aims to promote knowledge , innovation , education and the digital society ; to make our manufacturing infrastructure more resource-efficient , whilst reinforcing competitiveness ; and to increase the rate of involvement in the labour market and the acquisition of qualifications , whilst combating poverty .
In particular , I would stress the ' Innovation Union ' initiative , which addresses major social challenges like energy and food security , climate change , health , and the ageing population .
However , there is a need to enhance , stimulate and secure the financing of research , innovation and development in the EU .
I call for increased funding for crucial instruments for research , innovation and deployment that have already been adopted , such as the Strategic Energy Technology Plan ( SET-Plan ) .
I would also emphasise the important contribution of the Research Framework Programme , and the contribution the Structural Funds are making in stimulating research , development and innovation at national and regional level .
I voted against the motion for a resolution on the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The Europe 2020 Strategy follows on from the failed Lisbon Strategy and cannot provide answers to questions such as how we are to recover from the crisis and create new jobs .
Applying this strategy - and hence the erroneous policies that resulted in the crisis - to the letter will undermine the rights of European workers still further .
The socio-economic governance of the EU needs an alternative policy that will reject any ' Competitiveness Pact ' and help to bring about real economic convergence between the Member States .
The European Union is in dire need of strategies that will promote values such as solidarity , social justice , gender equality and an honest effort to combat poverty .
Together with other MEPs on the left of the House , we tabled an alternative motion for a resolution describing the measures and mechanisms needed for a Europe which targets economically , socially and environmentally viable growth with full employment and rights for its workers .
in writing . - ( RO ) I think that the inclusion on the European Union 's list of objectives of economic growth , the social objective and the fight against poverty is also important for Europe because achieving them will help safeguard the European Union 's economic independence .
The major challenges facing the EU and its Member States in terms of employment and unemployment should be reflected in and integrated into the political framework of the EU employment guidelines .
At a time when the economic governance package , which aims to shore up the finances of the Member States and the Union as a whole , is under discussion , I cannot fail to underline the importance of its relationship with the Europe 2020 Strategy .
I see the strategy 's contribution to improving the consolidation of national and Union finances , innovation , and , consequently , competitiveness and growth as particularly important .
This motion for a resolution , which is in line with some proposals on economic governance currently under discussion , sets out basic principles to be followed in future discussions , and establishes key ideas to take into account .
In particular , I am referring to the need to follow a Community method that leads to increased unity between Member States , to the inclusion of a European Semester that enables improved coordination between national policies , and to the need for policies that encourage European competitiveness , such as support for innovation , for small and medium-sized enterprises and for the implementation of the Single Market .
The world in general and the European Union in particular have been experiencing difficult times , of which the current economic and financial crisis is an example .
With the goal of bringing about the end of this situation , on 17 June 2010 the European Council adopted the Europe 2020 Strategy for employment and smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
It is a growth strategy for the next decade that boosts the European economy to achieve high standards of employment , productivity and social cohesion .
The goals to be achieved by 2020 are ambitious : in terms of education , reducing school drop-out rates to below 10 % and increasing the percentage of 30- to 34-year-olds who are graduates to 40 % ; in social terms , pulling 20 million people out of the risk of poverty and social exclusion .
The intention is also to invest 3 % of gross domestic product in scientific research .
I welcome the choice for Europe 2020 of flagship initiatives aimed at education , employment , young people , innovation , the digital agenda , the environment , globalisation , resource use , and combating exclusion , which will encourage growth and competitiveness .
I also welcome the adoption of this strategy and call on the institutions of the European Union and the governments of the Member States to spare no efforts to achieve the goals set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
Reality is demonstrating that it is not enough to make statements of intent , however modest in social terms , in order for those goals to be achieved .
This is particularly true when the proposed policies follow exactly the same course as those adopted before now , which are the root cause of the social crisis we are experiencing .
That is the case with the Europe 2020 Strategy , with which they are now associating so--alled ' economic governance ' .
The leap they are attempting to make in this so-called economic governance with the creation of the ' European Semester ' - the deepening of the penalties relating to compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact , of the economic policy guidelines , and of any indicators that may be adopted - is not accompanied by a significant increase in the Community budget , which is always a crucial condition for moving towards economic and social cohesion , and for preventing the worsening of the current divergences .
What they are intending is to create a veritable straightjacket for the Member States so that they will implement so-called austerity measures , which involves the deepening of the neoliberal agenda with all its serious antisocial consequences .
If there are any doubts about this , take a look at the Franco-German project on the so-called Pact for Competitiveness , which aims to raise the retirement age , put collective bargaining at risk , and deliver yet another blow to labour and social rights , all so as to ensure increased earnings for economic and financial interest groups .
We therefore voted against this motion for a resolution .
in writing . - ( DE ) Amendment 2 is intended to point out that the Commission needs to give greater consideration to the role of mobility and transport in this strategy .
In the transport sector we need not only to contribute to CO2 reductions , but also to maintain Europe as a centre of production and development .
Among other things , this includes increased investment in research and effective co-modality in the creation of trans-European networks .
in writing . - ( DE ) In the Europe 2020 Strategy the European Union declared employment policy to be a key issue .
It is important that all the Member States pursue the declared objectives both jointly and individually , so that a high level of employment and productivity can be achieved in Europe .
These aims can only be achieved if we all act together in areas such as combating structural unemployment , developing a skilled workforce , promoting job quality and improving the performance of education systems .
I therefore support the motion for a resolution , which sets out economic and employment policy guidelines for the Member States .
' Europe 2020 ' is nothing less than a project comprising all the measures that the European Union must adopt to bring down by at least 20 million the number of people living in or at risk of poverty .
Although ambitious , that target is the guiding principle behind the European Union 's economic activity .
That , of course , includes responsible activity aimed at changing the economic strategy itself , as far as the Member States are concerned , but even before that it is necessary for all the European institutions to work together towards a single goal .
With the motion for a resolution on the Europe 2020 Strategy , Parliament has today adopted a series of proposals for the Council , so that together we can achieve the final target without crushing the hopes of every European citizen .
These requirements pertain to the need to work with the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development in drawing up a package of measures in the fields of energy , food security , climate change , health , youth policy , research and , above all , industrial policy aimed at creating strong social protection systems and cutting the unemployment rate .

in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which underlines that the Europe 2020 actions are of crucial importance to the future prospects of all European citizens , delivering sustainable jobs , long-term economic growth , and social progress ; fears that the Europe 2020 Strategy will not be able to deliver on its promises due to its weak governance structure , and strongly urges the Council , therefore , to strengthen the Community method ; reiterates the importance of integrating the EU 2020 goals into the economic governance framework and calls for the European Semester to be part of the legislative governance package , while including national parliaments and social partners at an early stage in order to foster democratic accountability , ownership and legitimacy ; stresses that the achievement of Europe 2020 is essential and not optional .

in writing . - ( RO ) The economic crisis has had a disproportionate impact on social groups .
It is alarming that the youth unemployment rate is double the average European rate .
Reform programmes are needed to mitigate the effects of the crisis , which will result in the creation of jobs .
In this context , I can mention the measures adopted by the Romanian Government aimed at encouraging entrepreneurial initiative among young people .
In addition to increasing the number of jobs , it is also vital to improve their quality .
We can achieve this objective by encouraging research and innovation , by having the business sector involved more in academic life and by adapting the school curriculum to the needs of the labour market .
In this regard , studies need to be carried out on economic development in Member States .
In particular , they need to be coordinated at EU level and those areas need to be identified where the European Union can develop a comparative edge on the global market .
Furthermore , recognition of diplomas at EU level would facilitate the free movement of labour and support the creation of a proper single European market .
We will only be able to achieve the objectives set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy by devising specific proposals and allocating sufficient funds .
Otherwise , we risk facing failure , just as happened in the case of the Lisbon Strategy .
This motion for a resolution endorses the Lisbon ' social breakdown ' Strategy of which Europe 2020 is the continuation .
What is worse , it makes it easier to control the national budgets via the European semester and promotes free trade .
I voted against it .
The goal of the Europe 2020 Strategy is to lead Europe to recover from the crisis and emerge from it strengthened through job creation , and through smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
This is to be based on the European Union 's five major objectives , namely : promoting employment ; improving conditions for research , development and innovation ; meeting climate change and energy targets ; increasing levels of education ; and promoting social inclusion , in particular by reducing poverty .
These objectives are ambitious and we all need to make an extra effort to achieve them for the good of the EU and its citizens .
I reject the motion for a resolution on the Europe 2020 Strategy as I think it continues along the anti-social lines of the Brussels Consensus , which does not concern itself with the European people , but is designed to consolidate the neoliberal policies that have led us to the serious economic crisis that we are suffering .
This crisis that we are going through is not a natural disaster but rather the consequence of the way in which the conservative , liberal and social democrat political forces have moved from the Washington Consensus to the Brussels Consensus , imposing no public intervention in the economy , pay restraint , and the privatisation of public services and of the main businesses in key sectors of the economy , such as energy and telecommunications .
We already know the consequences of these neoliberal measures and of the Brussels Consensus : crisis , widespread unemployment , poverty and cuts in workers ' rights and the welfare state .
I therefore voted against this resolution on the Europe 2020 Strategy , because I consider this ' new ' strategy to be more of the same : neoliberal measures that do not incorporate the necessary distribution of wealth , and improvement of the social and employment rights of the European people .
The realisation of the Europe 2020 Strategy is of fundamental significance for strengthening the EU and should not be merely an adjunct .
The strategy is intended to promote the future prospects of European citizens as regards secure and sustainable jobs , long-term economic growth and social progress .
If we are to implement this , the Community method needs to be reinforced and the objectives included in our economic policies .
In order to guarantee the financing of the strategy it is essential that we have a catalogue of political initiatives , which no doubt includes the involvement of the EIB and EBRD as well as attracting private financing .
Rejuvenating the internal market should also enable us to advance the ambitious aims more quickly and more effectively .
In addition , there are numerous flagship initiatives such as Innovation Union , Youth on the Move and An Industrial Policy for the Globalisation Era , to name but a few .
I did not vote in favour of the motion for a resolution , mainly because the financing of the Europe 2020 Strategy was unable to be resolved .
I should like to comment on the motion for a resolution on the Europe 2020 Strategy which has been adopted by the European Parliament .
I fully agree with the position of Parliament , and I think we should strengthen the structure of governance of the strategy , because what has been done to date has not been specific enough and so has not been very effective .
In my opinion , gender equality is the key factor for achieving the ambitions of Europe 2020 .
Above all , we need to increase the proportion of women in work by eliminating by 2020 the current pay gap between women and men ( the strategy assumes this will be done by 1 % per year , in order to close the gap by 10 % by 2020 ) .
Another very important question is the reduction of poverty among women .
Iit is estimated that 17 % of women live in poverty , and that most of these are lone mothers and immigrants .
The objectives of the strategy can be achieved principally by education and training .
I am thinking , here , of financial support for young people and support for programmes related to the mobility of students and academic staff .
Major emphasis should also be given to training and programmes which support a change of qualifications .
The need to emerge from the economic crisis , ensure sustainability and develop a ' smart economy ' are the underlying objectives of the strategy that will mark out the future context of the European Union 's market economy .
High employment levels favouring social and territorial cohesion , productivity , efficient resource use , innovation and especially stronger economic governance should be the foundations of Europe 's new path .
They will be the subjects of our work over the coming years , based on which the Council 's deliberations , the Commission 's assessments and proposals and Parliament 's political guidance should lead to concrete conclusions .
For all the reasons above , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the Europe 2020 Strategy .
This resolution will supplement the initial proposal , highlighting the need to strengthen the strategy 's governance proposals and calling on the Member States to give more careful thought to the ambitions of the strategy from a budgetary viewpoint and to focus on fighting unemployment through national programmes of reform .
The first signs from the implementation of the EU strategy for this decade are not particularly encouraging , just as the results of the Lisbon Strategy were not encouraging .
It is clear from economic developments in the euro area and the problems of monetary union which the debt crisis highlighted in the region , that the Europe 2020 Strategy needs to focus on budgetary stability , policies for growth and the need for European economic governance , if it wants the ambitious targets it has set , such as increasing youth employment to 75 % and increasing investments in research to 3 % , not to end up as simple symbolic pronouncements .
The motion for a resolution by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) on the Europe 2020 Strategy moves in this direction and I voted for it .
The document Europe 2020 - A strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth sets out a series of measures that should help Europe to recover from the crisis and emerge from it strengthened through job creation , and through smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
This is to be based on the EU 's five great objectives : promoting employment ; improving conditions for research , development and innovation ; meeting climate change and energy targets ; increasing levels of education ; and promoting social inclusion , in particular by reducing poverty .
I voted for this motion for a resolution because I agree with the proposals tabled by the European Parliament , specifically the need for the governance of the Europe 2020 Strategy to be strengthened .
We cannot over-emphasise the actions taken under the banner of the ' Europe 2020 ' Strategy are crucial to realising the expectations of the European public .
in writing . - Among the articles that brought us to support that text , is Article 12 , which : welcomes the flagship initiative on ' Innovation Union ' as a key driver to achieve Europe 2020 objectives , which addresses the major societal challenges like energy and food security , climate change , health and an ageing population ; recalls that the 3 % target is composed of a 2 % ( private expenditure ) share and a 1 % ( public expenditure ) share ; notes that there are still particular shortcomings in the field of private research spending which can only be overcome by adapting the regulatory environment for companies , including SMEs and welcomes , therefore , the Commission 's intention to improve framework conditions for business to innovate , in particular with respect to intellectual property rights .

Europe is facing a difficult challenge : to cut unemployment and at the same time build a people-oriented economy .
We realise that the Europe 2020 Strategy has high ambitions and requires us to stand firm at both national and European levels .
The global economic crisis has unfortunately wiped out many of the results achieved so far , showing just how fragile the national economies often are .
That is why now more than ever we need to redouble our efforts , sustained by the principle that together we are stronger .
No Member State should or can effectively tackle global challenges by acting alone .
To revive the challenge of sustainable growth , we have to use all the political means and financial instruments at our disposal .
I voted in favour of this resolution because stronger coordination of the Member States ' employment policies is essential , and that can only be achieved if the common goals are consistent and credible .
We have to build a new economic model based on knowledge and high employment .
This challenge marks the beginning of a new stage of European integration , one that pays greater attention to employment and social security and mobilises all the actors present in Europe .
The Europe 2020 Strategy establishes European Union goals of smart , sustainable and inclusive growth for the coming years .
There are certain crucial aspects to achieving this goal , such as strengthening the governance and funding of the cohesion policy .
The current European Union programme should involve increased participation by all stakeholders in setting out its policies and implementing actions , as this is suggested to be the main cause of the Lisbon Strategy 's failure .
Therefore , all institutional actors - at European , national , regional and local level - must be called on , as well as civil society , to implement this strategy .
In this context , I would stress the need to implement the Territorial Pact of Local and Regional Authorities for Europe 2020 .
Strong cohesion policy is needed for all European regions , as an essential prerequisite for implementing the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The cohesion policy is cross-cutting in nature and is therefore a key element in the strategy 's success , so its complementary nature should be made clear .
Economic growth and an atmosphere of job creation should be incentivised as part of this programme , in order to reserve a particular role for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SME ) , which are the engine of European economic growth .
For the above reasons , I voted for this motion for a resolution in plenary .
in writing . - The Commission 's EU 2020 Strategy is essential in order to enhance the EU 's growth and competitiveness as it emerges from the economic crisis .
However , its objectives can only be achieved with a coordinated and focused approach from all member states .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the Europe 2020 Strategy because I believe that it sets out the need for Member States to be completely committed to the strategy 's targets .
The resolution calls for the economic governance of the EU 2020 strategy to be better coordinated and I fully support this because it outlines the need for a credible funding framework to be established by national governments .
Member States should also ensure that policies , as well as budgets , are aligned with EU 2020 targets , especially with regards to objectives such as tackling unemployment and social inclusion .
I also welcome the resolution 's proposals that the next Multiannual Financial Framework should reflect EU 2020 ambitions .
The employment guidelines proposed by the Commission and approved by the Council present the European Union 's current common priorities and Member States ' objectives regarding their national employment policies .
Some of the EU-level employment guidelines entail increasing participation in the labour market , including that of specific population sub-groups , reducing structural unemployment and promoting the quality of jobs , developing a well-qualified workforce which will meet the labour market 's needs and improving the performance of education systems which will provide vocational training at every level .
I think that Member States and the European Union must get involved in drawing up a coordinated employment strategy which will promote a skilled , qualified and adaptable workforce , as well as labour markets capable of responding quickly to the economy 's development .
I also support the initiative from the rapporteur to promote the battle against social exclusion and the reduction of poverty , key objectives in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
These are the reasons why I voted for this resolution .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because there is an urgent need to step up efforts at all levels to ensure that the European Union employment guidelines are properly implemented .
Only by properly implementing these guidelines will it be possible to increase labour market participation , develop a skilled workforce , and improve the quality and performance of education and training systems .
Furthermore , the goal of the guidelines for the employment policies is to ensure that , under the Europe 2020 Strategy and economic governance , the employment targets are achieved and sustainable economic growth and social progress are guaranteed .
I believe that it is very important for the Member States to make every effort to deliver on the commitments made to increase employment levels , improve people 's skills , create job opportunities , reduce poverty and enhance social inclusion .
The European Commission and the Member States must be ready to ensure that these guidelines are implemented together with social partners and regional and local institutions , which must participate in drawing up and implementing national reform programmes .
As a result of the economic and financial crisis , the situation in Europe 's labour market is still tense and therefore combating unemployment must be one of the most important policy priorities for both the European Union and Member States .
The European Employment Strategy and the national strategies applied by the Member States are among the main instruments designed to ensure the Europe 2020 Strategy objectives are achieved .
It is therefore very important to work with the business sector and social partners to implement the employment policy guidelines correctly and effectively .
I enthusiastically welcome the guidelines and concerns set out in the proposal : the need to strengthen government responsibility and create ambitious targets , in order to achieve the goals stipulated in the 2020 Strategy ; the need to ensure that the employment policy guidelines are implemented ; and the need to ensure that job creation is given the highest priority in the National Reform Programmes .
The Union lacks a strong horizontal policy to combat unemployment and social exclusion , which would undeniably involve a cohesive economic governance package suited to responding to the needs of the Union and its Member States ; it would also require ambitious targets such as those set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy to be achieved .
This motion for a resolution of the European Parliament on implementation of the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States rests on a number of pillars , of which I would highlight : the current economic crisis , which is increasing unemployment and social exclusion ; the need to create synergies that encourage development with a view to pursuing the objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy ; and the Commission 's proposal that , under the terms of the Annual Growth Survey , the same employment policy guidelines should be adopted for 2011 as for 2010 .
To overcome this situation , it is crucial to make a joint effort at all levels : governments , social partners and civil society .
The European Union is playing a crucial role here in directing the policies to be followed and in respect for the principle of subsidiarity , by encouraging social dialogue and promoting the adoption of fair and effective measures .
I hope that these guidelines will contribute to helping to overcome the crisis , consolidate social-protection systems and relaunch the economy so that we can achieve the goals set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
We find it regrettable that the European Commission is maintaining the same employment policy guidelines as those adopted for 2010 , so we are maintaining the same critical position as we adopted then .
Although the European Parliament 's motion for aresolution makes some criticisms of the policies that have been followed and calls for the very limited social objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy to be met , it does not get to the root of the problem of unemployment and job insecurity , it does not seek to eliminate their causes , it does not resolve to revoke these austerity programmes , and it does not make serious criticisms of the demands being made of the Member States with the most serious difficulties in blindly complying with the ridiculous criteria of the Stability Pact .
On the contrary , it puts forward the opinion that the tools included in the European Semester are a positive response , forgetting that the European Commission 's proposals on so-called ' economic governance ' not only constitute an attack on the Member States ' sovereignty , but will also aggravate the social situation by continuing to prioritise monetary criteria over social welfare and progress .
Following the Commission communication on the Annual Growth Survey : advancing the EU 's comprehensive response to the crisis , Parliament , myself included , has voted in favour of a resolution urging the Council and the Commission to work together to achieve our employment targets , as contained in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
In the opinion of the rapporteur , Mrs Berès , we need to provide the Member States with policy advice without , however , interfering too much in national policy , and to supply guidelines so that the interested parties can all work to the same plan .
The lack of jobs , particularly in recent years , is a serious problem and must be tackled with a dash of ambition to ensure that by 2020 we can guarantee 75 % of Europeans decent , secure jobs that meet the needs of the wide range of people who are preparing for the world of work .
A particular effort is needed for certain groups , including women - especially mothers - young people and immigrants .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which stresses the importance of policies facilitating the transition of young people from school to work ; stresses that it is clear that early school leavers are a group at high risk of poverty , and emphasises that any flexible or temporary forms of work used in this context should incorporate the right to training and access to social security and ensure that people make the transition into more secure employment .
During these years in which we are recovering from the economic and financial crisis that has hit many countries in the Union , when our governments are striving to implement common policies and strategies in order to attain the goals that we have all identified and decided to pursue together , I believe it is important to acknowledge Parliament 's deserved and rightful central position as the most representative institution in the European Union .
It is a matter of acknowledging its representativeness and its function , not least with regard to the provisions of the Treaties .
The importance of the economic and employment policy guidelines must certainly be a focus of the European Semester and must adapt to the variations in the Annual Growth Survey and to our countries ' implementation times .
The consultative function deserves the right amount of space and the time needed for analysis and adjustment to the general framework .
I therefore declare that I voted in favour .
The guidelines for employment are synonyms for an increased retirement age and a flexible labour market .
Although this motion for a resolution has the virtue of reminding the EU that wage policy is a national responsibility , it still endorses the above .
I therefore voted against it .
The European Employment Strategy and the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States are some of the main instruments aiming to guide the policy of the European Union and the Member States in achieving the objectives and targets set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
Combating unemployment and creating sustainable jobs is the European Union 's great challenge for the next 10 years , and we must all play our part in making it a success .
One of the key objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy is to achieve an employment rate of 75 % .
The economic crisis faced by the EU continues to pose the challenge of how to curb increasing unemployment and social exclusion .
The European employment strategy and its guidelines therefore represent an important instrument for curbing unemployment .
It is also intended to steer efforts by the Member States in the right direction .
As a result , the Member States are required to include social partners , regional and local authorities as well as civil society in their actions .
In addition , it should be able to be guaranteed that both employment policy guidelines and the creation of new jobs will be ensured .
To underline the seriousness of this key objective , the Member States are in future required to submit reports on their progress .
In addition , the individual Member States are required to pay attention to national objectives , including the problems of integrating sub-groups such as women , people with disabilities and older workers , as well as the problem of the working poor .
I did not vote in favour of the motion for a resolution because in my opinion there is too much interference with national law here , particularly in the area of the regulation of social partners .
The implementation of the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States is crucial for the implementation of the guidelines included in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
European Parliament involvement in these policies must not be neglected .
Debate encourages ideas , and ideas and strategies are needed to overcome the current economic crisis .
There are a number of important concerns in this motion for a resolution that I share : ensuring that the employment guidelines are implemented ; stepping up action to deliver on more and better jobs ; and acting decisively to deliver on fighting poverty and social exclusion .
In order to ensure success in all these policies , it is crucial to make a joint effort at all levels : governments , social partners and civil society .
in writing . - In this resolution , Parliament ( 1 ) considers that , in the light of the Commission 's proposal to maintain the employment policy guidelines adopted in 2010 for 2011 , the recommendations on the Member States ' national reform programmes ( NRPs ) have become the main macroeconomic surveillance and orientation tool , and deplores the failure to involve Parliament in this process and the lack of debate concerning it ; and ( 2 ) considers that the major challenges faced by the EU and the Member States with regard to employment and unemployment should also be duly reflected in the future process to address macroeconomic imbalances , within the policy framework of the European Employment Guidelines ;
I am voting for this report because I agree with the rapporteur 's position on the need to keep the Employment Guidelines stable until the midterm review of the Europe 2020Sstrategy .
The integrated economic and employment policy guidelines must be the main thrust of the European Semester , and if the key messages of the annual growth survey depart from the content of the guidelines , these should consequently be amended to ensure consistency .
I also agree with the involvement of stakeholders in the design , implementation , monitoring and evaluation of the National Reform Programmes .
I would also stress the recommendations of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ( ECON ) so that the importance of the guidelines for the economic and employment policies of the Member States should not be diminished in order to achieve ownership and democratic accountability .
in writing . - ( LT ) Following the assessment of preliminary National Reform Programmes ( NRPs ) , the European Commission presented a proposal to keep the employment guidelines adopted by the Council last year stable until 2014 in order to devote most attention to their implementation .
This proposal by the Commission is understandable because the employment guidelines are an integral part of the Europe 2020 Strategy and they must be fully transposed into the Member States ' national programmes , and therefore the Member States should focus as much as possible on their implementation .
Although these guidelines will not be reviewed annually as a rule , the main priority of the European Union 's employment strategy must continue to be full employment which would increase economic growth and competitiveness and strengthen social cohesion .
The examination of the Member States ' draft National Reform Programmes shows that Member States should continue to make every effort to address the following priority areas : increasing labour market participation and reducing structural unemployment , developing a skilled workforce responding to labour market needs , promoting lifelong learning , improving the performance of education and training systems at all levels and increasing participation in tertiary education , promoting social inclusion and combating poverty .
I would therefore like to call on the Member States to ensure the employment and social policy is implemented as effectively as possible , by drawing up , observing and assessing these national programmes .
I would like to express my concern at the current employment situation .
I would argue that unemployment is the real social problem of today .
Although good signs of recovery can be glimpsed at a macro-economic level , industry cannot reabsorb all the workers that it has laid off in recent months , who now face the difficulty of re-entering the labour market .
The same applies to young people and women .
These problems are extremely important and pressing .
Among the objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy , the Commission prioritised increasing employment , strengthening the single market and encouraging growth .
The European Union and this Parliament in particular have done well in tackling the problem , but concrete action is needed to attain these goals .
The EU must work towards channelling and rationalising its resources , while investing in transport , energy and telecommunications infrastructure : in this respect , the turning point will be the creation of project companies guaranteed and financed by project bonds .
That will both enable the Union to retain its competitive edge in the global market and provide people with new job opportunities .
The whole system should be put into practice , albeit step by step , as soon as possible .
I voted against the Beres report on the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States .
The report proposes that the integrated economic policy and employment guidelines for the Member States adopted for 2010 should be upheld in 2011 and thus that the Europe 2020 Strategy should be fully integrated into National Reform Programmes .
Unfortunately , the report calls for the same economic policies and the same employment guidelines to be applied that resulted in the crisis and the failure to deal with it .
It calls for the same political choices and practices to be followed that made Europeans suffer austerity measures and sovereign Member States fall prey to the speculation mafia .
Finally , it calls for the employment policies that have resulted in a mediaeval labour market , that have increased unemployment and under-employment , that promote flexible forms of work and attack the wages and pensions and rights of European workers , especially young workers , to be continued .
I voted for this report because I advocate an annual review of the Europe 2020 Strategy , the main focus of which should be the integrated economic and employment policy guidelines .
It is necessary for the Commission and the Council to ensure that the integrated guidelines constitute the main thrust of the European Semester .
The involvement of stakeholders , including the social partners and parliamentary bodies in the design , implementation , monitoring and evaluation of the National Reform Programmes , is a crucial element of effective governance of the employment and social policies by the Member States .
As I said about the report by my colleagues Ms Gruny and Mr Ory , ' society has evolved , the world has changed , and labour relations must accompany this change ' .
For that very reason , I believe that the review of the employment guidelines under the umbrella of the Europe 2020 Strategy should commit to flexibility and to new ways of working as a way of fostering economic development and of combating poverty .
Given that the crisis has meant that the number of unemployed people in Europe has increased from 16 million in 2008 to 23 million in 2010 , any exit strategy has to involve the recovery of jobs .
This is only possible if there is a clear focus on innovation , flexible working and new models for work , and training for young people in an increasingly competitive market .
The Europe 2020 Strategy leaves the way open to these , and the Member States must make proper use of them so as to boost employment and give impetus to the European economy .
The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union obliges the Council to produce guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States every year and to consult the European Parliament before adopting these decisions .
These , then , are the circumstances under which we are asked to give our opinion on this matter .
The economic and financial situation being experienced by the majority of the countries requires the attention given to the Member States ' employment policies to be redoubled .
The Europe 2020 Strategy sets out these guidelines , but it is necessary for all Member States to transpose these guidelines and turn them into concrete measures to be integrated into the National Reform Programmes that they have to submit this April .
I agree with the rapporteur 's recommendations , so I am voting in favour of this proposal for a Council decision on the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States .
We disagree that the European Commission should maintain the same employment policy guidelines for 2011 as those adopted for 2010 , so we are maintaining the same critical position as we adopted then .
In fact , the aforementioned guidelines are clearly inadequate when we look at the figures relating to the 25 million unemployed and 30 million people in precarious or poorly paid jobs .
It is also unacceptable that the European Parliament supports the close link between these guidelines and the neoliberal economic measures that the Commission continues to develop , specifically those included in the Europe 2020 Strategy , or also in the six pieces of legislation included in the package of the so-called ' European Semester ' .
It is well known that the European Commission 's proposals on so-called ' economic governance ' not only constitute an attack on the Member States ' sovereignty but will worsen the social situation by continuing to prioritise monetary criteria over social welfare and well-being .
For all these reasons , we voted against this report .
In view of the ageing of society , demographic changes indicating a movement of population from rural to urban areas and the increasing stratification of society in terms of income , it is essential to take preventative action .
Particularly adverse phenomena are to be seen in rural areas , where the number of young people wanting to take over the running of farms continues to fall .
They are leaving rural areas to get away from low incomes and poor access to services .
Those who stay cannot find work outside of agriculture .
In the worst situation , however , are the female residents of rural areas , who very rarely are the owners of farms , but despite this they work very hard on their husband 's farm .
This is why it is essential to keep young farmers in rural areas by guaranteeing them a decent income and standard of living .
Those , however , who do not find work in rural areas , should be guaranteed education which will allow them to find employment .
Also needed is a campaign to persuade people to join the Lifelong Learning Programme and to retrain .
It is also essential to have programmes which support the enterprise of women and make it easier for women to run their own business , including businesses not connected with agriculture .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Following the assessment of preliminary National Reform Programmes ( NRPs ) presented by the Member States under the Europe 2020 strategy , and in parallel with the presentation of the first Annual Growth Survey , the Commission adopted on 12 January a proposal for a Council decision that suggested confirming the validity , for 2011 , of the integrated economic policy and employment guidelines of the Member States adopted in 2010 .
This proposal takes account of the fact that the new Europe 2020 integrated guidelines are to be fully transposed into the policy measures and sequencing of the reforms of the Member States to be presented in the final NRPs due in April 2011 .
Furthermore , the Commission 's proposal is based on the commitment included in the Employment Guidelines of 2010 to keep the guidelines stable , as far as possible , until 2014 so that the Member States can focus on their implementation
This report endorses the harmful employment guidelines of the Commission and the Council .
It actually supports EU authoritarianism where increasing the retirement age , creating a flexible labour market and cutting budgets and wages are concerned .
The rapporteur also endorses this .
She is , all the same , a member of a party that claims to be socialist .
I voted against the report .
The European Employment Strategy and the guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States are some of the main instruments aiming to guide the policy of the European Union and the Member States in realising the objectives and targets set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
Combating unemployment and creating sustainable jobs is the EU 's great challenge for the next 10 years , and we must all play our part in making it a success .
We must stress the importance of focusing the annual review of the Europe 2020 Strategy on the integrated economic policy and employment guidelines .
I am against this report on the employment policies of the Member States essentially for one reason , which is that it repeats and includes the guidelines adopted by this House last September , which sought to facilitate access to employment for the Roma people .
I agree with facilitating access to the labour market for people with different abilities , the young , the elderly and women , but I really fail to understand on what grounds we should particularly facilitate access for a given ( and rather problematic ) ethnic group such as the Roma .
I voted in favour of the Berès report because , with the adoption of this text , the Member States will , according to the Europe 2020 Strategy , have to present their 2010 employment initiatives and guidelines by April 2011 .
The Commission 's proposal to maintain the guidelines for the Member States ' employment policies adopted in 2010 for 2011 is perfectly in line with the Europe 2020 Strategy and is supported by Parliament through this report .
All EU Member States are therefore called on to fight unemployment , especially youth unemployment , by means of constructive proposals with precise deadlines for providing a concrete response to the problem of employment and poverty .
I am voting for this proposal for a Council decision on guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States and I agree with the rapporteur 's recommendations .
The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union obliges the Council to produce guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States every year and to consult the European Parliament beforehand .
I believe that it is necessary for the Commission and the Council to ensure that the guidelines are the main thrust of the European Semester .
The involvement of stakeholders , including the social partners and parliamentary bodies in the design , implementation , monitoring and evaluation of the National Reform Programmes , is a crucial element of effective governance of the employment and social policies by the Member States .
Without the Member States ' profound involvement , the Europe 2020 Strategy cannot succeed ; I hope that this will not come about .
in writing . - On 12 January 2010 , following assessment of preliminary national reform programmes ( NRPs ) presented by the Member States under the Europe 2020 strategy , and in parallel with the presentation of the first Annual Growth Survey , the Commission adopted a proposal for a Council decision in favour of confirming the validity , for 2011 , of the Member States ' integrated economic policy and employment guidelines adopted in 2010 .
This proposal takes account of the fact that the new Europe 2020 integrated guidelines are to be fully transposed in the Member States ' policy measures and sequencing of reforms to be presented in the final NRPs due in April 2011 .
Furthermore , the Commission 's proposal is based on the commitment included in the 2010 Employment Guidelines to keep the guidelines stable , insofar as possible , until 2014 so that the Member States can focus on their implementation .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Berès because I agree with what it says about the policies that should be adopted to promote employment in the European Union .
The new Europe 2020 integrated guidelines must be fully included in the Member States ' policy measures and initiatives .
Each individual Member State 's ongoing commitment to stick to the 2014 targets will be crucial .
Unemployment , especially youth unemployment , remains one of the targets requiring the greatest commitment from us to tackle it at its roots , because it reduces not only immediate spending power but also all future investment strategies , causing very serious social unease that goes beyond mere economic factors .
It is not only the number of jobs that must be increased , but also their quality , and this requires action particularly by the Member States , which must also maintain their commitment to fighting poverty and promoting social inclusion .
Unemployment is a major problem and a difficult one to solve .
It puts a drain on public finances .
On the expenditure side , amounts paid as benefits and other social allowances go up , increasing the cost of various kinds of programme for combating unemployment and for encouraging a return to work .
On the income side there is no production and no tax is collected .
The number of unemployed people in the Union has reached over 23 million , which means that in the last year half a million people have lost their jobs .
Every effort should be made to achieve the target set in EU2020 of raising the level of employment among people in the 20-64 age bracket to 75 % .
Let us remember that unemployment is highest among citizens under 25 - over 20 % .
I voted for this motion for a resolution because I believe it is necessary to face up to the increasing volatility in food prices and commodities , with an increase of around 90 % in 2010 , which have led to problems in the operation of the food supply chains that make the measures proposed in this resolution necessary .
These measures include internal action , such as : a strong common agricultural policy that is capable of compensating farmers facing increased costs ; greater commitment to small , organic farms producing for local consumption ; tabling adequate proposals relating to the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive and the Market Abuse Directive ; giving the European Securities and Markets Authority more powers to oversee raw materials markets or even to issue a mandate to regulators and supervisory bodies to restrict speculation .
The European Union also needs a strategy at global level to combat speculation , which includes international coordination of a mechanism to prevent excessive price fluctuation and the creation of specific regulation to be applied to the greatest possible number of countries .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on rising food prices .
Food prices have peaked for the seventh consecutive month between 2010 and 2011 , reaching the highest levels since 1990 .
Commodity price hikes have become a destabilising factor in the global economy , which have helped spark riots and unrest in a number of developing countries and most recently in Algeria , Tunisia and Egypt .
Poverty and famine still exist in the European Union , and 79 million people still live below the poverty line .
I therefore agree with the call made in the resolution for immediate action to ensure food security for EU citizens and at global level .
It is also very important for food to be available to consumers at reasonable prices , and , at the same time , for a fair standard of living to be ensured for farmers .
I therefore call on the EU to support rural development , increasing investment in food security , and taking particular account of urgent hunger needs , small-scale farming and social protection programmes .
The index of food prices on the financial markets has shown an uncontrollable rise in these prices over recent months , due to the international economic and financial crisis and also the recent environmental disasters resulting from climate change .
The situation is aggravated even further by speculation , which has been responsible for up to 50 % of the price rises , preventing many people from enjoying food security and generating political instability especially in poorer nations .
As we know , this can have a domino effect and end up threatening peace and security in other countries .
Food security is a fundamental human right and is included among the Millennium Development Goals , as well as being a common agricultural policy objective .
The European Union therefore has a duty to confirm both its commitment to establish a sound agricultural and rural development policy and also its support for research and technological innovation aimed at improving productivity , while meeting energy efficiency and sustainability requirements .
Sustainability also means promoting the production and marketing of traditional local produce , by offering suitable financial incentives and the chance for small and medium-sized enterprises to access credit .
I believe it is equally important to adopt clear and transparent regulations to prevent speculation , which is particularly damaging to the health of many Europeans , and to make Europe 's agricultural production competitive .
The popular uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt and the mass demonstrations in a series of other countries are directly challenging poverty and unemployment .
The angry demonstrations by people living below the poverty line highlight the dead end into which the general economic crisis and their efforts to shift the burden of it on to the workers have brought the political forces of capital and its political representatives The FAO emphasised just a few years ago that the number of people who found it difficult or impossible to obtain the food they needed in order to survive was higher than ever before in the history of mankind , having passed the 1 billion mark , and that this would inevitably cause serious social unrest .
The problem of poverty in the world is not a matter of inadequate resources ; it is the result of imperialist aggression and capitalist exploitation of natural resources based solely on the profit motive .
Food prices did not stop rising after the 2007 food crisis ; on the contrary , they continued to rise even more sharply .
Within the context of the economic crisis , stock exchange gambling on the back of farm production and human hunger is the way to over-concentrate capital and maintain its profitability .
In 2010 , agricultural produce generated the biggest gains on the stock exchanges .
Rising food prices in the European Union and worldwide pose a major problem in 2011 .
There are different causes for this and it is difficult to anticipate and control them .
However , there are also causes which we can and need to control .
A slow supply chain with too many intermediaries , natural disasters caused by climate change , low incomes earned in the agricultural sector or the volatility of the agricultural product market are just some of the reasons why the price of agricultural products has risen in an unacceptable manner across Europe .
I think that decision makers at European level must make reducing food prices a major objective on the European and global political agenda .
Obviously , we are not talking about interfering in the operation of the free market , but about eliminating the speculative behaviour which sponges unjustifiably off the demand and supply chain , having an illegal influence on and distorting how prices are set .
I voted for this motion for a resolution as Europe needs measures to ensure that food prices are not increased artificially by intermediaries involved in speculation .
The European Union needs to simplify the food supply chain so that parasitic intermediaries are removed from the trade cycle .
This will allow both citizens and producers to benefit , while making it easier to overcome the economic crisis .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of this document .
Although , according to forecasts , global cereal , wheat and sugar stocks will be higher than in 2007 and there does not seem to be any recurrence of the situation that led to the food crisis in 2008 , there is an over-reaction by the markets , causing excessive volatility , which can be explained by the actions of speculators ' investments funds .
Furthermore , whole sectors of the agricultural industry are under threat .
I see this situation in my own country , Romania .
Indeed , the 5 % increase in the VAT rate , which has reached 24 % , was reflected immediately in price rises .
It is difficult to accept that a livestock farmer toiling day in day out is the victim of a market game which is played tens of thousands of kilometres away on the computers of companies which have nothing to do with agriculture , but have sufficient money to destabilise global markets .
In our report on the recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security , adopted in December , we stated that the right to food security is a fundamental human right , and that the EU has a duty to feed its citizens .
In line with our position , it is our duty today to denounce the rise in food prices , which have soared over the last seven months .
There are many reasons for this rise , but we should focus above all on price volatility and speculation on basic foodstuffs , since they destabilise our economies and create uncertainty .
Stopping speculation is absolutely crucial , as is combating climate change .
Indeed , food security and climatic and environmental conditions are closely linked ; they make the coordination of environmental and agricultural policies vitally important .
We should also turn our attention to developing countries and support them in their efforts to achieve food self-sufficiency , in contrast to everything that has been done in recent years .
The challenge is huge : in Europe alone , almost 80 million people still live below the poverty line .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because there is a need to take specific action to ensure food security for EU citizens and at global level .
Food prices have peaked for the seventh consecutive month between 2010 and 2011 , reaching the highest levels since the Food and Agriculture Organisation started measuring food prices in 1990 .
Commodity price hikes have become a destabilising factor in a number of developing countries .
Furthermore , the recent riots and unrest in Algeria , Tunisia and Egypt have had a significant impact on this .
Food must be available to consumers at reasonable prices , and , at the same time , a fair standard of living should be ensured for farmers .
The European Union therefore has a duty to ensure food security for its citizens .
Attention should be drawn to declining farm incomes in the EU , caused by rising production costs and price volatility , which impact negatively on farmers ' ability to maintain production .
There is also a need to highlight the costs that European farmers have to bear in meeting the highest food safety , environmental , animal welfare and labour standards in the world .
Farmers should be compensated for these additional costs and for providing public goods to society .
I abstained from the vote on rising food prices .
The motion for a resolution contains a number of positive points , such as the priority of the agricultural sector in development policy .
However , important points contained in the initial motion for a resolution by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left are missing from the joint motion for a resolution .
To be precise , no link is made between the food crisis and the price rises caused by the agricultural and trade policies applied and , therefore , no proposal is made to change that framework .
Also , the motion for a resolution calls for the food problem to be resolved by the World Trade Organisation and the G20 , which is not only contrary to the demands by farmers ; it also replaces the UN framework , thereby promoting decisions by the same people who caused and perpetuated the problem with their political choices .
Also , the motion for a resolution does not make any reference whatsoever to the basic concept of food sovereignty , even though it is prerequisite to food security .
Finally , it addresses the problem of speculation and rising food prices in a very inadequate manner , by referring simply to ' transparency ' in food prices , with no mention as to how to put an end to financial mechanisms which can be used to create speculation .
in writing . - ( DA ) We have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on rising food prices .
We recognise the fact that we currently have major problems in the food sector , and in this regard we believe that we can achieve a great deal by intervening with regard to speculation on foodstuffs .
That is why we have voted in favour of this resolution .
However , we do not support an increase in the budget for the EU 's agricultural aid , nor do we support an extension of the market management instruments .
Furthermore , we are not in favour of the increased use of GMOs in food production .
Global food prices have reached dramatic levels recently .
Indeed , last December they overtook the prices recorded at the peak of the economic crisis .
The UN stated recently that it considered improbable the scenario where excessive demand in relation to supply would be behind these price fluctuations .
In the mid-1990s a speculative market was created which had food products at its heart and has grown during the financial crisis .
Speculators are currently taking advantage of the lack of regulation of the markets , earning millions from this activity .
This type of speculative behaviour has a direct impact on people 's standard of living and can contribute to political instability .
Therefore , I think that the European Union needs to combat speculation involving food prices through regulation and transparency .
For this reason , I voted for the motion for a resolution on rising food prices .
in writing . - ( RO ) The global economic crisis and the rise in food and fuel prices have caused poverty and hunger for millions of citizens , but especially for poor people living in developing countries , who are the most vulnerable to the adverse impact of price volatility and the food crisis .
The European Union as a whole is and remains the main producer of food .
For this reason , common skills must be developed in conducting research and providing training in sustainable farming methods and new technologies so as to ease the collapse of agricultural systems and prevent this crisis temporarily .
I believe that the European Union and Member States have a duty to adopt a joint commercial strategy which will provide sufficient protection to food markets , and to decide together on their own agricultural and food production policies .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted against the motion for a resolution on rising food prices .
We welcome the debate on food prices and price fluctuations , particularly with regard to speculation on food commodities and the weak competition in certain parts of the food chain , but we nevertheless do not believe that this resolution provides an adequate description of the problem .
The claims of direct threats to Europe 's food supply are grossly exaggerated .
We are also opposed to the concern about rising food prices being used to justify a European agricultural policy based on extensive direct subsidies and regulation of the market .
The resolution 's monotonous focus on the agricultural sector means that the significance of other social factors for the ability to deal with substantial price rises is ignored - we are thinking primarily of the lack of democratic institutions in many countries , inequality when it comes to income and weak welfare systems .
The Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations ( FAO ) warned in January of possible increases in the price of food products in 2011 after they had hit record highs in 2010 and following the increase during the 2008 food crisis .
The FAO food price index of 55 basic foodstuffs has increased for the sixth consecutive month to 214.7 points , above the previous record high of 213.5 points that was hit in June 2008 .
As it stands , food prices increased for the seventh consecutive month between 2010 and 2011 to the highest levels since the FAO started analysing food prices in 1990 .
As I have already argued in the past , I believe that concrete measures must be taken in the context of the common agricultural policy to increase production , to better supply markets and to ensure greater price stability , as well as to ensure that production meets Europeans ' consumer needs .
As I have been arguing , agriculture must be viewed as a strategic sector that is crucial to guaranteeing the food security of populations , especially at times of crisis like the one we are experiencing .
The right to food is a fundamental right that is achieved when all people have permanent physical and economic access to sufficient , safe and nutritious food to meet their requirements for living an active and healthy life .
I consider it to be an unacceptable failure that hunger exists in the European Union and the world .
In fact , the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) estimates that the number of undernourished people in the world reached 925 million in 2010 .
Rising food prices coupled with unpredictable shortages of supply may cause this situation to worsen .
I therefore advocate a strong and sustainable agricultural sector across the EU and a thriving and sustainable rural environment .
The common agricultural policy should ensure this objective .
I would also draw attention to declining farm incomes in the EU , caused by rising production costs and price volatility , which impact negatively on the farmers ' ability to maintain production .
Moreover , European farmers have to meet the highest food safety , environmental , animal welfare and labour standards in the world .
in writing . - ( PT ) The motion for a resolution includes several significant aspects , such as : the need to prioritise agriculture in development aid and acknowledge the divestment that has been taking place in this area ; the need for strategic stocks and intervention ; and the need for market intervention instruments to become a key aspect of the future common agricultural policy , even though these instruments are not specified later and it is true that many people are only advocating so-called ' emergency mechanisms ' , compatible with the liberalisation of the market that has been pursued .
Nevertheless , the resolution misses out crucial points and includes others that are negative or even unacceptable .
It does not mention that the food crisis is the result of current agricultural and trade policies such as the CAP and free trade , and it does not make the fair and necessary criticism of these policies or call for the change that is needed .
It accepts the integration of agriculture into the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , although it does propose measures to mitigate this inclusion ; for our part , we maintain that agriculture should remain outside the WTO .
The basic concept of food sovereignty , which cannot be dissociated from food security , is not touched on .
The problem of speculation is touched on , but very inadequately .
The measures suggested do not go much beyond demands for ' greater transparency ' in the market , which is clearly insufficient .
Climate change and speculation on the commodity markets are among the main factors threatening food security both within the European Union and outside .
Based on this belief , I support the motion for a resolution calling for urgent measures to combat the manipulation of food commodity prices and to ensure that agricultural production is maintained in the EU .
It is in fact beyond doubt that droughts , floods , fires and storms - phenomena that occur more frequently now than in the past - are reducing agricultural production capacity worldwide .
Good soil and water management are therefore essential to prevent the loss of farmland .
It is also necessary to curb the abusive speculation that burdens the markets for food products , agricultural raw materials and energy .
Food security depends on having a strong policy that guarantees a future for our young farmers and encourages the introduction of more effective and sustainable farming practices in the less developed countries .
The rise in food prices is unacceptable .
Poor harvests in Russia and Ukraine cannot possibly explain the 91 % rise for wheat , and still less the rise of 57 % for maize , 33 % for soybean and 32 % for sugar .
Clearly , the crazy world of finance is today speculating on the food markets , without ever wanting to touch the goods themselves , which are constantly bought and sold .
Access to these markets should be reserved for professional buyers only .
However , the main problem remains the need to increase world agricultural productivity .
In order to feed 9 billion people better , agricultural production needs to increase by 60-70 % .
Only access to more efficient agriculture will enable us to conquer hunger .
New seeds , as well as input- and water-saving techniques , will be able to produce the required yields .
The number of farmers growing GMOs is increasing every year .
There are more than 14 million of them , working more than 10 % of the world 's arable land .
Only Europe claims to want to do without GMOs , even though European livestock is already fed on feedingstuffs of which two thirds come from genetically modified crops from the Americas .
At a time when food security must be declared a fundamental human right , world food prices have peaked at the beginning of 2011 , affecting both producers and consumers within the EU and everyone throughout the world .
This trend , which is exacerbated by price volatility caused by speculators , is completely unacceptable , when we know that more than a billion people are suffering from poverty and hunger worldwide .
I therefore voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , which recommends the introduction of global regulation to prevent speculation from violating the right to food ; reaffirms the European Union 's commitment to becoming one of the main actors in the field of food and agriculture at global level ; takes account of climate change ; and encourages the Member States to increase the share of official aid dedicated to agriculture .
in writing . - ( DE ) I welcome the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) on the current problem of rising food prices .
The European Union is called on to speed up the progress of the global fight against poverty and hunger ; in developing countries this concerns the provision of the very basics of life .
However , the high prices are also a problem within the EU .
This situation has come about as a result of commodity shortages , high fuel prices , dependence on harvests and exports , the world market situation and profiteering .
The only means of guaranteeing the future food supply in Europe is through the common agricultural policy .
The farmers themselves are equally dependent on reasonable prices ; they are facing high production costs .
Higher consumer prices are not reflected in farming incomes .
Parliament demands of the Commission that urgent action be taken and that measures be created across all policy areas .
The current hike in food prices , and especially in the prices of food commodities such as cereals and oilseeds , is primarily due to natural disasters in Russia and Australia .
Even though this rise in food commodity prices could conceivably boost our European farmers ' incomes , we must not forget that the livestock sector is seeing a corresponding hike in the price of animal feed .
We are painfully aware of the European Union 's extreme dependence on supplies of food commodities , which means that food security in Europe is far from being achieved .
We do not have to go very far - the proof can be found in the countries of North Africa - to realise the dangerous consequences that such uncertainties can have .
Our life insurance consists in maintaining a common agricultural policy worthy of the name , so as to ensure a fair income for our farmers , and in maintaining productive agriculture in every region of Europe .
That is why I played an active part in this resolution and why I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution on rising food prices .
According to the resolution , food prices have reached the highest levels since the Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) started recording them in 1990 .
Anger over soaring food prices has led to great unrest in a number of countries .
A crucial cause has been speculation by traders and brokers who have no commercial interest in these markets .
Action must be taken to fight against the excesses of speculation on commodity markets .
I am voting in favour of this motion for a resolution because I agree with all the principles set forth in it .
I am in favour of producing healthy food in sufficient quantities to contribute effectively to the global demand for food .
It is essential to ensure income for farmers and create mechanisms to prevent enormous volatility in terms of prices and markets .
In order to ensure that we will have enough food globally to feed the whole of the world 's population , it is essential to support farmers in developing countries .
We have to ensure that everything is being done to combat climate change at a global level so that natural resources and income from farming do not decrease .
It is essential to strengthen the farmers ' position in the food supply chain .
In order for the productive sector to prosper , it is essential to evaluate the issue of price increases relating to other outside costs and to speculation on basic agricultural products .
in writing . - ( HU ) Food safety is a central issue for Europe and precisely for this reason it demands an unabatedly robust common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and , as an objective , is unattainable unless we find a solution to the two most important current problems , the volatility of markets and prices , and dwindling food stocks .
Growing speculation related to agricultural and food commodities lies in the background of the current increase in food prices .
Investment funds are pumping huge amounts of money into food price speculation , thus forcing consumers to pay prices that exceed the production costs several times .
Price rises exacerbate the problem of accessibility , in particular for people with low or no income .
Expenditure on food is one of the main components of family budgets , accounting for 60 to 80 % in developing countries and 20 to 30 % in the less developed Member States .
Financial instruments must serve the economy and must help agricultural production overcome major crises and climatic events , and for this reason speculation cannot be permitted to jeopardise agricultural production .
I condemn speculation in agricultural commodities and raw materials , which contributes to increased price volatility and the deepening of the global food crisis .
For exactly this reason I agree , and I support , that in the future CAP effective action cannot be taken against major price fluctuations without strategic stocks and so the role of market intervention instruments must be strengthened .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because I support the measures that it contains for combating the obstacles that hamper global food security : commercial speculation , concentration in the food distribution chain , price volatility , low levels of income for farmers and climate change .
I think that the call for immediate and sustained action to guarantee global food security is positive , and I welcome the re-affirmation of the right to food as a human right .
I support the call for the EU to increase its rural development aid by investing in social protection programmes and small-scale agriculture , and to undertake effective measures to combat climate change .
I welcome the fact that the resolution asks the Commission to include compliance with EU-equivalent standards in terms of the environment , animal welfare and food safety and quality in trade negotiations with EU partners .
I also support the call for the EU to respect and promote the guarantee of a sustainable future for farmers in the context of trade agreements , and not to put European agricultural production , rural agriculture and global access to food at risk .
Food prices have risen to a record high .
This rise is resulting in food insecurity for millions of people , destabilising the world economy and causing riots and unrest .
The international community made a commitment , moreover , to halve world hunger by 2015 as part of the Millennium Development Goals .
Guaranteeing adequate and regular food for every human being is not only a moral requirement , it is also the fulfilment of a fundamental human right .
This inalienable and universal right was confirmed during the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held in Kinshasa in December .
While the Commission must honour its commitments to developing countries and the least developed countries , it must also promote a strong and sustainable common agricultural policy that reflects the needs of European farmers .
I share the latter 's concerns , because their drop in income as a result of the rise in production costs and of price volatility has meant that they have not benefited from the rise in food prices .
Effective , coordinated steps must be taken to solve these problems .
Opulence and waste are unacceptable when the tragedy of hunger is assuming ever greater proportions .
I agree with the motion for a resolution , but it says nothing about what is to follow .
It is not enough to establish the single fact that foodstuffs are expensive .
It is essential that we rapidly develop a management system for the control and optimisation of food prices .
It is essential to develop an anti-monopolistic and anti-speculative mechanism for regulation and the elimination of abuse .
Such a mechanism would need to establish a General European Control and Supervision Agency for Prices and Services .
It would also need to forecast productivity and efficiency in the spheres of production .
That would offer us the possibility of preventing overproduction and shortages , and reduce losses to a minimum .
A serious task of analysis is essential .
That would enable us to define the true costs and avoid destabilisation .
The combined effect of increased commodity prices , export restrictions , poor harvests as a result of weather conditions , higher transport costs , agricultural speculation and increasing demand is pushing up prices .
The EU should look at its own behaviour .
When it is more lucrative to use agricultural land to produce biofuels than for food production it is scarcely any wonder that there is competition for land , with all the negative consequences that this has .
I took these considerations into account when voting .
in writing . - ( BG ) I was pleased to sign and vote in favour of the motion for a resolution on rising food prices , as special measures are needed to ensure the stability of food prices .
My colleagues and I want a solution to be found to the problems which are at the root of the rising food prices : buyers abusing their dominant position , unfair practices in negotiating prices , lack of information on price formation , the distribution of profit along the food chain and speculation on the commodity markets .
We want the reform of the common agricultural policy to secure a stable first pillar to maintain the incomes of farmers and to undertake measures to support the market .
In order to reduce speculation on the commodity markets , the European Parliament wants the Commission to ensure greater transparency by exchanging good and timely information regarding developments on the market .
In addition , we aim , with this resolution , to improve the position of agricultural producers in the food chain , so that they can get a greater share of the profits in the food industry .
I also welcome the call for prompter action on the part of the G-20 to coordinate the mechanisms to prevent rising prices and to prepare regulation for dealing with crises which affect food and agriculture .
The vote was held today on the motion for a resolution on rising food prices .
Rapidly rising food prices are causing the food security of millions of people to be undermined , both in developed and in developing countries .
In relation to the fact that the effects of the rise in food prices have been felt most by groups that are in a difficult social situation , Europe , together with third countries and international institutions , should take the following action without delay .
It is necessary to introduce regulation and oversight at national and international level which will solve the problem of speculation in agricultural markets ( dealing with food commodity derivatives restricted as far as possible to investors directly linked with agricultural production ) .
The common agricultural policy should be provided with appropriate market intervention instruments , because I think a strong common agricultural policy is the only guarantee of solving the problem of food security .
It is very important to set up adequate risk prevention and management measures to limit the consequences of natural disasters for agricultural production .
Attention should also be given to supporting agricultural production for local and regional consumers .
Lack of coordination in combating major price fluctuations may contribute to a still greater disproportion in the distribution of food between wealthy countries and poor ones , and in the longer term may endanger us with a food crisis .
Questions relating to the need to supply food to a continually growing population remain unanswered .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on rising food prices in Europe .
The right to food is a basic and fundamental human right , and we therefore have to make every effort to ensure that food prices are regulated and accessible to all , paying particular attention to the issue of food accessibility in developing countries .
I agree with the proposal that the Commission must adopt a new trade and development strategy which would give developing countries greater independence in solving the issue of rising food prices .
Attention is drawn to the fact that we need to create a favourable support and business environment for farmers , in particular small-scale farmers , Export tax rates must be reduced and we must restrict industrial farming activities that may have a negative impact on food production capacities .
We must make every effort to ensure that greater support is given to development in the agricultural sector , supporting rural development , introducing innovative production methods and providing effective humanitarian aid .
Only by implementing measures to prevent concentration along the food supply chain and speculation in agricultural commodities and to reduce production costs , can we limit the rise in food prices .
Given the need for food and energy security , we must develop alternative energy supply sources and minimise food waste both at EU and national levels .
So that the measures for combating rising food prices provided for in the resolution function effectively , we must establish an independent regulatory agency and ensure that food safety systems work properly and effectively at regional and local levels .
The hike in food commodity prices is causing difficulties for the European Union as well .
They have risen constantly over recent months and have reached the highest levels ever recorded in the history of the Food and Agriculture Organisation .
That is due to a whole range of factors , including the lack of a global trade agreement , the increase in certain raw material prices and the increased demand for foodstuffs , but it is also due to speculation and ' financial games ' that are played out on other markets but have repercussions on the global market .
Added to that is the opposition between developed and developing economies , in which the latter - which have been hit hard , albeit indirectly , by the crisis - use foodstuffs as the only weapon at their disposal .
That situation has implications not only for the global market but also for small producers and for consumers , who are faced with sometimes significant price rises for essentials .
I therefore believe that food security is a priority that must be defended and pursued , and it is both necessary and right to seek a global solution to this instability that is as widely acceptable as possible .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on food prices .
As a global power in agricultural production , the EU needs to take account of and effectively adapt to emerging challenges , such as extreme weather conditions , limited availability of natural resources , dependence on food imports and increasing speculation in commodities .
Moreover , the food crisis also applies to Europe .
Seventy-nine million Europeans , 16 % of the population of the EU , are in receipt of food subsidies and price inflation of staples is rising constantly ; this , in conjunction with the recession , is being felt very acutely in Greece .
Clearly Europe needs to produce more today , using fewer resources more efficiently .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on rising food prices because in six months , the cost of the food basket prepared by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ( FAO ) , including 55 of the basic essentials , has increased by 34 % .
In Portugal we have an unsustainable situation for farmers with agricultural diesel approaching 2008 's record price of EUR 1 per litre ; electricity prices have risen almost 4 % and the plan is to end agricultural electricity this year ; prices for animal feed , fertiliser and pesticides have also rocketed ; and interest rates for agricultural loans are around 6 % .
These are just a few examples .
I also think that it is unacceptable , at a time when things are made worse by a widespread crisis , that consumers should pay inflated prices without farmers ' incomes increasing .
I argue that the European Commission must face up to its responsibilities and that it should consider the whole chain when it is looking at these serious problems in the agricultural sector and not , as it did with the ' Milk Package ' , leave out one of the key players : the large retailers .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on rising food prices , because no one can be content with the situation that has prevailed for months and which is primarily affecting small-scale farmers and consumers .
Cereal prices have even surpassed the highs of 2008 , when soaring food prices already caused unrest in Haiti and Egypt .
While the responses must , first and foremost , be on a global scale and coordinated together with the Food and Agriculture Organisation , they must be extended to Europe , where the objective of price stability must be attained .
That is why I welcome the adoption of proposals , such as reducing food waste , that are full of common sense , and the request made to the Commission to ensure that dealing with food commodity derivatives is restricted to investors directly linked to agricultural markets .
These are all measures that make for strong and sustainable European agriculture .
Commissioner Cioloş rightly reminded us yesterday that Europe is not there to subsidise biofuels , but to promote the use of arable land for food production purposes - it is as simple as that .
On the eve of the G20 Finance Ministers ' meeting , Europe is once again arriving at the negotiating table unprepared .
Since January 2011 , the US administration has been demanding that the positions adopted by financial funds on the agricultural markets be controlled and transparent .
The Commission must quickly make proposals along these lines .
This advance is a first step towards denying the speculators what they crave .
The impact on European livestock farmers is dramatic and immediate , too .
They can no longer feed their animals .
Hundreds of farms are going bankrupt .
Five years ago , wheat was worth EUR 100 per tonne .
Today , it fetches almost EUR 300 .
The Commission is demanding that farmers adapt to market signals .
It would do well today to follow its own advice .
In the face of this crisis , the European Union cannot wait until 2014 to come up with solutions .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because it strongly criticises the rise in the food commodity price index , which in recent months has reached its highest level for 20 years .
This has caused social crises , such as the uprisings that have been convulsing the entire Maghreb since December .
Increased food prices are clearly bringing down living standards for the majority of workers , who as a rule spend 50 % of their household income on food products .
In the European Union alone , around 80 million people still live below the poverty line , and many of them are helped through food aid programmes .
Poor harvests in the United States , natural disasters in Russia and Brazil , the hike in energy and crude oil prices and the ageing of operators in the farming sector are among the problems that need to be addressed without further ado .
It is now more important than ever to condemn speculation , and to examine the idea of a European food stock system in order to withstand crises such as the one we are now experiencing .
The aim is to look for shared , collective strategies to respond promptly to the increased demand for foodstuffs , not least through specific incentive policies to attract young people into the world of farming .
in writing . - The EPLP is supportive of the resolution drafted in response to the current steep food price hikes we are seeing and their impact on global food security .
The most recent price increases bring to the fore many of the concerns the EPLP have long held over distortions in the food supply chain , the role speculation can play in exacerbating the situation and the lack of agricultural investment in many developing countries to build up production capacities .
The EPLP is supportive of the need for a global response to the food security challenge but would also like to stress the role an ambitiously reformed CAP can play in helping to address this challenge .
A reformed CAP must be in line both with global food security and development policy objectives , abolishing once and for all export refunds , that undermine the ability of developing countries to build up their own agricultural production , limiting market intervention mechanisms , which also serve to distort the market and promoting sustainable agricultural production to help both the agricultural sector mitigate and adapt to climate change , thereby protecting the EU 's natural resource base and food production capacity .
in writing . - ( NL ) Food safety policy is first and foremost defence policy .
Any country which fails to provide safe and affordable food to its people and ensure a reasonable standard of living for its farmers is heading towards instability and food riots .
The right to food is a basic and fundamental human right .
The text before us rightly emphasises the need for a multidimensional approach .
The steps needed to ensure safe food have much in common with the steps needed for a more efficient fight against climate change , improved development aid , the development of other commercial structures , greater transparency on the commodity markets and measures against speculation .
I would have liked the text to have been even stronger , in particular by pressing for the establishment of an independent global agency that will strictly regulate speculation with food commodities .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance also wanted to propose actions which are necessary to reduce food waste : 20 to 30 per cent of crops are lost at as early a stage as sowing and harvesting .
In developing countries half the harvest rots because it is not being stored or transported .
Meanwhile , consumers and distributors in developed countries throw 40 percent of their food products untouched into the waste bin .
This is unacceptable and unethical !
Finally , I think that food does not belong in the forum of the WTO .
Food can never be an ordinary commodity .
Never !
I welcome the adoption of this joint motion for a resolution , which highlights the main factors contributing to today 's soaring food prices .
They are : the rise in oil prices ; the growing production of biofuels , which is devouring huge swathes of agricultural land ; the ever-more frequent occurrence of natural disasters ; and speculation on the markets .
The aim is no longer to supply food products at the best price , but to make as much profit as possible out of them .
According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation , food prices peaked in January , and it is estimated that , when food prices rise by 1 % , the nutrition of an additional 16 million people is put at risk .
Price hikes thus become a huge challenge for developing countries , which already devote almost three quarters of their income to buying basic foodstuffs .
Consequently , we fear a social and political situation even more dreadful than that during the 2008 ' hunger riots ' .
Europe has a vital role to play in guaranteeing global food security .
Let us hope that the G20 ministers , who will meet in Paris in June , come up with solutions to combat food price volatility .
The right to food , established in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in Article 39 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , has been severely affected by the current economic and financial crisis .
The population growth that is forecast , particularly in emerging economies , and the growing rise in global poverty and hunger demonstrate that at least a 70 % increase in food production is needed to satisfy the population 's needs .
At the same time , financial speculation on food commodities that leads to volatility in food commodity prices is adding to this scenario , as are extreme weather events and the constant increase in bioethanol production instead of food .
I believe that measures urgently need to be taken to combat the destabilisation of the agricultural markets , so supporting farmers and promoting innovation in the sector , whilst reinforcing the role of the common agricultural policy as a key objective of the European Union .
This cross-cutting issue must be discussed multilaterally as it affects people worldwide and the multiplying effects are indisputable .
The riots that have taken place in developing countries are examples of this .
Support for at-risk countries should be reinforced to prevent future food crises .
in writing . - I supported the resolution drafted in response to rising food prices , which are having an impact on global food security .
The most recent price increases highlight many of concerns relating to distortions in the food supply chain , the role speculation can play in exacerbating the situation and the lack of agricultural investment in many developing countries to build up production capacities .
We need a global response to the food security challenge but also to stress the role an ambitiously reformed CAP can play in helping to address this challenge .
A reformed CAP must be in line with global food security and development policy objectives , abolishing once and for all export refunds that undermine the ability of developing countries to build up their agricultural production .
Promotion of sustainable agricultural production is necessary in order to help the agricultural sector both mitigate and adapt to climate change , thereby protecting the EU 's natural resource base and food production capacity .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Border clashes between Thailand and Cambodia
The next item is the debate on seven motions for a resolution on border clashes between Thailand and Cambodia
Mr President , the border clashes between Thailand and Cambodia at the beginning of this month placed the decades-long conflict over access to the temple of Preah Vihear back in the consciousness of the international public .
Although the armed clashes have abated somewhat at present , we must push for a political solution to be found to this conflict .
ASEAN , the United Nations and the EU have a duty to work more intensively on this now , and not to wait until the situation escalates again before reacting .
In the most recent clashes civilians and soldiers on both sides were injured and killed .
The use of cluster bombs was particularly perfidious .
These cluster munitions wreak havoc on civilians that continues long after their launch .
Up to 30 % of cluster munitions fail to explode and remain on the ground as unexploded bombs , where they later explode when disturbed perhaps by playing children .
We call on Thailand and Cambodia to stop using these terrible weapons immediately .
We also call on both governments to sign up to the international convention banning cluster munitions .
Finally , I would urgently appeal to the governments of Thailand and Cambodia to make every effort to resolve this conflict without resorting to arms .
The civilian population on both sides will only suffer further ; suffer for something to which politicians can find a negotiated solution if they only have the political will to do so , rather than attempting to pander to cheap nationalism on both sides of the border .
author . - Mr President , since the beginning of this month there have been fights between the armed forces along the Thai-Cambodian border , near the temple of Preah Vihear , which is listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage site .
We have a responsibility to protect the lives of people first and foremost , but we also have a responsibility for cultural heritage .
Particularly worrying is the reported use of cluster munitions .
Those reports may well be true , as neither Thailand nor Cambodia has ratified the Convention on Cluster Munitions .
To prevent further escalation , which would put the region at risk of destabilisation , both governments have to assume their responsibilities and also have to care for people displaced as a result of this conflict .
We welcome the efforts by the ASEAN chair to facilitate a dialogue between the two countries so that the dispute can be resolved in a peaceful manner .
Thailand and Cambodia have agreed to join an urgent meeting of South-East Asian nations to discuss the conflict .
The Director-General of UNESCO will also send a special envoy to Bangkok and Phnom Penh to urge both sides to cooperate with a possible UNESCO mission .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Lochbihler is quite right : it is firstly about people , about the dead and wounded , and about this scandalous use of cluster munitions .
Secondly , of course , it is about containing a border conflict , settling it by peaceful means and ensuring that it does not broaden into a war .
The third aspect - and we want to address this too - concerns the irreplaceable world cultural heritage of the temple complex in this border region .
Karl von Habsburg , a former Member of this House and the son of Otto von Habsburg , is responsible for these matters at Unesco and will attend the March plenary here in Strasbourg to tell us more about it .
It is my feeling that we actually need to make concentrated efforts to combine attempts to bring about peace and protect people with the protection of cultural heritage .
Here in Europe we know only too well what terrible gaps wars can leave in the cultural landscape .
We must therefore take action wherever there is a threat to the world 's cultural heritage .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since the beginning of February , there has been renewed fighting between the armed forces of Cambodia and Thailand at the border near the temple of Preah Vihear , the surrounding area of which is claimed by both countries .
Regrettably , there have been fatal casualties on both sides , and more than 3 000 people living close to the conflict area have had to be evacuated .
In 1962 , the United Nations International Court of Justice , acting in accordance with French historical maps , recognised Cambodia 's rights over the temple of Preah Vihear and the land adjacent to it .
However , Thailand has never accepted that decision .
What is more , some parts of the border have not been demarcated , a situation which already caused several armed incidents in 2008 and 2009 .
In 2008 , UNESCO listed the temple as a World Heritage site , which also provoked anger among Thai nationalists .
Although a memorandum of understanding on the demarcation of land boundary was signed in 2000 , Thailand 's PAD nationalists are calling for it to be revoked because they feel it is too favourable towards Cambodia .
I should like in particular to highlight the action taken by Indonesia , the current chair of ASEAN , which has offered to play the role of mediator in this conflict .
On Monday 14 February , the UN also urged the two countries to observe a permanent ceasefire , while it made no plans to send UN peacekeepers to the area .
I hope that these two countries will finally be able to settle this land issue peacefully and to stop taking thousands of people wishing to live in peace hostage in this way .
author . - Mr President , for us in the European Union , the idea of taking military action over border disputes is now thankfully unimaginable .
However , this is sadly not the case on the border between Thailand and Cambodia , whose armies have clashed several times in the past couple of weeks over a disputed , tiny , part of their border near to an ancient temple .
Aid agencies report that some 30 000 people have been displaced by the fighting , so it is hardly surprising in such circumstances that innocent civilians have been killed , although both sides contest the actual numbers .
Cambodia 's Prime Minister , Hun Sen , has referred to the clashes as a ' real war ' .
Such bellicose and incendiary rhetoric can only make matters worse .
The short-term solution to this dispute lies in the hands of both governments and the UN Security Council , which should take the lead in imposing solutions to de-escalate the crisis .
In the longer term it is to be hoped that further ASEAN regional integration will help to make such clashes a thing of the past , as has been the case here in the EU for decades .
Mr President , new incidents , apparently minor , took place on Tuesday evening and Wednesday morning on the border between Thailand and Cambodia .
Extremely tense relations have developed between the two neighbouring nations and I believe that this is the reason why the debate we are having today is welcome .
I would actually like to thank Mr Posselt for the initiative he came up with .
I would also like to say that I too deplore the human losses resulting from the armed clashes since the start of the month .
Especially in the current charged atmosphere , we must firmly ask both sides to act with the utmost restraint and comply with the request from the UN Security Council to establish a lasting truce .
Whatever the source of disagreement between Thailand and Cambodia , resorting to force is not a solution .
I therefore wish to appeal to both sides to find an urgent peaceful solution to the territorial dispute in the area around the temple of Preah Vihear .
I must actually remind you that an unequivocal decision was made by the International Court of Justice in 1962 and that there are ample opportunities for resolving the dispute , including via mediation through ASEAN .
All that is needed , in accordance with international law , is to conduct negotiations in good faith .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the 11th-century temple of Preah Vihear has many times been the scene of clashes between the influences of Hinduism and Buddhism , as well as the Khmer Rouge army and the regime of Lon Nol .
Since the beginning of the 20th century , the temple has been the subject of a dispute between Cambodia and Thailand , who each in turn claim the right to the building and the surrounding terrain as well as the right to establish the border between the two countries .
We have been witnessing the latest developments in this dispute since the beginning of February this year .
Despite the decision of the International Court of Justice in The Hague , which ruled that the temple belongs to Cambodia , there are other questions which still have to be decided .
Both governments should make every effort to find a compromise which will provide the foundation for a permanent agreement .
A repeat of the conflict of a week and a half ago , when the armies of both countries shelled each other , is unacceptable both from the point of view of the people of the region , who are in danger of being killed , and from that of the temple , which , despite its inclusion on the UNESCO World Heritage list , has sustained damage .
UNESCO has already offered its help , as has the Association of South-East Asian Nations .
Today , the European Parliament has joined the appeal .
A ticket to gain entry to the temple of Preah Vihear costs five dollars .
I would like to ask what the price is of the conflict between Cambodia and Thailand , which has lasted for over 100 years .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I find it appalling that , in the 21st century , there are some political forces that keep operating in a 19th century paradigm .
Growing nationalism in many parts of the world is giving rise to conflicts based on ethnicity as well as on religion .
The Governments of Thailand and Cambodia must consider that the border clashes have an impact on peace and stability in the region as well as on relations between the two countries .
Even if there are unresolved political issues between countries , it should not reflect on people-to-people contacts .
Otherwise there is an imminent danger of growing nationalism as well as xenophobia .
The situation on the border between Thailand and Cambodia should be resolved peacefully in accordance with the ruling of the International Court of Justice of 1962 .
The beginning of this year has seen already far too much bloodshed around the world .
Mr President , it is a particular strength of the European Union that we are not egoistic , that we can see past the end of our own European nose and that we do look at what is happening outside Europe and in far-off exotic Asia .
This conflict , as has been rightly emphasised , in fact has a history of over a century .
However , it is good that the European Union and the European Parliament , which is in fact the heart of the Union , has something to say on this matter .
It is good , because we should be present wherever there is debate about human rights , wherever there is debate about this most important matter , and this conflict most certainly shows that people have died and are fighting today , although not with such deadly results , about matters which perhaps could be decided in a more peaceful way .
It is good that the European Parliament is intervening in this matter .
Mr President , in the International Court of Justic ruling of 15 June 1962 , it was decided that the Preah Vihear temple falls within the sovereignty of Cambodia .
It is the obligation of the Thai Government to respect this fact and to refrain from attempting to change the internationally recognized boundaries through military force .
At the same time , the Cambodian government is obliged to allow access to this temple to worshippers from Thailand .
In a situation where one of the parties to a dispute is inclined to go beyond the rules and to impose its interests by force , it is necessary to mobilise international institutions in order to convey a clear verbal message that the world wishes to live under stable political conditions and does not wish to see disputes settled through the use of military force .
It is therefore necessary to mobilise the relevant international institutions locally , in order to prevent the spread of unnecessary conflict and trauma to the civilian population .
The offer of Indonesia , as the presiding country of ASEAN , to mediate in the border dispute is the best way to find a first step towards resolving this situation .
( PL ) Mr President , UNESCO is trying to rescue the temple of Preah Vihear - a monument on the World Heritage list - and to finance its conservation .
However , not only are Thailand and Cambodia failing to respect that effort , but they are also breaking the international Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict , which is binding on both countries .
I think this thoughtlessness may mean the destruction of a building which has lasted since the 11th century .
Above all , however , I think this example should raise the question of responsibility .
There must not be a repeat of what happened in Afghanistan in 2001 , when a unique statue of Buddha was destroyed .
This was the result , not only of the religious fanaticism of the Taliban , but also of the lack of sufficient commitment from western countries .
The destruction of the world 's cultural heritage must not go unpunished .
This is such an important matter , that by analogy with the International Criminal Court in The Hague which tries war criminals , an institution should also be established which tries and brings to justice people who destroy priceless monuments .
Mr President , the resolution on border clashes between Thailand and Cambodia condemns the armed conflict and urges both countries to stop fighting , reduce tensions and accept the mediation of ASEAN and the United Nations .
We are dealing with a totally unjustified conflict .
In 1976 , as ASEAN members , Cambodia and Thailand signed the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation , which commits them to rejecting the use of force in relations between member states and to the peaceful settlement of interstate disputes .
The conflict is unreasonable , also , because the International Court of Justice ruled in 1962 that the Temple of Preah Vihear , close to where the fighting is occurring , belongs to Cambodia .
There are many reasons to believe that the armed clash is linked to nationalist fervour in Thailand , steered by elements in the government which are provoking the fighting to curry favour with hardline voters with a view to this year 's elections .
Mr President , border clashes between Thailand and Cambodia have left an estimated 1 000 dead and another 30 000 displaced .
We deplore the loss of life and make the prevention of any further such losses a priority .
I would also like to express my concern at the alleged use of cluster munitions and call on both countries to refrain from using such munitions .
Killing people and endangering people 's lives is never a solution .
We therefore strongly support all the parties currently working to find a solution and to stop the violence .
We stand for peace and we urge peace .
( RO ) Mr President , I too would like to join my fellow Members who are calling for the peaceful resolution of the tense situation on the border between Thailand and Cambodia .
The clashes which broke out at the start of the month mark the resumption of an older conflict over the UNESCO temple located on the border between both countries .
I should stress that a decision made by the International Court of Justice in 1962 confirmed that this monument belongs to Cambodia , and the authorities must respect this decision .
While it is true that the area around the temple was not demarcated by the Court , I believe that Thailand and Cambodia can reach an understanding by means of negotiation and not through the use of weapons .
The clashes in the area are not only putting a UNESCO monument in danger , but the lives of the population as well .
A border conflict is always a source of instability .
This is why I encourage the initiative from both governments to resolve the issue bilaterally .
I think that the project aimed at setting up a buffer zone to prevent the destruction from spreading is a step towards peace .
( RO ) Mr President , I too would like to express my regret at the loss of human lives , especially in the case of innocent civilian victims .
I am also alarmed that thousands of people have been obliged to abandon their homes due to the clashes on the border between Thailand and Cambodia .
As summarised in the joint motion for a resolution , there is an international legal framework which both sides must comply with .
I believe that the appeal made by the European Parliament must be followed by strong pressure from the High Representative for Foreign Affairs .
However , what may be even more serious is the use of cluster munitions .
I believe that we have a duty to demand Thailand and Cambodia to ratify the convention banning this type of weapon .
Mr President , this situation is a further reminder for the European Union of the importance of mediation and conflict prevention .
To use its soft power to the fullest extent , the EU needs to invest more in conflict prevention .
It is high time that the Vice-President / High Representative Catherine Ashton came up with an initiative to build up a credible mediation and conflict prevention capacity .
This requires policy coherence , standing as a good reminder for the EU Member States .
( ES ) Mr President , I would also like to take this opportunity to highlight two matters that have already been mentioned , but which I consider to be fundamental .
The first is the use of cluster bombs by both Thailand and Cambodia , and the need for both countries to ratify the international Convention on Cluster Munitions .
The second matter is also one that we frequently discuss in these debates on urgent issues .
It relates to freedom of expression , fundamentally on the Internet .
I believe that the weakness and fragility of the Thai political system reveals some serious situations .
For example , the trial being held against Chiranuch Premchaiporn for comments on his website criticising the Royal Family .
The person responsible for the comments has been freed , while the person responsible for the website has not yet been freed .
I also believe it is necessary to point out the need for freedom of expression and , above all , for freedom of association in each of these countries .
Mr President , unfortunately this dispute is over a century old .
It re-emerged in June 2008 and has escalated since the beginning of this month .
Many people have different views as to why it should have escalated at this particular time .
There are those who think that hawkish Thai generals are using it as an excuse to overthrow the government and to cancel the elections proposed for later this year .
Be that as it may , this dispute - particularly looked at from a distance - should be solvable .
It is not a major dispute , particularly if the United Nations uses its mandate and its influence to bring about three things : firstly , an agreement to end cluster munitions ; secondly , a permanent ceasefire ; and thirdly , if necessary , deployment troops to oversee that ceasefire .
If these happen , then this dispute can be brought to an end .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I can confirm that the Commission is following the events along the Thai-Cambodian border closely .
On 7 February 2011 , the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Baroness Ashton , expressed her concern about the armed clashes .
She called on both countries to exercise the utmost restraint , to take the necessary steps to reduce tension , and to resume dialogue with a view to resolving their differences peacefully .
The points raised by the Parliament 's draft resolution were discussed on 14 February 2011 in the United Nations Security Council , in the presence of the Foreign Ministers of Thailand , Cambodia and Indonesia , the latter in its capacity as current chair of ASEAN .
We agree with the conclusions of UN Under-Secretary Pascoe that the situation is indeed serious .
The issue is not only about a world heritage site .
It is also about - perceived or real - national and cultural identities and national pride .
Most importantly , the issue is about human lives and about regional stability .
There are two questions : what can the region do to redress the situation , and how can the EU contribute to a peaceful settlement ?
It is obvious that this kind of conflict cannot be solved by armed force .
ASEAN has a role to play , and we are pleased to see that ASEAN is assuming its responsibility .
The Indonesian Foreign Minister has rightly invoked the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation .
This agreement requires all parties to settle their differences by peaceful means .
We welcome the decision by Indonesia to convene a special ASEAN Foreign Ministers ' meeting on this subject on 22 February 2011 in Jakarta .
There is broad agreement in the United Nations on not letting this issue get out of hand .
Members of the Security Council have called on both parties to refrain from provocation and from deploying military reinforcements along the border .
It is becoming clear that regional efforts offer the most promising avenue for a peaceful resolution to the conflict .
For the EU , this implies giving full support to ASEAN .
The External Action Service is following the matter in detail and will be considering options for supporting ASEAN , if such support is appropriate and is requested from their side .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the final debate .
2 .
Yemen : death penalty against juvenile offenders , notably the case of Muhammed Taher Thabet Samoum
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on Yemen - death penalty against juvenile offenders , notably the case of Muhammed Taher Thabet Samoum .
author . - Mr President , I look with great admiration at the courage of citizens who defy the repression and violence of their governments .
We have seen this happening in popular uprisings in Tunisia , Egypt , Iran , Algeria , Bahrain and also in Yemen .
The young generation wants hope to replace cynicism , opportunities to replace poverty , justice to replace impunity and internet freedom to replace repression and censorship .
We have a long list of serious concerns about developments in Yemen in relation to democracy , human rights and the independence of the judiciary , as well as to the persecution of journalists , bloggers and human rights defenders .
In particular , we are concerned about the climate of fear that is created by the execution of juveniles , despite Yemen 's commitment to the international community not to execute juvenile offenders and the reflection of that commitment in its own penal code .
There is a lack of adequate means to determine the age of defendants , so it is difficult for people to defend themselves .
We call on the President of Yemen and the authorities to at least respect Yemen 's own laws and commitments to the international community and halt the execution of juveniles .
We also stress the need for reforms in Yemen , as called for by so many demonstrators in the streets , and we want their living conditions and their rights to be improved .
Mr President , the Arab countries are being rocked by a wave of popular uprisings that are spreading to them all , one by one , and I hope that this will continue .
An unprecedented wave of protest against the dictatorships in power in those countries is gaining ground .
These dictatorships are in place more often than not with the support and , at best , amid the silence of all of the Western regimes .
No country seems immune to popular uprisings , and that is all to the good .
We took too long - you took too long - to realise what was happening in those countries , and you are still delaying now .
It took until 2 February for the European Parliament to adopt a resolution on Tunisia , and it is only now , at this part-session , that we have adopted one on Egypt .
We had requested , in connection with these emergency situations , a resolution on Algeria .
Our request was refused once again , just as , for months , you - or at least the vast majority of you - refused to see what was happening in Tunisia .
Today , protest movements are being formed , as we speak , in Iran , in Libya , with regard to which you have just given your support - your conditional support , but your support nonetheless - to a partnership agreement , and also in Bahrain and in Yemen , to mention only those that we know the most about .
Yes , that is right , in Yemen , where President Ali Abdullah Saleh has been in power for no fewer than 33 years .
Talk about a managed democracy !
Of course , it is much better than the situation in Libya , since Mr Gaddafi has been in power for 42 years !
We were among the few who said that we could not vote today on a resolution on Yemen without taking account of what was happening in that country .
Men and women there are fighting for their freedom .
Violence is erupting between supporters and opponents of the regime .
Since the rallies began at the end of January , hundreds of people have been injured .
Yesterday in Aden , a young demonstrator was shot dead during clashes with the police , who opened fire to disperse a gathering .
Right now , students in Saada are barricaded inside their campus , where they are still surrounded by the police , and we remain silent .
When we think of Yemen , we think only of the problem of capital punishment for minors .
I am by no means suggesting that the abolition of the death penalty should be abandoned - I have always been a staunch supporter of its abolition , and I believe that any supposedly democratic country that is incapable of abolishing such a punishment is criminal and should not lecture others on democracy and human rights , even if it is the world 's leading power .
Yes , this capital punishment is even more unacceptable when it is applied to minors , especially in a country where it is impossible to know for sure when a person was born and where this impossibility is used to sentence people to death , the benefit of the doubt being given , dare I say it , because of the failure to establish their date of birth and so prove that they were minors at the time of the offence .
And you would like us to adopt a resolution focusing on just one issue , a resolution that merely emphasises , in paragraph seven , the need for reforms , as called for by , I quote , ' so many demonstrators ' ?
That is a bit weak .
Therefore , I and my fellow Members from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have tabled three amendments to update this resolution , and I hope that , together , we will be able to adopt a resolution worthy of the name .
author . - ( RO ) Mr President , I want to assure Mrs Vergiat that , as anyone can see , we are debating not only the death penalty , but also the events taking place recently on the streets of Yemen .
I believe that when it comes to the vote , she will also be able to see what stance our group adopts on these issues .
However , we must not forget that the subject of the emergency resolution which was adopted to be discussed today is the persecution of juvenile criminals and the imposition of the death penalty in this case .
As you are aware , if we Europeans find the death penalty unacceptable and barbaric , it is even more awful and terrible when juveniles are involved .
The bottom line is that the use of the death penalty for crimes committed by an offender under the age of 18 even violates Yemeni legislation , although the authorities in this country continue to carry out such executions .
author . - Mr President , the topic of the urgent resolution is important in itself .
I too want to call on the President of Yemen to halt the execution of Thabet Samoum , as well as to call on him and the authorities to commute the death sentence passed on him and other juveniles such as Ali Abdulla .
However , as has been said , it would be unfortunate to miss this opportunity and not raise some of the basic and more important issues that are emerging now in that country .
That is why I would also like to see Parliament add , at the end of the resolution on which we will be voting , that it notes that in Yemen as in other Arab countries , notably Tunisia and Egypt , demonstrators have taken to the streets in recent weeks to demand more democracy and reforms of the state .
' Whereas many protestors have been attacked or taken into custody by the security forces ' : that is our first amendment .
Secondly : ' expresses its deep concern about the long-standing political and socio-economic problems in Yemen and calls for considerable efforts by the international community to prevent the escalation of the current crisis ' .
Finally , our third amendment : ' expresses its solidarity with the demonstrators who demand democratic reforms and improved living conditions ; welcomes in this context President Saleh 's announcement that he will step down in 2013 and calls on the authorities to stop violence against peaceful protestors and to release all demonstrators who express their dissent peacefully ' .
If all three of these amendments are included , the resolution would be really very good .
author . - ( RO ) Mr President , the death penalty is truly the most inhumane punishment possible and I have appealed against it on countless occasions .
Indeed , the European Parliament has made appeals for its abolition in the countries which still retain this barbaric practice .
However , the executions in Yemen referred to in our resolution are especially outrageous as juveniles are involved .
Even before a crime has been committed , the victims are children .
This therefore violates the fundamental right to life , as well as the international conventions which Yemen is party to and , last but not least , even the penal code in this country , which explicitly forbids the use of capital punishment against juvenile offenders .
The difficulty in determining the exact age of those convicted due to the lack of birth certificates is a circumstance which increases the discretionary nature of this type of punishment .
We cannot discuss this specific issue without taking into account the state of affairs in Yemen .
The Yemeni authorities are violating human rights .
Journalists and activists are being imprisoned illegally .
Women are discriminated against regarding their participation in public life and access to education , while the judicial system is anything but independent .
The recent riots are not only motivated by economic and social concerns , but they also express the strong desire to make Yemeni society democratic .
author . - Mr President , Yemen is a state party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , both of which expressly prohibit the execution of juvenile offenders - those convicted of crimes committed when the perpetrators were under the age of 18 .
The impending execution of Muhammed Samoum , and indeed the detention on death row of several other juvenile offenders , is an affront to international law .
By pursuing such policies , on the bizarre excuses of the accused not having proper birth certificates or of uncertainty about their age , Yemen is aligning itself with the brutal theocracy of Iran .
However , the difference between the two countries is that Yemen receives massive aid from the West , including the EU , in order to root out al-Qaeda terrorists , whereas Iran is an international pariah .
Therefore , we have considerable leverage here in the EU over President Ali Abdullah Saleh .
I urge the High Representative to take all possible steps to persuade him to grant clemency in this case .
Having announced that he will shortly relinquish his post , President Saleh has a real chance now to leave a positive and enlightened legacy in his country , which has been brutalised by conflict and terrorism for so long and now dreams of a democratic future .
Mr President , the use of capital punishment on juveniles under the age of 15 was prohibited in Yemen in 1991 .
Since 1994 , this ban has applied to people below the age of 18 .
Unfortunately , this prohibition is not always respected in practice , for example in the case of people who do not have any documents which confirm their age , as has already been mentioned in this Chamber .
Other dangerous things are also happening in Yemen .
It is a country where the number of weapons has long ago exceeded the number of people , where brutal tribal battles are a daily occurrence and where teenagers with weapons do not cause a stir .
There is even a saying in Yemen that ' if you are old enough to use a knife , you are old enough to fight for your tribe ' .
Besides , everyone who has been to Yemen knows that almost everyone carries a knife , and a teenager with a Kalashnikov is nothing unusual .
Yemeni society is also a very young society - almost half of Yemenis are still under 14 .
The different militias recruit young soldiers , and we should also fight against this .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the death penalty is still in use in 58 countries and one of these countries is Yemen .
My Group condemns the death penalty in general and the planned execution of Muhammed Taher Thabet Samoum in particular .
We want to remind the Yemeni Government of its international commitments regarding the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
Both conventions prohibit the executions of people under the age of 18 .
On Monday , Amnesty International reported on the actions of Yemeni security forces .
According to Amnesty , the security forces beat protestors with sticks and shocked them with electric batons during peaceful protests in Sana 'a .
My Group condemns these violent actions and urges the Yemeni Government to cease all violence against its own people .
Mr President , I promise I will not read quickly , because I am going to speak slowly .
It is an honour for me to speak straight after the former Prime Minister of Finland .
I would like to say that the call for Yemen not to carry out the death sentence on juveniles is an example of the European Union 's characteristic minimalist approach .
I am opposed to capital punishment , though I know that in this Chamber there are people who support it , although they do not say so publically .
I am opposed to capital punishment , irrespective of whether it concerns a juvenile person or an adult .
However , on this particular question I hope we are going to rise above our national and political divisions to demand unequivocally from the authorities in Yemen that on this matter the President of Yemen should make use , after all , of his right to grant a pardon .
This really is a question of a truly united fight .
Mr President , the Yemeni administration has made a commitment to accept the application of both the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
Both of the cases of condemned juvenile offenders are subject to the regime of these documents , and it should therefore not be possible for a judicial body in Yemen to issue a legal decision denying the rights and protection arising from these documents .
Penalties imposed in violation of the valid commitments of a country , and hence the applicable law , cannot be accepted .
If the Yemeni Government claims that its power is based on civilized democratic principles , then it cannot use barbaric forms of governance based on arbitrariness and injustice .
In my opinion , we should make this fact clear to the Yemeni Government today .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , naturally I believe that it is important that here in the European Parliament we condemn dictatorial means , that we condemn dictators and dictatorships , but I also believe that it is important that we urge Yemen in general towards democratic structures .
However , I think that , although this Yemen affair has been raised in the European Parliament , it is not the European Union 's job to adopt a position on this .
This affair is totally confused .
There are totally unclarified circumstances in it .
Even the particulars of the crime cannot be made out satisfactorily .
For one thing , we do not even know how old the young man accused and convicted of the crime was at the time the offence was committed .
It is possible that he was not a minor .
We do not see clearly in this case .
Nothing illustrates Yemen 's astonishing backwardness better than the fact that not even the birth certificate of Mohammed Taher Thabet Samoum has surfaced .
Neither has it been proven to this day whether his school papers presented by his lawyer are genuine or whether these are false school papers .
Moreover , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that this is not about stealing a hen but this is a case of murder , and so here I prefer to be a little restrained and more measured than the speakers so far .
The European Union must consider , similarly to the world 's other democratic countries such as the United States of America , the option of the death penalty for certain exceptionally serious crimes proven beyond doubt .
( FI ) Mr President , the Samoum case is not a oneoff event in Yemen : at least eight other juvenile offenders are in custody awaiting a death sentence .
This is especially challenging in a country where there are no birth records , so it is impossible to say with any certainty whether someone was underage in a situation when a crime was committed .
It is nevertheless important to remember that the state of Yemen is party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , both of which expressly prohibit the death sentence against juvenile offenders and harsh sentences in general for such people .
The execution of juvenile offenders is , furthermore , forbidden in Yemen 's own penal code .
In contrast to the previous speaker , I would like to say that the death penalty is always cruel , inhuman , and a punishment that strips a person of human dignity .
For that reason , the EU will fight against the death penalty in all situations , and we too in this House will appeal in favour of that .
( RO ) Mr President , sentencing a child to death is unacceptable in the world we live in .
Turning this practice into a habit is a crime in itself .
This is why I want to express my disagreement with the decision made by the Yemeni authorities to continue such actions .
The government is violating both the international treaties on this matter and the penal code which prohibits the use of the death penalty for juveniles .
In addition , the way in which the justice system tries to find out the age of those brought before it remains unclear .
This case is a sad example of what is going on in Yemen .
As an MEP and citizen of the EU , I believe in the fundamental importance of a person 's right to life , and children must be the first to be protected .
I appeal to the EU 's High Representative to halt the succession of these bloody executions .
( RO ) Mr President , Thabet Samoum and Fuad Ahmed Ali Abdulla were probably minors , as they maintain , when they committed the offences for which they were sentenced to death .
They received their sentence years ago and it may be carried out at any time .
They are being subjected to huge psychological strain , which is inhumane and degrading treatment in itself .
We call on the authorities to refrain from carrying out these punishments .
In addition , neither offender can prove that they were under the age of 18 because they do not have birth certificates .
Obtaining a birth certificate is a serious problem in Yemen where only 22 % of births are officially registered , according to UNICEF .
Some of the funds we use to help this country will perhaps resolve this problem .
Public discussion about these cases must lead to the abolition of capital punishment in Yemen and to the sentences of hundreds of people condemned to death being commuted .
I call on the European Commission and Council to insist on achieving this objective in the dialogue with this government .
( PL ) Mr President , adult or juvenile - capital punishment is a subject to which we ought to devote a lot of time .
After managing to develop our ethical code in the wake of the nightmares which have affected Europe , we should be promoting it in other countries - in countries with which we have any kind of economic contact , but I am also thinking here of countries in Europe .
In Belarus , sentences of capital punishment are still imposed and the death sentence is still in use .
What is happening in Yemen must attract our attention and we must make the loudest appeals to the Yemeni Government to put an immediate stop to these awful practices , and also to look into the fact that - as my fellow Member said a moment ago - there are still a number of juveniles in prison awaiting execution .
I appeal , too , to all of us : we should be working more closely together with organisations such as Amnesty International and the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights , so that our voice will be heard better and have greater force throughout the world .
( DE ) Mr President , the decision in Yemen to impose the death penalty on someone who was a minor at the time of the offence is shocking .
Yemen has clearly acted unlawfully here , since like nearly every country in the world Yemen is a signatory to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child .
Under Article 37 of the Convention , neither the death penalty nor life imprisonment may be imposed for crimes committed by persons before their 18th birthday .
This decision has been justified by the claim that the age of the accused is uncertain .
However , death sentences are also passed against minors in other parts of the Islamic world .
Sharia courts are imposing capital punishment on youths in Somalia , for example .
Together with the UN , the EU must act more resolutely and more speedily here to prevent breaches of international law with such serious consequences .
Dialogue is good , but Realpolitik and economic pressure are better ways to advance our argument .
At any rate , they tend to get things moving much faster .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while we are speaking , hundreds of prisoners packed into Yemeni gaols are waiting for their death sentences to be carried out .
I think this debate should call for greater attention and a swifter commitment from the European institutions .
The ongoing violation of the International Convention on Human Rights is a topic on which Europe must be neither silent nor absent , least of all with regard to a country such as Yemen , with which we maintain economic relations .
Inevitably , therefore , we must also pay great attention to issues of this kind .
In Europe and the Western world , rehabilitation is clearly an important , basic aspect of a sentence .
A death sentence has absolutely no rehabilitation purpose , which is why we need to intervene with the utmost firmness and determination and to make our voice heard in this respect .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the European Union , in implementing its well-established Death Penalty Guidelines , has long been active in fighting the death penalty in Yemen , both generally and by targeting individual cases .
The capital punishment of juvenile offenders has always taken place in Yemen .
In earlier times , however , cases were largely unknown and civil society was not as active .
The EU-funded and UNICEF-implemented Juvenile Justice Programme has contributed significantly to raising awareness , both in Yemen and within the international community .
This programme was carried out together with a coalition of civil society organisations and the Higher Council for Motherhood and Childhood .
However , awareness-raising is not enough .
We need to follow up with actions .
As a last resort , the EU delegation actively carries out démarches to halt executions .
The two most recent cases were in December 2010 for Fuad Ahmed Ali Abdulla , and in January 2011 for Muhammed Taher Thabet Samoum .
In both cases , the execution was halted - after EU intervention - to allow for presentation of evidence of age .
The issue of Muhammed Taher Thabet Samoum was taken up again last week .
It seems now as if a presidential pardon is the only hope for a formal reversal of the sentence .
The EU and UNICEF have again contacted President Saleh and now , according to our own feedback from Sana 'a , the execution is on hold again .
Yemen is bound by international obligations , and by its own juvenile justice legislation and penal code , not to execute juveniles .
The reasons for having juveniles on death row are mainly attributed to a lack of capacity in age determination .
We are therefore , together with UNICEF , looking into how to assist Yemen in building up such expertise , so as to arrest the issue at its roots .
In the immediate term , the EU will encourage the setting up of an independent body to re-examine the age of juvenile offenders .
We will also aim to support the capacities of lawyers to provide legal assistance to juveniles .
In the medium-term , we are looking to develop EU support for an effective civil registry authority .
We are thus taking this extremely grave issue very seriously and using all available means .
The Government of Yemen has shown receptiveness to our démarches .
The EU remains prepared to assist them , now and in the future , to achieve our goal of eradicating the death penalty totally .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the final debate .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( FI ) We have frequently addressed the subject of the death penalty in our resolutions .
Condemning minors to death is rare , but Yemen is one of those countries in which it has happened .
Although Yemen has made progress in its efforts to prohibit death sentences against minors , courts have continued to pass them .
The case of Muhammed Taher Thabet Samoum is not the only one .
Generally speaking , and in connection with intercultural dialogue , it is worth giving serious consideration to what radicalises young people , prompting them to commit crime , even murder , and how best to prevent them from going down the road of crime .
As is known , the death sentence does not reduce crime .
The prodemocracy demonstrations that began in Tunisia and Egypt have received much support from the local youth .
The lack of prospects and opportunities , in addition to a desire for democracy , has provoked resistance .
This wave of resistance also spread to Yemen last week .
I share my fellow Members ' concerns and demands with respect to Samoum and others who have received the death sentence .
Although we are now waiting with interest and hope to see what political changes the demonstrations in the Arab countries will lead to , we cannot for a moment close our eyes to outrages which contravene international human rights agreements , such as the death sentence for minors .
3 .
Uganda : murder of David Kato
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on Uganda - murder of David Kato .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all would wish that David Kato , who was murdered a few weeks ago , was still alive and that he could be here with us - as he was just last November - to speak about the rights of lesbian and gay people and the lack of rights for lesbian and gay people in Uganda , and to plan together with us what can be done to change that .
We all would rather he was alive and had not been the victim of a brutal murder .
David Kato worked in his home country of Uganda to defend the human rights of lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people .
I am pleased that we have succeeded in bringing about agreement between six political groups in this resolution to condemn the murder of David Kato and to call on the authorities , the new political leadership that will be elected in Uganda tomorrow and also religious leaders to bring to an end once and for all the persecution of and violence against lesbian and gay people and against other minorities , and to contribute to enabling lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people to live freely in Uganda too .
Here in the European Union we also have a responsibility to work for such equal rights and to honour the memory of David Kato and others who sacrificed their lives before him in the fight for equal rights .
To this end it is also essential that Baroness Ashton - our High Representative for Foreign Affairs - and the new European External Action Service work for these same equal rights ; for example , in order that the Toolkit to Promote and Protect the Enjoyment of all Human Rights by Lesbian , Gay , Bisexual and Transgender ( LGBT ) People is also used in all non-European countries .
author . - Mr President , today we have an urgent resolution on LGBT rights in Uganda for the third time in this parliamentary term .
The previous two were warnings and attempts to prevent what happened to David Kato , the human rights activist who was brutally murdered .
We must condemn LGBT discrimination across the world , including in Europe and even in this House .
The murder of David Kato is a crime that needs to be fully and impartially investigated .
Not only do the perpetrators have to be brought to justice , but the broader context of intolerance , discrimination and threats to LGBT people needs to be analysed , and changed .
Local publication Rolling Stone and Ugandan parliamentarians have played a role of incitement rather than one of protecting citizens .
Since David Kato 's murder , the authorities have been too silent .
The Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has put the rights of LBGT people on the agenda over and over again and , with the support of all Members of this House , we have urged respect for their human rights - because that is what LGBT rights are - and we will not be silent .
I hope that those Members who are sometimes hesitant or even reluctant to stand up for gay rights will think again and realise that killing people is never justified and that it needs to be met with our ongoing and unequivocal condemnation , just as we address the violations of the rights of other minorities across the world , such as Christians .
The Commission and the External Action Service need to use the toolkit to promote , and protect the enjoyment of , the rights of LGBT people to the full extent with regard to Uganda .
author . - Mr President , the murder of David Kato is the direct result of the hatred and hostility towards Uganda 's LGBT community , whipped up by certain hard-line parliamentarians in that country .
Twice in the past year we have lambasted the outrageous attempts by some MPs in Uganda to mandate the death penalty for the so-called crime of same-sex activity .
It is inevitable that in a climate of such bigotry the lives of gay rights activists would be endangered , and so it has sadly proved to be the case with David Kato .
He knew the risks of publicly defending gays .
He and other alleged homosexuals were outed last year by a newspaper which printed their photos next to a headline which said , disgracefully , ' hang them ' .
I am sure that many of my London constituents are deeply concerned about the European Union giving financial aid to a country where such disgusting sentiments are not only tolerated but sometimes apparently officially condoned .
I hope that Parliament 's Delegation for relations with the Pan-African Parliament will consider carefully what action it can take to register our anger and disgust at Mr Kato 's murder and , more generally , to underline that the EU 's continuing engagement and financial aid to African countries must be reciprocated with progress on fundamental human rights on that continent .
Mr President , we are now on to the third European Parliament resolution of this parliamentary term on discrimination against the LGBT ( lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender ) population in Uganda .
Today we are dealing specifically with the case of Mr David Kato , whose killing has been strongly denounced by many NGOs and international bodies .
Mr Kato was , in fact , a symbol of the fight against homophobia in his country , and more specifically of the denunciation of the Bahati bill , which goes very far in cracking down on homosexuality , since it envisages sentences right up to life imprisonment and even the death penalty .
We must pay tribute to him , but we must also think of all those whose photographs , names and addresses have been publicly disgraced by a rag whose name I shall not even mention .
The climate with regard to the LGBT community is unacceptable , exacerbated as it is by the religious authorities and in particular by the evangelist fundamentalists close to the Head of State .
Tomorrow , presidential elections will take place in Uganda .
Although there are eight candidates , the outgoing President has already declared himself certain of his re-election and announced that he will imprison anyone who protests against the elections .
Those elections are undoubtedly an opportunity to remind Uganda of its human rights obligations , to tell it that the fight against discrimination of any kind , including against LGBTs , is an integral part of these universal values and that we should together respond to Mr Ban Ki-moon 's appeal to make the decriminalisation of homosexuality a universal fight for human rights .
deputising for the author . - Mr President , for those of us who live in the developed world , the chasm between us and the sub-Saharan area both in terms of thinking and practice is very difficult to comprehend .
The case of David Kato is an example of that .
He was a man who was regarded as the father of the Ugandan human rights movement .
As a founder member of SMUG , Sexual Minorities Uganda , he was condemned by a magazine called Rolling Stone , and won his case against them .
The editor said that the persecution of homosexuals and their execution should continue .
Sure enough , David Kato was murdered , on 26 January .
author . - Mr President , it is always a sad moment when we have to pass a resolution on the death of a human rights defender .
For me it is even sadder because , like others in this House , I met him when he came to Parliament to plead for it to act on behalf of those living in Uganda .
As a gay man , can I personally thank this House for the way it has united in this resolution in saying that hatred against lesbian , gay and bisexual people , and the diminishing of their human rights , is totally unacceptable .
The justice that we can give David Kato is not only to ensure that the perpetrators are brought to justice for the crime that they have committed - the senseless murder of this young man .
The real issue is that in the continent of Africa , as Mr Tannock quite rightly said , on issues of human rights and civil liberties , we have given our colleagues too far and too easy a ride on these vital matters .
The best thing that can come from this is that the colonialism that we imposed through our laws , and sometimes through our religion , can actually end in the repeal of the law in the 38 countries that criminalise homosexuality and bring to an end the death penalty in Somalia , Mauritania , Sudan and Northern Nigeria .
That would be a memorial not only to David Kato , a giant amongst the pygmies who preach prejudice and persecution .
It would also be a memorial to this Parliament speaking up for those who have no voice .
Mr President , I truly believe that the discussion about the violation of the rights of sexual minorities in Uganda ought to go further than voicing criticism .
We should reflect on the effectiveness of our measures supporting human rights and examine the level of contribution from European diplomacy towards this .
In December , we adopted a resolution against the punishment of homosexual persons in Uganda and the incitement to crimes against a community stigmatised for its sexual orientation .
I abhor this awful crime , but at the same time , I also abhor the reluctance of European institutions and European Union Member States to resort to the tools of persuasion and pressure which they have available .
I believe that it is appropriate for us to firmly request the Ugandan authorities to guarantee respect for fundamental rights , conduct a fair investigation into this case and prevent other such crimes .
I also think that we need to issue a warning to the Commission for it to become involved much more actively in defending human rights .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we will pass our third resolution against the criminalisation of homosexuality in Uganda .
Within a short space of time gay people have been declared fair game in Uganda .
Even children or minors are affected .
This is all due to the irresponsible actions of a US-based Christian sect and the call by local newspaper Rolling Stone for a hundred people whom it named as being gay to be hanged .
Now David Kato - one such person publicly named as being gay - has been hammered to a pulp on a public street ; this is , in fact , what we were hoping to prevent with our last resolution .
We call on Uganda firstly to hold an independent investigation into the murder of David Kato and not to arrest just anybody for the crime .
Further , we call on Uganda to prosecute those who call for the public murder of gay people .
We also call on Uganda to revise its legislation .
Mr President , I would like to join in expressing my sadness , emotion and , above all , my outrage at the murder of David Kato , and to say that what we need to do now is to show clear determination and a firm will to combat not only this type of murder but also insults and any type of discrimination based on sexual orientation .
In Africa homosexuality is only legal in 13 countries , and in 38 countries it is considered a crime .
This is unacceptable and , moreover , as the European Union we must fight it both politically and economically .
We should not forget that finally we also have the opportunity to contribute , from an economic point of view , to combating this type of measure .
Persecution on the grounds of sexual orientation also needs to be considered as an essential element of the basis for applying for refugee status , and for the right to protection from the European Union and from the Member States that , unfortunately , do not currently grant that right .
If we had had that possibility in the case of David Kato , perhaps we would not be mourning his loss .
How many more deaths are we going to have to mourn in the future .
Mr President , I think a situation in which we are talking about Uganda for the third time in 14 months and for the second time in only a few months is one which is very disturbing .
I agree with previous speakers that in fact this is not about the human rights of just one group , but it is about human rights in Uganda in general as all minorities there are facing extreme challenges .
I think it is particularly important for the European Parliament to speak again on this matter .
I welcome the fact that the representatives of different political groups are speaking together on this matter and are , in fact , speaking with one voice , although of course they may have different emphases .
Human rights are not respected at all in Uganda , especially the rights of this group .
We should therefore protect this group in particular .
We should also defend the right to unhindered political activity and we should also stress , in this context , the rights of human rights defenders .
( PL ) Mr President , the brutal murder of David Kato , one of Uganda 's best-known human rights defenders , is the result of hatred towards homosexual people .
Even if the murderer is punished , the atmosphere of hatred will still remain , sanctioned by the law which discriminates against LGBT people .
Homosexuality is a crime in as many as 38 African countries , and in four of those countries it carries the death sentence .
The European Union actively supports democratic change in Africa .
We must not allow human rights to be violated in such a drastic way .
How much blood must still be shed , how many more people have to die before the international community can force a change in legislation in Africa which violates human rights ?
It is also necessary to examine the role of the Church , which instead of promoting love and peace , is promoting hatred against homosexual people , teaching the ridiculous theory that homosexuality is a serious illness which needs to be treated .
Mr President , I would just like to make a point of order before I go on to my speech .
This is the third time that we have been promised speaking time but then not been listed .
Just because we are independent Members of this House , it does not mean that we do not have a say as well .
Going on to my speech as I wish to give it , I would like to take the time to commend the late David Kato for his brave work in Uganda , for defending not just his rights , but also the rights of other LGBT people in Uganda , and indeed of those in Africa .
It is only too sad that , although he came to this Parliament last October , we obviously did not heed his warnings - nor did the international community - and now he has been killed .
I find it unbelievable that the European Union is still giving aid to Uganda .
I would hope that , after the elections in the next couple of days , we will review that .
I hope that , if there is no amnesty for people being prosecuted for LGBT offences , we would withdraw all aid .
I would just like to make one final point .
It is very sad that the current Presidency of the European Union , the Hungarians , have decided to ban an LGBT pride march this June .
What message does that send out ... ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mrs Sinclaire , I have been told that your staff did not notify your speaking time .
If your staff can forward proof of such notification then I assure you personally that I will look into the matter .
I will attend to it personally if you submit the proof of notification to me .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the murder of David Kato has been met with harsh and decisive condemnation from the European institutions .
We must not forget , however , that this violent act is just a single episode in a wider state of affairs , in which cultural , ethnic or religious minorities suffer discrimination in various parts of the world .
Just a few weeks ago , we adopted an urgent resolution condemning what had happened to Coptic Christians in Alexandria , Egypt , who had been cruelly murdered just because they wanted to profess their faith freely and respectfully .
Looking beyond gay rights , Uganda is an extremely vulnerable country , the victim of financial speculation by certain powers interested in profiting from this country 's weakness .
The European Union must therefore devote its attention to Uganda so that the country can benefit from our ability to promote democracy and civil rights even in non-EU countries .
Mr President , hatred and human rights violations against sexual minorities continue worldwide .
The recent news of the killing of David Kato in Uganda is yet another sad example of the discrimination and brutality that sexual minorities are facing .
The killing of Mr Kato has to be investigated thoroughly , and the person or persons responsible have to be brought to justice .
It has been reported that certain sources , including the Rolling Stone tabloid , had publicly called for the killing of Mr Kato .
These allegations need to be investigated .
I must say that I was appalled by the comments of the Ugandan Minister for Ethics and Integrity , who announced that homosexuals can forget about human rights .
( PL ) Mr President , when I think of Uganda , I think of how much that very beautiful country has suffered since the times of Idi Amin and of how human rights are still being violated there , and I am grateful to all the fellow Members who so diligently draw attention to this .
I think that while we are on the subject we should also talk about the language of hatred and what it can produce .
For ultimately it was the language of hatred ( the tabloid which published photographs of Mr Kato ) which led to this horrendous murder .
The language of hatred is also in use here in the European Union .
There are Internet sites such as Redwatch , and on these sites the names and sometimes even the addresses are given of people who have a different sexual orientation , a different religion or a different world-view .
In fact , on these Internet sites violence is openly incited against minorities .
We must protect human rights and the safety of minorities around the world , but we must also do the same here in the European Union .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , let me start by paying tribute to the late David Kato .
David Kato was a courageous human rights defender and fearless LGTB rights activist .
As a leading voice on LGTB rights , his life was under threat .
On 2 October 2010 , David Kato 's name and picture , along with the names and pictures of other alleged LGBT persons , were published by a Ugandan tabloid , the Rolling Stone , under the headline ' Hang them ' , shamelessly putting their lives at risk .
It was a success that he won an appeal against the paper .
On 3 January , a court ruled that the paper had violated their constitutional rights to privacy and safety and awarded the three plaintiffs damages .
It was his last success .
On 26 January , David Kato was killed .
The EU , through its heads of mission in Uganda , expressed its shock and called on t