Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament , adjourned on Thursday , 5 September 1996 .
Order of business
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe is to meet from 23 to 27 September and will be looking at the draft Bioethics Convention , among other things .
Parliament has already held lengthy and detailed discussions on this extremely important issue , but we have unfortunately not yet delivered an opinion on the subject , having failed to adopt the Pelttari report at the July partsession .
We feel it is absolutely essential for the European Parliament to state its position on this issue , which has such far-reaching implications for the future of mankind .
We are therefore proposing that our group 's oral question should be put on the agenda for this week , and I also hope that the Christian Democrats will propose the same for the PPE Group 's question .
The European Parliament must say something , otherwise the Council of Europe will simply decide what it wants and we shall be left without any official position whatsoever , which would be completely irresponsible of us .
We have requested , pursuant to Rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure , that the vote on this motion today should be taken by roll call , in accordance with Rule 119 .
It is up to you to decide when the debate should be held .
It was not our intention for us to start the discussion today ; we simply wanted to ensure that the issue is debated and voted on at some point during this week .
Mrs Roth , I have a written request from you for the subject to be included on the agenda for the week at 5 p.m. on Monday , 16 September .
I see that you meant this differently .
You meant that it should be taken during the week .
So the request is for this oral question to be added to the week 's agenda .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten wishes to speak in favour of the request .
Mr President , I find it rather strange that one group has tabled an oral question , but another is allowed to speak first .
Be that as it may , it is extremely important that we should decide on our position on the Bioethics Convention as a whole .
We failed to do so in July , as a result of a number of misunderstandings , and I would now urge you and all the other Members of this House to decide what Parliament 's position on the subject should be , since having no position at all is the very worst thing we could do .
I would therefore urge the House to support the inclusion of this oral question at some time during the week .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I should like to express our opposition to the request that has just been made .
We are well aware that bioethics is a contentious issue which causes divisions among the various groups and gives rise to questions of conscience . But this is not the problem .
We are opposed to this request for three reasons .
Firstly , there has already been a decision and a vote .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights debated these issues at some length , under the guidance of Mr Pelttari , and other committees were involved in the discussions too .
These culminated in a vote , and we cannot start using oral questions to cast doubt on the validity of a vote against . No parliament in the world can operate in that way .
Secondly , contrary to what Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has said , there has not been any confusion .
In any event , as the coordinator of the Socialist Group for legal matters , I take it upon myself to say , on behalf of my group , that we had set a minimum level below which basic rights as we see them , in particular women 's rights , would no longer be respected in the document that was before us .
The series of votes led us to take the responsibility of voting against it .
As far as we are concerned , there has been no confusion .
The vote was perfectly clear .
Thirdly , our opinion will be irrelevant in any case .
The European Court of Justice clearly indicated last March that the Community could not be a party to the convention .
The Commission refused to ask for a negotiating mandate , and Mrs Cresson has explained ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) Our vote would therefore be no more than a pious wish which the Council of Europe would , of necessity , have to disregard .
( Applause )
I now put the request to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request )
For Tuesday to Friday , no changes have been proposed .
I would point out , however , that Question Time to the Council has been removed from the agenda for Wednesday .
Members will therefore receive written answers to their questions .
The reason for this is clear , and as you know is due to the large number of items that we have to deal with on Wednesday afternoon .
Mr President , on Wednesday afternoon we have on our agenda a statement by the Council on the political situation in Turkey and a statement by the Commission on the implementation of the customs union with Turkey .
Last week in the Conference of Presidents it was agreed that the issue of Cyprus , what had happened in Cyprus over the summer and the tension currently in Cyprus , should be taken as an urgency debate on Thursday afternoon and kept separate from the discussion on Turkey .
I want to say on behalf of my group - and I know this was said in the Conference of Presidents by our representative - that this is absolutely unacceptable .
We will be arguing that our relations with Turkey must be , and are , influenced by the way in which that country retains an occupation and invasion force in the north of Cyprus .
We have just heard in the Turkish Grand National Assembly that the Foreign Secretary of Turkey released 65 million Turkish lire to send a group of the Grey Wolves , a fascist organization , to Cyprus over the summer .
Those very people , paid for by the state , were involved in the attacks and murders in Cyprus .
It is unacceptable that we should treat an applicant state of the European Union in a time of crisis and tension to a three or four minute debate as part of the topical and urgent debate .
My group will be dealing with what has happened in Cyprus as an integral part of our discussion on the political situation in Turkey .
We hope that other groups will respect that .
We shall also seek to comment on these events in the resolution .
We do not seek to remove the item from topical and urgent debate .
If people wish a second debate on Cyprus on the human rights aspect , fine !
But this is a political issue , it must be dealt with as a political issue and we shall certainly be striving to do that .
Mr President , our group too has just had a meeting with Mr Matsis , the party leader from Cyprus , and we had a very interesting discussion with him .
I entirely agree with Mrs Green that we should try to include Turkey and Cyprus on the agenda , on Wednesday afternoon at least .
I did not quite understand what she said about having an urgency debate on Thursday .
I think if this is what is proposed , then we could also consider having a longer debate on Wednesday afternoon and two resolutions , if necessary .
It is not really important , but we would at least have Thursday free to look at something else .
Before further divisions develop among us - and we are still on the order of business - I shall make a proposal to the House , on the basis of what has been said by Mrs Green and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
The groups are of course entirely free to mention any issues relating to Cyprus in the context of the statement by the Council on the political situation in Turkey and the statement by the Commission on the implementation of the customs union .
That depends on how you organize the debate .
It is also a question for the groups .
You decide what you wish to include in the resolution .
Moreover , you have an opportunity , if you agree on this procedure , of changing the list of urgencies on Wednesday morning and replacing the first item , ' Cyprus ' , with a different subject .
That can be done without any difficulty .
Should there not be enough time on Wednesday afternoon , I am also prepared to say that the sitting will continue until 8 p.m.
If you are in agreement with that , we can proceed accordingly .
Mr President , I am speaking for my Group , since its chairman cannot be here at this time for reasons beyond his control .
And in expressing my Group 's view , I want to say that we agree with the proposal that reference should be made to the Cyprus problem on Wednesday in the statements by both the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , granted the experience we have , it is unthinkable to debate the situation in Turkey , to discuss whether and to what extent Customs Union has been implemented , without also mentioning the Cyprus problem which is absolutely linked with both those subjects .
In that way , the debate can be more complete and there can be a resolution which , of course , will refer to all three issues : the situation in Turkey , Customs Union , and the Cyprus problem .
The issue is different under the urgency procedure : in that case the Cyprus problem stands alone because of the murders that took place in the middle of August .
That is another matter . We should not let one issue get in the way of the other .
So , we are agreed on the procedure .
The groups will mention what they consider necessary on Wednesday , and you will decide on Wednesday morning whether or not to leave the item ' Cyprus ' on the list of topical and urgent subjects .
Mr President , I hope the cancelling of Question Time to the Council is an absolute exception .
I would like to point out to you that when it was decided to move Question Time from its late evening position to an earlier slot , we were assured that it would not be pushed off the agenda .
So , may I have your assurance that this is an exception .
This is really only intended as an exception , Sir Jack .
The group chairmen were agreed , however , that in the special circumstances which we have this week , Question Time could not be held for reasons of time .
Mr President , a small correction to Tuesday 's agenda as regards the Rocard report .
At the Conference of Presidents last Thursday , it was agreed to start the debate at 4.30 p.m. to comply with the Council 's request , but not that it should only go on for an hour , till 5.30 p.m.

Granted that the Rocard report will start at 4.30 p.m. , it could also continue into the evening if necessary , given the importance of the issue .
I think that simple correction is in line with the Group Presidents ' decision .
That is correct , Mr Dell 'Alba , the debate on the Rocard report can be continued after Question Time to the Commission .
Our aim was to have another hour on Wednesday afternoon in the presence of the Irish presidency ; this would therefore be from 4.30 to 5.30 p.m. , as set out in the agenda .
Mr President , it is not unusual for Question Time to be cancelled , unfortunately .
Since it was moved from its evening slot , it has been postponed or cut short on a number of occasions and this is now the second time it has been cancelled , if I am not mistaken .
I am afraid that it will carry on like this , because no one bothers to turn up for it now that it is no longer held in the evening , which is why I think it should be returned to its old place .
The only disadvantage with this is that it means the Council has to work another hour and a half after dinner , but that should not be too much to ask .
We should now bring this item to an end .
Mr President , my point of order is based on Rule 103 of our Rules of Procedure .
Could you please confirm that Jean-Marie Le Pen , a Member of this House , has indeed received the selection of instruments from the Treaties which includes the Joint Declaration on Racism and Xenophobia of 11 June 1986 ?
In this declaration , amongst other things , we vigorously condemn all forms of intolerance , hostility and use of force against persons or groups of persons on the grounds of racial , religious , cultural , social or national differences .
Recent statements by this Member bring disgrace on Parliament and are clearly a total contradiction of all the texts upon which our Community is founded .
All Members have received the documents to which you refer , Mrs Berès .
No , I shall not allow a debate on the matter now .
We have established the order of business .
That was a point of order based on Rule 103 .
I am not allowing a debate on the matter now .
Amendment of Rule 80 ( 1 )
The next item is the report ( A4-0208 / 96 ) by Mr Wijsenbeek , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the amendment of Rule 80 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure on conclusion of the assent procedure .
The report which it is my privilege to present to you today on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure marks a step towards the further revision of parliamentary procedures .
This is not just a natural process which every Parliament has to go through from time to time to keep up with changing responsibilities and ideas , it is also necessary to prevent us from becoming bogged down in procedures which are often not entirely clear to those whom we are here to represent .
The European Parliament sometimes finds it very difficult to get through to the general public properly , partly because of our unfortunate position of having two seats .
When we meet here in Strasbourg , there are sometimes so many interesting things going on in Brussels that the press prefer to stay there .
And if we have something important on the agenda , you have to be very familiar with our procedures and be here all the time to understand how everything works .
We have 20 different types of powers , each with their own characteristics , ranging from simple consultation in one reading to codecision , which can involve three readings and conciliation , or the budget procedure which , including the discharge , involves five different stages .
It is to be hoped that the IGC can simplify matters a little .

However , this is not the subject of this report , which deals with just one of those procedures , the assent procedure , under which Parliament is required to grant final assent for an international agreement or legislative proposal .
Rules 89 and 90 set out more detailed procedures for the accession of new Member States and international agreements .
These two , like Rule 80 , state that the vote is always to be taken , as is customary in Parliament , on the basis of a report drawn up by the committee responsible .
Let us assume that the committee responsible decides that the agreement , accession treaty or legislative proposal in question is not worthy of assent .
If the House agrees to reject it , it must vote ' yes ' , which means that the agreement , treaty or proposal will not be adopted .
If the House supports the proposals in question against the advice of the committee , it must vote ' no ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , believe me when I say that I have no desire to cast doubt on the intelligence of Members of this House , or of the journalists who have to report on everything we get up to , or of the voters who elected us , and who must therefore be extremely intelligent .
But this procedure can be confusing , even for someone with a high IQ , and this was why our committee , at your request , Mr President , instructed me to present this report to you .
These proposals will prevent any possibility of an agreement , treaty or legislative proposal being adopted or rejected by mistake on the basis of committee reports .
From now on , we shall be able to vote ' yes ' when we agree with the proposal and ' no ' - or ' kata ' for those who know Greek - when we want to reject it .
If you approve this proposal by the required two-thirds majority , Parliament will be helping to make its procedures more transparent for the press and for the public .
In conclusion , I would just say that I hope the Council and the Commission will follow our example and make their own procedures more transparent .
Mr President , I can be very brief .
First , I should like to thank Mr Wijsenbeek for his report .
It is a technical revision of the Rules aimed at simplifying and making clearer the Rules as they currently stand .
Mr Wijsenbeek himself summed it up in his own explanatory statement where he said : how are the media , to say nothing of the citizens of the Community , supposed to understand and keep abreast of a procedure in which in order to say Yes , one has to say No ?
Under the Rules revision if we mean to say Yes we will vote Yes , if we mean to say No we will vote No .
On that basis the Socialist Group commends and will be supporting the Rules amendment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Human Rights in the European Union
The next item is the report ( A4-0223 / 96 ) by Mrs De Esteban Martín , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on respect for human rights in the European Union in 1994 .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank all the political groups for the interest and commitment that they have shown with regard to the drawing-up of this report on respect for human rights in the European Union in 1994 .
As you are all aware , a report of this kind will not be without certain difficulties which require a major effort of cooperation and dialogue , with a view to achieving a compromise that accommodates the various viewpoints and positions .
We all know that examining and dealing with the issue of human rights is a complex and wide-ranging task , in the sense that there is a great variety of national standards , reflecting the different constitutional traditions which stem from the various histories and specific circumstances of the individual Member States .
Similarly , at international level , there are many instruments designed to address human rights problems .
In view of this complexity , and taking account of the provisions of Article F.2 of the Treaty on European Union , I took the view that the European Convention on Human Rights was the proper legal basis for the preparation of this report .
It is important for us to distinguish between the traditional human rights that are enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights and the economic and social rights which are also encompassed by this report , and which - as the House will be aware - are different in terms of both their legal nature and the degree to which they are protected .
Traditional human rights are the rights of individual persons , as determined by the appropriate law , which implies the ability of legal persons to bring proceedings against those who violate such rights , using the necessary means .
Economic rights , on the other hand , are programmatic , in the sense that they derive from the development of the law , politics and the economy ; and the State must therefore guarantee those rights by means of a specific undertaking .
However , this does not mean that , in general terms , legal persons have the direct ability to demand specifically from the State the benefit implied by the recognition of a given right .
The State 's obligation lies in the fact that it must make available , within the bounds of its economic and financial possibilities , the resources necessary for the fulfilment of those economic , social and cultural rights .
That distinction being made , Mr President , I have tried in my report to reflect the actual situation of respect for human rights in the European Union in 1994 , with priority being given to direct or formal legal sources - such as legislation , case-law and jurisprudence - at national , international and Community level ; to the reports of the Council of Europe and the judgments of the Court of Human Rights , which helped us to collect reliable information on the actual situation of respect for human rights in the European Union ; and to the contributions of certain nongovernmental organizations .
Clearly , the Member States of the Union belong to a group of countries which fully guarantee respect for human rights by means of democratic , pluralist political systems with effective parliamentary institutions and independent legal systems . Nevertheless , we were able to identify cases of the abuse of these fundamental rights throughout 1994 , including the violation of the right to life by terrorist groups and situations of ill-treatment , particularly in the form of overcrowding in prisons .
The report expresses concern for the rights of persons charged with an offence , especially as regards the slowness of legal proceedings and the need to establish certain procedural guarantees in the legislation of the Member States . It addresses the subjects of the rights of the child and the need to guarantee the principle of equal treatment and non-discrimination in the broadest sense , as well as specifically condemning all manifestations of racism and xenophobia .
The development of the law within the framework of universal respect for human rights is a fundamental commitment , and the prime objective of any blueprint for a genuinely democratic society has to be human freedom and dignity .
Consequently , the European Union , which is moving towards a common political future whose legitimacy must be based on fundamental democratic principles , has long been concerned to defend and protect these fundamental rights ; and the European Parliament , as an institution directly elected by free universal suffrage , has a special duty to safeguard respect for those rights .
This Parliament will not have the moral authority to adopt resolutions concerning respect for human rights in third countries if it does not prove capable of deliberation and constructive self-criticism with regard to respect for human rights within the European Union .
Consequently , I call on the Members of this Parliament to assume their responsibilities , so that together we can take forward this report , the difficulties and complexity of which I referred to earlier .
The European Parliament must prove capable of adopting resolutions such as that which is now before it , in order to be able to maintain its prestige , authority and influence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank Mrs De Esteban Martín for all her hard work over the last few months .
I hope - and this is repeating the call she herself has just made - that Parliament will now be able , this year at least , to adopt a report on the human rights situation in the European Union .
We failed to do so last year because our discussions were far too ideological , and we lived to regret it , because the House really has no place discussing and passing resolutions on human rights violations outside the Union when it cannot even draw up a report on the situation within the Union because it is unable to agree on a definition of what human rights are .
I should therefore like to stress that the report as it now stands - thanks once again to Mrs De Esteban - is very much in line with my group 's ideas and is something that we can broadly subscribe to .
We are most grateful to the rapporteur and the committee for adopting it .
The fact is that as we go into the twenty-first century , we need to set about extending the traditional 18th- and 19thcentury concept of civil human rights to include a number of basic rights which are of fundamental importance to people in Europe and throughout the world .
There are rights associated with the environment , because the inviolability of man also involves environmental considerations .
There are social and cultural rights which advanced societies such as ours in western Europe should be able to guarantee .
These are all ideas which should be included in the report as new perspectives generated by our discussions .
We hope that our colleagues in the PPE Group in particular will support the rapporteur , who has suggested in her report that we should work together to try to extend the concept of human rights , whilst still carrying out our traditional review of the human rights situation in the European Union .
You would be playing a vital role in ensuring a majority for the report , on which there is already broad agreement , rather than its rejection , which is what the result might be if you voted against it with the extreme right .
We must not allow a repetition of the events of last year , when the human rights debate foundered because the extreme right used their votes to prevent the House from adopting a report on the human rights situation .
Or do we really want to allow people who sit in the House but should really be in this report to determine how the human rights debate in the European Union should develop ?
Do we want to let Mr Le Pen , a racist and fascist extremist , have a say in how the human rights debate is conducted ?
He can try to sue everyone who calls him a racist and a fascist in France .
He is welcome to try to sue me .
That is what he is !
The far right-wing parties in Europe are trying to use the kind of fascism we saw in the 1920s and 1930s to appeal to people 's baser instincts and to bring the oppressed minorities even further under the yoke .
And these people are sitting here in the House voting on this report .
It is up to you , the members of the UPE and PPE Groups , to help us to ensure that this rabble are not given the opportunity to decide what human rights should be in the European Union .
That is why we welcome this report as it stands .
We intend to vote in favour of the amendments we have tabled , and some of those proposed by Mrs De Esteban .
I am addressing my colleagues from the conservative groups when I say that I hope we have finally found a common platform on which we can conclude the human rights debate in the European Parliament with dignity .
Mr Schulz , I cannot let the word ' rabble ' pass as a description of Members of Parliament .
Mr President , we must not allow the human rights report to be used as a cudgel in our internal political wranglings , and I am afraid that your speech , Mr Schulz , showed distinct signs of doing that .
How can you talk about human rights in a way which is bound to earn you a reprimand from the President ?
We want to see Mr Le Pen and his colleagues out of Parliament just as much as you do , but this is a matter for the voters , not for you as an individual !

Mrs De Esteban Martín has done an excellent job on her report , and made an outstanding speech on which I warmly congratulate her .
This Parliament has not had much fortune up to now - to put it mildly - with its human rights reports , which have either failed to be adopted or been highly controversial , for the most part because they were not so much a reflection of the human rights situation in Europe as of the internal political disagreement on the concept of human rights .
As long as this remains the case and we are unable to find a common definition of human rights , we cannot claim to speak about them with any credibility or legitimacy .
We cannot allow the concept of human rights to be expanded indefinitely .
The previous report called for it to include things like the right to housing , work , a healthy environment and life-long education , which are all entirely legitimate political demands , but as Mrs De Esteban Martín rightly pointed out , they are not human rights , they are a political manifesto .
Manifestos are there to be argued about : human rights should not be .
That is why we need to restrict ourselves to the concept of human rights and leave manifesto demands alone .
The simple key to the problem lies in the Convention on Human Rights , which everyone has signed , and the European Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg .
The issues which can be brought before the Court are human rights matters , and everything else should be excluded .
Mr President , a debate on human rights in the European Union should be an occasion to highlight issues of major importance .
However , many elements of the report which we are now considering , not through any fault of the rapporteur , are unacceptable .
I will come to these shortly .
I have no difficulty in supporting the request to the Commission to submit a communication on instruments aimed at combating trafficking in human beings , a subject which we will have an opportunity to consider later this week in the context of our group 's oral question on the need for EU measures aimed at tackling violence against children , which is particularly and tragically topical in the light of recent events in Belgium .
Equally I have no difficulty in endorsing - and indeed emphasizing - the need for effective cooperation to combat drug gangs whose members , if they care in any way , have so many deaths and ruined lives on their hands .
Existing policies on drugs have failed to prevent illegal drug trafficking , which is now more intense and more deadly than ever before .
The days of kid-glove treatment for drug pushers and the unseen drug barons must end .
It is a question of who represents the law : the drug barons and the murder squads or the police and the justice department or the politicians .
In my own country gang warfare , intimidation and shootings are becoming all too frequent an occurrence , particularly in my own constituency .
In West Dublin , in my own constituency and in the inner city the drugs crisis and heroin addiction have reached epidemic proportions .
The people appear in certain areas to have resolved to take the law into their own hands in an effort to protect their own children and go beyond the law in some cases .
The cold-blooded murder of an Irish journalist , my friend Veronica Guerin , by one of our drug barons whose identity is known but who is evading prosecution is only one recent case .
These evil men who toy with and destroy the lives of adults and children alike , who pay no respect to human rights , must be brought to book and the full rigour of the law brought to bear on them .
Their ill-gotten gains must be frozen .
They must be prevented from transferring their assets anywhere within the Community .
The necessary police and judicial cooperation must be forthcoming at European level , and urgently so .
One has to ask who rules society .
Many of our citizens are asking this now .
Is it the legitimate forces of law and order or the drug barons operating throughout Europe with their vast fortunes and their hit-men striking terror into our towns and cities ?
As a result of the vote in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and the adoption of many amendments , the balance of Mrs de Esteban Martin 's report has been overturned .
On the one hand we are calling for effective cooperation to combat drug barons and on the other we are turning the report into a charter for prisoners , with scant reference to the needs and rights of the victims of crime .
Many of these prisoners are the very people who are responsible for organized crime , murdering and terrorizing elderly people in their own homes .
No reference has been made to the need for the transfer of prisoners which could go a long way to restoring the IRA cease-fire .
There is an awful lot to be said for this report .
I congratulate Mrs de Esteban Martin on the immense work she has put into it but I think that when it comes to voting we will either have to abstain or vote against because of the complexity .
Mr President , I should like to begin by sounding a warning note in this debate .
The world has never seen such long lists of human rights as in the constitutions of the former communist states .
Page after page , they set out all the rights which people had in the communist people 's democracies , and because there were so many rights , it was always possible to suppress one by referring to another .
Social rights were used as an excuse for suppressing political freedoms , and without political freedom , it was impossible to check whether social rights were being suppressed , so they were naturally suppressed too , with the result that people had neither one freedom nor the other .
That is why we have had these repeated disputes concerning human rights reports here in Parliament .
Some of us quite seriously take the view that human rights in Europe are damaged by including everything possible from our domestic party programmes .
If Mr Newman never had his human rights reports adopted , it was because he could not refrain from adding every possible item from his domestic party programme in the United Kingdom - reasonable points , no doubt , but items which do not belong in a report on human rights .
This report by Mrs De Esteban is much better .
It is shorter , and therefore more powerful .
I am pleased that it also addresses the question of trade union freedoms .
We should not just be stressing the freedom to form unions and associations and campaigning for such rights ; we must also emphasize the freedom to remain outside these organizations without a threat to one 's trade or occupation .
I also think it is necessary for us to have a separate clause on the need for the Member States to punish offences against children , even if these are committed in countries where they are not prohibited .
And the right to life was , after all , referred to as the very first right in the American declaration of independence .
We in the Liberal Group will be voting against several paragraphs in the report .
I would ask the House to appreciate that we are also voting against some things that we may well agree with , but are doing so because we do not feel that they belong in a report on human rights .
We hope the Socialist Group will change its mind and not vote to include so many party political items in the report that we are obliged to vote against it at the end .
We would vote in favour of the report as it is now , but there are limits to what we can accept being included , and we think there are a good many paragraphs which should be taken out of the report as it now stands .
As Liberals , we are ardent supporters of human rights .
We value them so highly that we do not wish to have them mixed up with everything else .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the area of human rights involves enormous problems , and without wishing to neglect all the other issues associated with human rights , which are often flouted in the Member States , I shall confine myself today to talking about the predicament of those families without papers who are suffering violence at the hands of the French Government .
These families are hoping that their problem will be resolved without delay .
This House can help by supporting their campaign .
In France , the Pasqua laws of 1993 on immigration have ' clandestinized ' - if I may use the term - many immigrant families and put them in a situation of permanent legal insecurity .
Parents of children born in France are being refused the right to stay and threatened with expulsion .
Asylum-seekers are being herded shamefully onto chartered aircraft , and the Minister of the Interior regards these expulsions with the same satisfaction as if they were the tally of a successful day 's hunting .
Since March , these people without papers have been conducting an admirable campaign , and I would pay tribute in particular to the courage of the hunger strikers .
They have had the support of associations , churches , trade unions and political parties , like it or not .
A large delegation of people without papers will be in Strasbourg on Wednesday to inform Members of the reasons for their actions and their objectives , and to breathe the spirit of the church of St Bernard into our Chamber - which for some of us would be no bad thing .
The French Government has responded to their quest for recognition and justice with contempt , excessive violence or an entirely arbitrary approach to dealing with individual cases .
Our group supports these people without papers in their fight against a government whose immigration policy has been reduced to a low-grade policing operation for sordid political ends .
Although we need to combat clandestine immigration , its networks and traffickers , we cannot do so by disregarding people 's rights .
We are asking for the position of those without papers , who have settled in France legitimately , to be regularized without delay , out of respect for both human rights and international conventions .
By the same token , I welcome what is happening in Spain and Portugal .
By contrast , at European level , I deplore and condemn the recommendations and resolutions adopted by the Council , which are always more restrictive and discriminatory as regards immigration and asylum .
Let us say no to fortress Europe !
Let us say yes to a Europe of brotherliness and solidarity !
It is a matter of urgency to bring this strategy of scapegoats to an end . Using immigration for political purposes is dangerous , and only serves to strengthen and lend credibility to those who favour a populist policy based on exclusion and xenophobia .
The axes wielded by the French police in the church of St Bernard prepared the ground for Mr Le Pen - who I believe is a Member of this House - to make his disgraceful racist comments about the races being unequal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we start talking about human rights here in our own back yard , as it were , I really do have the impression that there are a good many among us who think the same as the Pharisee in St Luke 's Gospel , Chapter 18 , verse 11 : ' God , I thank thee that I am not - that we are not - as other men are ' . Everyone seems to think that human rights violations always happen a long way away , anywhere except here .
This is a very two-faced view of things : we make a great deal of noise about human rights , but are very selective when it comes to putting them into practice .
Human rights policy here is always primarily a question of protecting interests .
A political theory of relativity seems to apply in our dealings with countries which commit classic human rights violations : the bigger and more important these countries are , the quieter our anger .
It is always - and this brings me back to where I started - easier to condemn crimes in others than to acknowledge one 's own wrongdoings , but this is exactly where the question of credibility comes in .
We must all take a long , hard look at just how good the human rights record is in the European Union .
For the sake of our own credibility , we must not just concentrate on defining human rights on paper , as has been done so often in various protocols , conventions , final acts and declarations .
We also need to find out what the situation is in reality , and assess it using a very broad and comprehensive definition of the concept of human rights , rather than a narrow , restrictive interpretation .
So when I talk about human rights , I include the right to a healthy environment , I include poverty and exclusion , I include the rights of women , children , the elderly , disabled persons , homosexuals and lesbians , foreigners and refugees .
The conservatives have scorned this as being what they call a watered-down version of the traditional concept of civil human rights .
So including social and ecological rights is meant to be wateringdown ?
This is what the developing countries have been criticized for doing for years : demanding social rights to help their poor and suffering people out of poverty .
But what has Europe been doing ?
It is the EU countries themselves which have been watering down traditional agreements such as the Geneva convention on refugees by failing to apply them correctly .
So the main danger for human rights is that they will gradually cease to be binding , not because they have become so all-embracing , but because of the European Union 's failure to apply them .
Only if we in the House are prepared to tackle the existing abuses as a domestic policy issue will the annual human rights report be anything more than just lipservice .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for adopting a genuinely broad and comprehensive definition of human rights , and I hope that this report on the human rights situation in the EU in 1994 will now finally be given the necessary majority in the House in September 1996 .
Mr President , our group will of course vote in favour of Mrs De Esteban Martín 's excellent report .
However , in discussing human rights in the European Union , we cannot confine ourselves to the behaviour of the Member States and their governments towards their own citizens .
Here in Parliament , we ought also to be discussing our behaviour towards the citizens of third countries , and how such behaviour should be firmly incorporated into our laws , regulations , the attitude of the authorities , and everyday life and practices .
But what does fighting for human rights really mean in practical terms ?
It means being opposed to battering down the doors of a church with axes in order to seize hunger strikers confined to their beds .
It means obliterating the disgraceful assertion which would have us believe that men are not born equal before the law .
Of course , the volley of warning shots which has been fired recently in France by militant fascists has only a limited range .
But let us be on our guard !
The way in which we now treat people from Africa , Turkey or the Arab countries , and the inhumanity we have shown towards them , certainly foreshadows the way in which we , the citizens of the European Union , will be treated if we leave the way clear for the nationalists . They are enemies of democracy who can easily turn into assassins , as they have already shown recently here in Europe .
Mr President , respect for human rights , which has its roots in our commitment to the dignity of the person and thus in our oldest spiritual traditions , deserves the utmost attention from the countries of Europe .
That is why the Member States of the Union are particularly vigilant in this context , especially France , which has respected human rights perfectly well in the case of the immigrants without papers who , whether Mrs Pailler likes it or not , have after all broken our laws .
It is in order to protect these rights that the Member States have acceded to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
We are today considering the question of whether the European Union as such should accede to the Convention .
The Esteban Martín report answers this in the affirmative .
We do not share this view , since accession , which would be of little practical use , would cause the Union to take an institutional leap forward which it did not control .
The fact is that Article F of the Treaty already states that the Union is to respect fundamental rights , as guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights and , for its part , the Court of Justice has integrated them into its caselaw .
In reality , the only outstanding issue is the possibility of a divergence of view on matters of Community law between the court in Strasbourg and the court in Luxembourg . However , this is of secondary importance , and does not present any difficulty which could not be resolved in the course of time .
On the other hand , the accession of the Union to the Convention would involve a complex set of legal arrangements which would be slow to use , since on top of the delays in our Court of Justice , there could be an appeal to the court in Strasbourg .
In these circumstances , the only advantage of direct accession by the Community would be to bring it a little closer to a goal at which it has long been aiming , namely to pass itself off as a state .
Moreover , if the Union were to accede in this capacity , it would first have to be given legal personality . This would once more lead us into uncharted territory .
Finally , if the Community , or the Union , were able to conclude international conventions on human rights , this would doubtless mean that , in this area , it would henceforth have a general competence that has always been denied it in the Treaties .
This would obviously be even more true if one were to include a list of basic rights in the Treaty , as some have been demanding .
Should there be such a swing from technical to general competences , we would not be very far away from a change in the nature of the European institutions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is strange to hear Parliament discussing human rights when just now the President twice refused to let me speak so that I could reply to Mrs Berès and Mr Schulz , both of whom had directly insulted our colleague Jean-Marie Le Pen and thus indirectly the other ten National Front Members of the House , including myself .
Furthermore , I am bound to say that the people have already decided on that particular issue . Last night , four byelections took place which showed the National Front making very considerable progress , in spite of the debate that has been raging in the media throughout the past week .
So Rule 108 of the Rules of Procedure has not been observed .
Point noted .
Human rights are , it is true , the most appropriate basis for the worship of a particularly obnoxious vice , called hypocrisy . Unfortunately , the report we are debating here today has a grave historical tradition behind it , since as long ago as 1793 , Robespierre had a particularly demagogic declaration on human rights approved by the Convention , and accompanied it with a brand of state terrorism known as the Terror .
Another example referred to just now by a colleague is the USSR under Stalin , who , without batting an eyelid , signed a splendid Universal Declaration of Human Rights at the San Francisco Conference .
Having a Gulag that contained millions of prisoners did not embarrass him in the least .
Furthermore , the great philosopher Hegel , in his writings on the French Revolution , very ably showed how modern totalitarianism was founded precisely on applying general legal and philosophical norms , which we call human rights , in order to crush the individual .
Leaving aside this philosophical debate , I note that the report fails to mention certain breaches of human rights which nevertheless cannot be denied . A case in point is the infringement of the right to free speech .
I cite the example of my own country because I know it best .
Our movement , the National Front , has been the victim of some extremely serious violations of the right to free speech . These have occurred not only as a result of the sometimes arbitrary behaviour of the media and the government , but also as a result of a communist-inspired law - the Gayssot law - a totalitarian measure which has no place in a democratic country .
Moreover , the Justice Minister recognized its totalitarian nature at the time it was adopted .
Another example is the violation of the freedom of the nations of Europe to decide by referendum whether or not they really wish to become countries of immigration .
In this context , I would refer you to the works of Kant , who states in his plan for everlasting peace that the native people of a country have always had the right to say whether or not they would accept immigrants .
I should mention that Kant was particularly concerned about protecting the American Indians . That unfortunate race has had to suffer immigration to the point where it has now almost disappeared , at least as a sovereign people .
Violation of the safety of the individual is yet another example . Strangely enough , this report has very little to say on the subject .
I see that five times as many crimes are now committed in the European Community as in 1957 .
As is usual in cases where human rights are violated , it is the poor who are the victims .
Infringement of the right to work , as mentioned by the rapporteur , represents another very serious assault on human rights . However , she was careful not to say that massive unemployment is the result of European policy on reducing inflation and unbridled free trade .
Amongst the 20 million unemployed it is once again , as if by chance , the weakest who are affected , as they are by immigration and insecurity .
All these violations , which are neglected or ignored in the report , obviously affect the weakest of our fellow citizens and represent a decline in civilized standards in everyday life , even though , day after day , people are frantically publishing texts on human rights .
All of which goes to prove that an internationalist Europe is an oligarchic idea designed to protect the interests of an extremely arrogant ruling class which has taken over the reins of power in Europe and is pursuing policies that show contempt for people 's interests .
I was particularly shocked by several specific examples of this attitude .
Firstly , I am astonished that there is nothing in the report about the right to life of the unborn child , which is quite plainly not recognized . Such an omission makes a mockery of two thousand years of Christian tradition and two and a half thousand years of humanist tradition , since Hippocrates himself had already acknowledged this right five centuries before Christ .
The attitude to immigration is yet another example .
The report does not mention the need for a democratic provision , once again , to enable people to decide whether immigration is justified .
I should also like to condemn paragraph 60 , which criticizes the attitude of the Greek Government .
I regard this as an infringement of Greek sovereignty which I find hard to countenance on the part of the European institutions .
With regard to the condemnation of racism in paragraph 86 , I note that no mention is made of the need to protect members of the native population who are the victims of racism on the part of certain immigrants .
One has the impression that it is always the same people who are the victims of racism . However , any group of people can experience racist attacks .
This has indeed happened to the native population in most European countries , but there is nothing about it in the report .
Finally , paragraph 93 states that the extreme right-wing parties advocate xenophobia .
I would make the point that xenophobia has existed throughout history , both on the right and on the left .
The Hébertistes were xenophobes during the French Revolution ; Blanqui was a xenophobe .
Nowadays , all the television channels are guilty of xenophobia against Iraq , to say nothing of the anti-Russian xenophobia to be found in some French newspapers , such as that prestigious daily ' Le Monde ' .
As regards the right of family reunification , it should have been made clear that this is to take place in the host country .
I have one final comment to make , namely that current economic policies in Europe show no respect for economic rights , but I have already said as much a few minutes ago .
As a result , I believe that there are huge gaps in this report , which is immensely hypocritical and thus reflects the present state of the political debate .
Mr President , it is very distressing to hear what we have just heard when we still ...
Is this what you call free speech !
Let me express my views - I said nothing at all while Mr Blot was speaking .
I was saying , Mr President , that it is very distressing to hear what we have just heard when we still have in our minds the pictures shown on French television last night of a demonstration by Mr Blot 's party that was no more than a sordid exploitation of a human tragedy being acted out in France .
( Heckling ) Free speech , Mr Blot , free speech !
This is not a personal attack on Mr Blot .
It is simply an attack on the exploitation of this tragic event in France by a political party for purely racist and electoral reasons .
And why ?
Because the decision to hold a demonstration , Mr Blot , was taken ...
( Applause ) The decision , as you well know , was taken only after the members of the National Front had received confirmation of the origins - I did not say nationality - of the perpetrator of the crime .
He was of Moroccan descent , and last night on television , Mr Le Pen referred to a Moroccan .
To Christine Ockrent he insisted : ' No , he was not French , he was Moroccan ' .
Whereas we know that he was French , with a French identity card .
Unfortunately , he had a Moroccan mother .
But enough said about intentions .
What this really means - and this is what the National Front has said in a number of past statements , I would point out - is that if you were to come to power , you would not beat about the bush as regards nationality and you might well , as happened under the Vichy regime , simply turn the clock back .
I am sorry , Mr President , I shall now return to what I really wanted to say , which is that Parliament devotes a considerable amount of time to condemning human rights violations in third countries , and quite rightly so .
There is a French saying that if you climb a coconut tree , you need to be wearing clean trousers .
So are we really in a position to be lecturing people , when human rights are not universally respected in the European Union , and when we all know very well that there are indeed numerous infringements ?
In the time I have left , I shall give just one example . It concerns the tragic way in which the right to asylum in Europe is becoming more and more exclusive every year .
Under the Geneva Convention , however , the European Union has a duty to protect those who are being persecuted which cannot be abandoned .
But as a result of some restrictive interpretations of the Geneva Convention , this protection is no longer guaranteed , and the number of people receiving immigrant status is currently declining , even though not a great deal of progress is being made in the world towards improved respect for human rights .
For instance , among those without papers in Paris , there were some who had been refused asylum , even though the UNHCR had recognized that they were genuinely at risk in their own countries .
I would end by saying that it is essential for us , at the very least , to condemn violations of human rights within the European Union as we do in the case of third countries .
That is the subject of the report we are discussing today .
Last year , however , we were not even able to approve and agree on the 1993 report on human rights .
Our refusal to do so sanctioned the opposing stance of two different views of human rights : a static view , rigidly based on fundamental rights , and a broader , progressive view , in touch with changes in our society .
This distinction still persists - as we have just seen - and threatens to lead to the same outcome .
I too would therefore draw attention to the remarkable achievement of the rapporteur in managing to reconcile these two disparate points of view .
She has shown great courage under extremely difficult conditions .
I hope that her efforts will not have been in vain .
A positive vote might lead to a calmer approach in future years .
Our credibility outside the European Union is at stake .
Mr President , I must protest about the way in which you have applied the Rules of Procedure , or rather not applied them .
It is quite disgraceful that , regardless of the subject under discussion , a speaker on the list who has a speaking time can in fact have it virtually doubled to enable him to hurl abuse at another Member , before going on to make his speech .
This cannot be allowed , and I would ask for this point to be noted in the Minutes .
Mr Bazin , your comments will be entered in the Minutes but I was generous because of my interpretation of the facts .
Our colleague was , it seemed to me , wrongly interrupted and so I gave her an extra twenty to thirty seconds . I do not see that as a violation of our Rules .
Let us continue our debate calmly , I hope . Mrs Colombo Svevo , you have the floor .
Mr President , we need a report like this and we also need to think carefully about its coverage .
Year on year we need to take stock , in summary , of the standing of these rights within the Union .
In my view the rapporteur has made a very good effort at that , but every year there is the recurring diatribe from those who believe that the report should concern itself strictly with fundamental human rights and those who want it extended to economic and social rights .
There are many arguments on either side , but if we were to keep strictly to the position of those who concentrate exclusively on fundamental rights , we would have to succeed , together with the Council of Europe , in pinpointing increasingly scrupulously every violation and shortfall in that area .
For example , we ought to think carefully about the right to life and human rights as regards what is going on in the field of bio-ethics , finding free expression and new language so that new ways of thinking can be continually opened up .
This would not mean cutting back , but we should honestly say that the other rights ought to be the subject of a parallel report on social and economic rights .
If we do want to try to include them in a single report , and I think it is possible , then clearly social and economic rights , within the report on human rights , cannot be confined to a repetitive list of all the objectives we are raising to the level of rights but which are not rights in the legal sense .
We will also have to find the right point of convergence for the coverage of this report , and that point can be identified because court judgements emphasize that , while the Convention on Human Rights essentially sets out civil and political rights , most of these do have economic and social repercussions and there are no hard and fast walls dividing them .
In fact the Convention is intended to uphold actual rights as well as theoretical rights , which is why the practical application of these rights by the State confirms the interdependence between civil and political rights .
So I call for a debate on this issue of possible convergence before the next report on human rights so that Parliament can approve it much more widely .
It is important for all the countries to reach the widest consensus on this .
That is the target our rapporteur set herself and I thank her for the work she has done .
Mr President , I may not have been present for the whole debate , but I did listen very carefully to the last speech and I think it pinpointed the problem we are dealing with .
Mrs Colombo Svevo 's experience has in fact enabled her to encapsulate it perfectly : at the moment the report is again in the eye of the storm because we cannot get agreement on the concept of ' human rights ' in this Parliament , nor can it be established whether we can or cannot effectively bring violations of the civil and general rights of Union citizens to general attention within our Community .
In our view the problem is that the concept has actually been stretched to an extremely risky and dangerous extent .
When people start talking about social rights , economic rights , union rights , the right to a home , work , health and so on , we are really getting into a minefield , and I think we have to give some thought to this .

For instance I do not believe we can talk about a right to work , but rather about a right to access to work ; I do not think we can talk about a right to a home , but rather about a right to shelter ; I do not think we can talk about a right to health , in the strict sense , but rather about a right to choose between different health systems .
Mrs Colombo Svevo is quite correct when she says we must reach agreement .
I fear we will end up arguing again , or perhaps failing to approve - again - this report on human rights in the Union in 1994 , demonstrating for the nth time that we are not even capable of reaching agreement on what constitutes a violation of citizens ' fundamental civil rights .
I present just one symbolic case : the issue of justice in our countries .
Well , if we do not agree on the starting point , namely this point , we will never get a result .
So I would suggest that on this occasion - and I make this a formal request - we look for the lowest common denominator of drawing up an internal self-regulation code for Parliament so that we can finally come to an agreement on what constitutes human rights .
Without this internal regulation code we will continue to argue , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , and we will go on failing to pass any report on human rights in 1993 , 1994 or 1995 .
Mr President , Mrs De Esteban 's report is the first to succeed in showing a certain respect for human rights within the European Union , and I should like to thank her for that .
However , there is one point with which I would take issue , and that is the point about the right of association for conscripts and regular military personnel , which is something that I myself and many others in the House fought for a number of years ago .
This right of association may now be recognized in the resolution , but there is still far too much scope for preventing soldiers from exercising it .
Reference is made , for example , to special characteristics of hierarchy and discipline and any restrictions considered necessary because of the role they play in guaranteeing national security .
Any ordinary soldier out on patrol knows that there is no point in even thinking about what we call human rights .
The right of association is a fundamental right in any democratic state , and I reject the tough conditions which the rapporteur is proposing to apply here and sincerely hope that the amendment on this point will be adopted .
It is high time that the Member States started talking about what the right of association means in the European context , now that multinational military forces are being set up and Europe 's defence policy is set to develop further .
Mr President , I should like to begin my speech by congratulating Parliament on the step forward which it is taking and the political maturity that it is displaying in debating a report on respect for human rights in the European Union ; because the fact is that human rights are being violated in the Member States of the Union , and not only the so-called ' modern ' or social , economic and environmental rights , but also - and this is more serious - those enshrined in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
I am confident that tomorrow , without further delay , we shall prove capable of adopting the resolution contained in Mrs De Esteban 's report , and that consequently we shall display sufficient political courage and consistency to engage in open self-criticism which leads our respective Member States to take the necessary measures to eliminate these violations of human rights .
I should like to remind the House that the motion for a resolution on the illegal deportation of 103 immigrants without papers from Melilla , Spain - which was included in the topical and urgent debate at the July part-session at my instigation - was roundly rejected . A golden opportunity was thereby lost to condemn publicly a specific case of the violation of human rights : that committed by the Spanish authorities in the form of the deportation of the immigrants in question , with total contempt for the European Convention on Human Rights and even Spanish laws , as indicated recently by the Spanish Ombudsman .
Today , in contrast , I welcome the fact that the issue is being addressed at this part-session , and that the House is finally displaying some consistency - since it would make no sense to hold this debate and disregard previous events .
Indeed , Mr President , in our resolution , we call on the Member States to ensure that detention prior to deportation is ordered only for a short period , and we maintain that the return of a person to a country where he or she risks being persecuted constitutes a violation of human rights .
Both these factors came into play in the Melilla case , especially in the sense that the majority of the deportees were waiting to receive a formal reply to their application for asylum .
Consequently , I believe that it is time for us to leave the rhetoric behind and address specific cases .
It is time , as we say in my country , to replace words with deeds - and I am sure that our concern at human rights violations will not only be displayed when such violations occur beyond the borders of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs De Esteban Martín 's excellent report should arouse a feeling of humility on the part of us MEPs who are so quick to condemn human rights violations in other parts of the world .
It shows to what extent the fundamental rights of human beings are being flouted in our own so-called democratic countries .
Of course there should be a more refined interpretation of the concept of human rights in the European Union .
Unemployment , exclusion and poverty , which are the lot of a growing number of our fellow citizens , open up an area where respect for individual rights should be improved , and the European Social Charter is a response to this new demand .
We cannot , however , classify everything neatly under the heading ' human rights ' .
To do so would be hypocritical and ineffective . The gaps we have noted in social justice require policies based on an act of will , which is not quite the same thing as dealing with these problems of infringements of civil liberties .
This is all the more important since - no doubt not by chance - it is an area in which the European Union has kept a low profile , probably for reasons of subsidiarity .
Be that as it may , recent events have demonstrated just how flimsy our achievements are with regard to human rights , especially in my own country .
I will not dwell on the outrageously racist nature of certain statements .
Nor will I dwell on the recent expulsion from France of the people without papers .
The brutality with which they were treated is particularly unacceptable , since I would point out that deporting people en masse is a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights .
Finally , I should also like to say a word about the rights of the child .
The violations of these rights make it a matter of urgency to include a charter of children 's rights in the Treaty on European Union .
Mr President , there are sound reasons for arguing that human rights are indivisible ; in principle , however , the traditional fundamental rights should be distinguished from socio-economic objectives , and this is where the report by Mrs De Esteban Martín falls down .
In recent decades the spotlight has been very much on social rights , but at the same time we seem to have forgotten that rights , when acquired , create just as much responsibility .
The report illustrates the spirit of our culture : we have rights , therefore we make demands .
However , we are not yet in a position to make any fundamental statements about human life .
The report is against the death penalty , but says nothing about unborn life , which is meant to be covered by national legislation in the Member States .
In my country , we now have an absurd situation where anyone performing an illegal abortion is liable to 12 years in prison for violently terminating a human life , which is classified as murder .
However , if a pregnancy is terminated at the request of the woman herself , the social system will cover all the costs because she is exercising her right to self-determination .
Fortunately , a great deal has already been achieved in the social field , and it makes sense to establish clear objectives for the many social problems in our society .
But we should not forget that society cannot exist without fundamental spiritual rules and values .
The fact that we have never before had such prosperity , such high levels of education , social services and health care , and at the same time so much crime , violence and drug addiction , is surely food for thought .
In a society which seems to have abandoned God and the Ten Commandments and in which people 's aspirations do not extend beyond the here and now , it has been suggested that true happiness in life lies in acquisition and our right to independence .
However , it should therefore come as no surprise that so many people struggle to find a meaning to life , or that greed , crime and racism are eating away at their rights .
Mr President , there are different approaches to human rights in the European Union .
Those of us who raise social rights and rights at work as human rights are accused by some of resorting to the Stalinist demagogy which uses social or collective provision as an excuse for suppressing human rights .
This was true of the former Soviet bloc but it is certainly not true of me and those of us supporting the amended report .
All the usual items listed as human rights - including the right to life , freedoms of conscience , religion , speech and private life , democratic rights , pluralism , the rule of law - are included and supported by me and those who think like me .
The fresh approach we take is to include such matters as social rights , ecological rights and cultural rights , and to regard these as fundamental human rights too .
What about the approaches of the two main groups in this Parliament opposing this fuller concept of fundamental human rights ?
Liberals have strong policies on certain individual rights linked to their support for individual liberty and freedoms .
However , pre-eminent for the Liberals seems to be laissez faire economic freedom for individuals to do in the economic marketplace whatever they want without too much concern about the effects on people with fewer entrepreneurial inclinations or abilities or less economic power .
In this ideological approach the Liberals are supported by other economic liberals , including most British Conservatives .
For Liberals individuals have the fundamental right to seek to become millionaires or to seek to create a large business or to live in a mansion , but individuals do not have the fundamental rights to live free from poverty , to have a job or to reside in decent housing .
When Mrs Thatcher claimed that there is no such thing as society , just individuals , she crystallized this philosophy .
The other main group opposing a full inclusive definition of human rights is the Christian Democrats .
In western and southern Europe Conservatives have not been at the forefront of the struggle for individual liberty and freedoms .
Certainly they now accept them and the democratic norms which exist in the EU .
Christian Democrats appreciate perhaps more than Liberals the idea of social solidarity in collective values and that there is such a thing as society which has a duty to support weaker individuals , yet when it comes to specific commitments in this area the Christian Democrats always seem to find reasons to vote against and , at best , just to resort to paternalism .
Society has a duty to organize itself - ourselves - to provide work for all , decent housing and free education .
And , yes , that involves planning and intervention , not just leaving everything to the anarchy of the untrammelled free market .
Will the Christian Democrats support these fundamental rights if they are described as fundamental duties ? - because they are duties as well as rights .
In conclusion , I call on all democratic Members of this Parliament to support this report and to have the courage to support full human rights in the European Union as we enter the new century .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , strong protection of human rights is one of the most important elements in the Union 's foundations .
Respect for human rights is a qualification for membership of the European Union .
Our Parliament is also demanding more participation in decision-making .
It must show itself worthy of that influence .
If Parliament cannot manage this , it deserves to remain stuck in the sometimes abnormal constitutional situation it finds itself in .
More legislative power places greater demands on seriousness .
Not everything can be solved by politicians , not everything can be solved at European level .
There is a private area , which lies outside that of politics , an area which is set to grow in many countries .
Our President , Mr Hänsch , who is a staunch defender of our Parliament , put it in the following terms in the Committee on Institutional Affairs : we must not assign to the EU tasks which we know the EU has neither a mandate nor the means to carry out .
Precisely .
But the red parties propose rights which cannot be upheld , for which no-one knows whether resources can be found and for which there is no legal basis .
In this way , the left threatens Parliament 's ability to function as an effective legislator .
There is a risk that its influence may be damaged and , most serious of all , that protection of human rights may be drained of all substance .
We in the PPE Group stand for basic human rights that can be enforced through the European Court of Human Rights .
But anyone who violates the wish-lists of the left risks nothing .
These political wish-lists are nothing more than a bid to exploit human rights for selfish political purposes , a means of securing the release by the back door of economic resources which will not gain approval at national level .
The heroic efforts of the rapporteur to establish basic human rights has been in vain .
The 126 rights in the report make for some painful reading and provide a sorry but striking example of the fact that Parliament must not concern itself with everything .
If Parliament is to present these annual reports at all , the red parties should ponder on a couple of sayings we have in Sweden that go something like : ' true mastery lies in moderation ' and ' reach out for everything , gain nothing ' .
Let today 's business serve its purpose as a cautionary example for the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , protection of human rights is perhaps the most important opinion-forming issue that we , together with the Council of Europe and the national parliaments , have to deal with as elected representatives in the European Parliament .
It covers everything from the right to life , through condemnation of the death penalty , torture and violence against detainees and prisoners , to the right to asylum .
On this point , Mr President , I am rather concerned at the fact that especially policy on refugees , immigration , asylum and visas is being made more restrictive and that the EU is on course to erect a wall against countries which are not Member States of the Union .
This must not happen .
The Schengen Agreement is a regrettable example of things moving in that direction .
This can create a fertile ground for the spread of the very racism and xenophobia which we want to prevent and which is one of the main themes of this report .
Perhaps the most important thing in this debate , Mr President , is that we should review past years and that present Member States and countries that have applied for membership and have agreements with us , such as Turkey , meet the demands we impose and that we should show the rest of the world that we are serious in our insistence on respect for human rights .
Mr President , this report on human rights has had a troubled past and a difficult path .
So we can only congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Estebán Martin , for completing such an arduous task - already attempted in vain , with great courage and dedication by our colleague , Mr Newman - and she has our appreciation and our gratitude .
The Estebán Martin report is sound and positive in many respects . It is an all-embracing report which leaves no stone unturned in its general approach and in the particular issues dealt with , even if we would have preferred a more distinct identification of violations of human rights , both inside and outside the Community .
While it is appropriate that the preamble to the report lists at least seventeen existing agreements on human rights , it is equally a duty to highlight , with growing consternation , how many of these declarations of sacrosanct principles have remained dead letters for years .
That consternation is certainly not relieved by the fact that the right-wing lineup of this Assembly repeatedly prefers to skate over violations involving their own countries .
A few examples : the law passed by the Italian Parliament which violates the rights of immigrants ; in France , the expulsion of stateless persons by executive decree , a point Mr Pailler has eloquently covered ; in Germany , the policy of persecution and discrimination against thousands and thousands of ex-citizens of the DDR .
And how can we ignore the fact that Turkey has been provisionally welcomed into the customs union while it continues to imprison political opponents of the regime - events that took place only last week ?
We would also have preferred the report to make some reference to violations in countries aspiring to join the Community or which have long influenced decisions positively or negatively through their power and specific weight .
We are talking about the recent massacre in Chechnya , the tragedy of the Kurdish people , the 560 thousand deaths , mostly of children , caused in Iraq by the prolonged United States economic sanctions , sanctions aggravated by military intervention already carried out or being carried out at this very moment .
We recognize that Mrs Estebán Martin 's report retains its validity and we shall vote to approve it .
Mr President , I know what human rights are .
This report was preceded by the controversy which accompanied the report that we produced last year .
If we lose this opportunity , we shall let slip a second chance to look inside the European Union and see what is happening with regard to human rights . And I believe that - if we are honest - we all know what we are talking about , even if only intuitively .
We are talking about drawing attention in this report to situations in which respect for human rights - the meaning of which is quite clear to us when we refer to third countries - is deteriorating or simply does not exist .
We must therefore make an effective effort to tackle such situations , since I believe that no citizen of the Union will be secure as long as the human rights of the weakest and most vulnerable sections of the population are being eroded .
I am aware that many Spanish socialist Members abstained in the vote on last year 's report .
Contrary to what some members of my group seem to think , I believe that it is sometimes necessary to make an effort to achieve a result , and that this report must be safeguarded as a report on the subject it seeks to address - and I repeat , I believe that we all know what that is .
We must therefore make an effort and not lose this second opportunity .
And I would call on the other groups to do the same , since I think that it would be most frustrating to emerge from the vote without having adopted the report and , moreover , that this would jeopardize our work in this field in the coming years .
Mr President , we have had considerable difficulties over the last couple of years with these reports on human rights because of differences of view as to what constitutes human rights and other similar problems .
But I believe this time we have a report which , though it might not be what all of us would have wished in every respect , nevertheless commands very wide support .
We have worked very hard in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs to produce a report that goes a very long way towards facing up to many of the injustices and abuses of human rights in our Community .
The European Union would be a vastly better place if all the proposals enshrined in this report were to be adopted .
It would be splendid if this report could be adopted by a large majority in Parliament .
I am one of those who believe that such injustices as poverty , homelessness and unemployment are denials and abuses of human rights .
I would say to those who have doubts about this that you cannot really enjoy even the narrow legalistic conceptions of rights such as freedom of expression or religion and so on unless you have employment , a home and the other basic requirements of life .
We could all perhaps agree that the right to health is one of the most important , but all the detailed statistics show that people who are homeless , who are unemployed , who are in poverty , live much shorter lives and have much poorer health , than those whose social rights are safeguarded .
I would particularly like to comment on two of the many good points in this report .
Recital p and paragraph 34 deal with the plight of domestic servants in my own country and a number of others .
Certain wealthy people are allowed to bring in domestic servants who have no rights whatsoever .
They must be guaranteed the same employment and civil rights as all people resident in those countries .
Paragraph 51 refers to the right of people who are arrested and imprisoned abroad not to have their trials indefinitely delayed and to suffer thereby because of technicalities like lack of translation facilities and lack of understanding of the legal systems in other countries .
These are just two of the many very valuable points enshrined in this report which I hope will receive very broad support in Parliament .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission , I should like to take this opportunity to thank Mrs De Esteban Martín for her report and to stress once again how important it is and how much I welcome the fact that such a report is discussed here in the House and given the attention it deserves .
The European Union is first and foremost a community founded on justice in which human rights are accorded great importance , as they are in our external relations .
I am therefore pleased to see that Parliament is to debate the report by Mr Carnero González on human rights clauses in treaties with third countries this coming Friday .
Most of what this motion for a resolution calls for actually concerns the Member States , since the Treaties do not in fact give the Union the power to enforce respect for human rights in the Member States .
What the Community can do is apply Community provisions relating to human rights .
I shall therefore focus in my reply on the comments that were addressed to the Commission .
Before I look at the specific points raised by this report , I should like to say a few words about the discussion which the Foreign Affairs Ministers had at their informal meeting in Tralee on the sexual exploitation of children .
The Commission supports the various initiatives which the Member States have put forward for combating this terrible phenomenon , and has itself proposed three practical measures directly or indirectly related to the problem .
First of all , following the conference on the trade in women held in Vienna last June , the Commission intends to forward a communication to Parliament and to the Council proposing measures in this field .
Secondly , it is to present a proposal in the autumn designed to clamp down on sex tourism .
Thirdly , it is to put forward proposals designed to combat paedophile networks , such as on the Internet .
It hopes that these practical measures will help to provide rapid and effective solutions to the problems , and it is pleased to see that Parliament is also scheduled to discuss the issues involved on Wednesday .
As you know , the Commission has in the past strongly urged that the Community should accede to the European Convention on Human Rights , and the issue is to be discussed again at the Intergovernmental Conference .
However , I have to say that , in view of the opinion delivered recently by the Court of Justice , I think it will be very difficult to make any progress in this field .
It is something we have been talking about for years , but the majority of the Member States do not appear to feel any great urge to take such a significant step .
On the subject of equal treatment , the Council recommendation on the equal right of men and women to participate in decision-making has still not been adopted .
The Commission put forward a revised proposal on 30 May 1996 which reflected Parliament 's amendments .
It should be pointed out here that the existing directives in the field of equal treatment - seven in total - have already gone a long way towards improving working conditions for women and men in Europe .
The Commission also intends to introduce a number of specific measures to improve equality in the legal position of women and men .
With regard to combating racism and xenophobia , the Council of Ministers has , as you know , officially declared 1997 to be the European Year against Racism .
This is a milestone in the history of the Community .
For the first time the institutions of the Community , acting on a proposal from the Commission , have agreed on practical measures to combat racism within the current institutional framework .
This sends out an extremely positive signal .
The European Year is , of course , only part of our strategy to combat racism , and a great deal of progress has already been made since the Cannes European Council .
Two resolutions have already been adopted as part of the shared responsibilities and joint action under the third pillar , and we are optimistic that a racism monitoring centre will be set up in the near future .
In its report for the Intergovernmental Conference , the Commission recommended the inclusion in the Treaty of provisions banning any form of discrimination and condemning racism and xenophobia .
It believes that the adoption of Community legislation offering at least a minimum level of protection against discrimination in the Community could be an extremely important step towards achieving the aims of the Treaty .
It is to review this whole issue again in the light of the progress made at the Intergovernmental Conference .
In conclusion , I would point out that the Council has launched various programmes over the last 20 years to tackle poverty in all its manifestations at European level .
It is another issue which has been discussed a great deal in recent times and has received the attention it deserves .
I should like to thank the rapporteur once again for her most detailed and comprehensive report .
I am sure that , as in previous years , Parliament 's report on human rights in the Union will play an important part in ensuring that we maintain a consistent approach towards human rights , and will also , and equally importantly , help to improve the credibility of the Union 's position on this issue in the eyes of third countries .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Rail , road and inland waterway transport
Mr President , I must inform the House that Commissioner Kinnock sends his apologies and regrets that he will be unable to attend this evening .
He wrote to me to inform me of this , which I very much appreciate , and it goes without saying that his apologies are accepted .
He has kindly asked Commissioner van den Broek to replace him .
In February this year , Parliament delivered its opinion on a package of measures proposed by the Commission relating to inland waterway transport .
This was quickly followed by the Council 's common position .
The package consists of three closely linked proposals which are designed to liberalize , restructure and promote the inland waterway market and , ultimately , to strengthen the position of the inland waterway sector .
It is clear from the common position that the Council agrees with the proposed measures , but has made a number of amendments to each of the three sections .
I should like to make a few brief comments about these .
First of all , the restructuring programme .
The most important change here is that the Council has limited the provision of Community co-funding to 1996 , whereas Parliament and the Commission had proposed that the Community should contribute towards the scrapping costs for the whole of the three to four-year scrapping period .
Although the Committee on Transport feels that the Council 's position is disappointing , it decided not to retable its amendments in view of the budgetary restrictions and the problems which the Council faced in making available even the ECU 20 million included in the 1996 budget .
We still feel that the dramatic overcapacity in the tanker sector calls for extra scrapping measures , and this is why we are maintaining our amendment to set up a separate scheme for this .
On the subject of liberalization , the Council agreed with the Commission 's original proposal for the gradual abolition of the system of chartering by rotation by 1 January 2000 .
The House and the Committee on Transport had already approved this , but things cannot stop there .
We need to think about the situation after the year 2000 as well as what happens up to then .
It is in the period after that date , when the inland waterway sector has been restructured and liberalized , that it is most important to have instruments which can help restore the balance in the event of any market disturbances .
Parliament tabled two separate amendments on this at first reading .
The first aimed to extend the ' old for new ' system beyond 1 January 2000 , and the second called for the structure and remit of the group of experts supervising the scrapping programme to be expanded to include regular consultations with the Commission , even after the completion of the present measures .
During the debate on this issue , the Commissioner spoke in favour of both these ideas , but it was felt that the amendments did not belong with the present proposals , so the Committee on Transport has not retabled them at second reading .
We are still convinced , however , that inland waterway transport will continue to require close attention after 1 January 2000 , so we have written to the Commissioner to ask him to take the necessary steps on both of these issues .
We would have asked Commissioner Kinnock for his response , but perhaps Commissioner van den Broek will be able to speak on his behalf .
Our reasoning here is that because the inland waterway transport sector is made up of a large number of small firms , fluctuations in the market caused by new investment could easily result in overcapacity once again .
What is more , water transport will be required to play an increasingly central role in our long-term transport policy , so inland waterways will certainly be on the agenda until well after 1 January 2000 .
However , there are also a number of issues which will affect inland waterway transport in the short term , such as the Commission 's mandate to conclude an agreement with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Parliament will no doubt have an opportunity to comment on the results of these negotiations in the near future .
Mr President , can I thank Mr van der Waal for his report and his contribution today .
There is no doubt that my group is concerned with the crisis in the inland waterways sector , and indeed we support Mr van der Waal 's report and his efforts to reduce the existing overcapacity .
We support the scrapping programme and the finances to be made available for it .
It is a sad fact that within the transport sector the inland waterways are underutilized throughout the European Union , just as our railways are underutilized , mainly because the vast majority of freight is now transported by road ; and the congestion and the environmental pollution that causes is there for all to see .
So our group is always supportive of any moves to help sectors that would take freight off the roads , be it railways or inland waterways .
There is no doubt that for many years inland waterways have been a Cinderella of the transport industry , but that does not mean that we should forget about them and that we should not invest in them , because that is what is needed .
Investment is needed in order to reduce the overcapacity , and that means helping in the scrapping programme .
It also means helping small businesses to actually go into the market .
But we also need investment in port infrastructure within our inland waterways network , and until we get that I fear that the inland waterways sector will continue to suffer , to be the Cinderella service , and will have to make do with the crumbs from off the table of the road haulage industry .
Our group would like to see the inland waterways sector flourishing .
We support Mr van der Waal 's report because we believe that his principles are right , that his views are right and that that is the only way the inland waterways sector can go forward .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the PPE Group also regards inland waterways as an environmentally-friendly and safe element of the transport sector .
This may be underrated as a means of transport , but it deserves the support and respect of Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
Mr van der Waal 's report and the Commission 's proposals were , quite simply , a joy to read as far as we were concerned , because of the very positive approach they adopted towards the subjects of chartering , pricing , restructuring and the rules on aid .
We welcome the fact that market distortions caused by the chartering by rotation system , for example , and overcapacity are to be eliminated by the scrapping fund and the ' old for new ' system .
But we also need to provide aid to improve or modernize our inland waterway transport .
The Commission 's attitude and Mr van der Waal 's work on this issue were very encouraging , but we have been very disappointed at the Council 's refusal to adopt so many of our amendments .
However , we are prepared to do what the rapporteur has asked by being sensible and not retabling all our amendments again .
We would , of course , have been delighted if the Council had allocated more aid for this extremely important but underrated sector .
The chartering by rotation system , which distorts the market and in some areas even means that the prices charged for carrying the same load over the same distance differ by up to 100 % , could also have been phased out earlier .
However , we are convinced that what we are doing now is an important step .
We still insist on keeping some of our amendments , and we feel that any firms which leave the sector voluntarily should be given some kind of social assistance to help them .
The aid which the Member States currently provide for the transport sector , which faces such fierce competition , could also be supplemented by aid from the European Union .
Working on the principle that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush , we are prepared to accept these proposals and do as Mr van der Waal suggested .
Mr President , a few years ago we had a debate on inland waterway transport in which Mr van der Waal and Mr van der Lek spoke , and Mr van Rijn from the Commission 's Legal Service replied .
From his name , Mr van den Broek should know a good deal about water , although it is swampy water and that makes for hard sailing , but nevertheless we are curious to know what the Commission will have to say .
We should first of all assure the rapporteur , who has already prepared many reports on inland waterways for us , that he once again has our support .
However , there is one problem which I should like to ask the Commission about , and I hope we shall be given a proper answer .
Aid and scrapping schemes are all well and good , we all support inland waterway transport , it is environmentally-friendly , it offers plenty of capacity , there are new facilities for containers and storage , port installations , inland ports and so on , all absolutely fine .
But the problem is that inland waterways are mainly used for transporting goods in bulk and , in particular , petroleum products .
Now that NATO no longer needs as much benzine , its pipelines are being used for the commercial trade in petroleum products instead .
This is all well and good , and much less dangerous , but it has resulted in overcapacity in the tanker fleet which needs to be dealt with by the scrapping scheme , as the rapporteur says .
The problem is that it will be mainly the smaller vessels that will be scrapped first under the scheme , and this will be counter-productive , because it will mean that all kinds of smaller ports will no longer be used and only the larger vessels will remain , sailing between Basle and Rotterdam .
So I should like to ask the Commission whether there should not be some sort of differentiation in the scrapping scheme , so that it is not just the smaller vessels that are taken out of service , since this would limit the scope of the inland waterways ?
Mr President , we Greens set great store by development , reconstruction and incentives for inland waterway transport because , as honourable Members have said , this is an ecologically compatible form of transport , provided it does not presuppose massive infrastructure projects which can sometimes have a strong environmental impact .
But we definitely regard this form of transport as very valid .
In fact we are convinced of the need to restore balance to transport , moving goods and passengers away from road transport towards rail , sea and river , and inland waterway transport is also less risky for dangerous goods .
For these reasons we think it was very negative of the Council to reject the majority of the amendments approved by Parliament at first reading .
But we understand and support the reasons given by the rapporteur , Mr van der Waal , and we invite the European Parliament to vote in favour of the few amendments that have been presented again .
We certainly expected something different from the Council .
The crisis in the sector requires that liberalization be accompanied by social security standards , especially as regards tankers .
We think it is right to retable the amendment which provides additional measures for the sector .
Finally we take note that as regards granting incentives for inland waterway transport , the Council has in fact accepted the position of the European Parliament .
I believe this may also constitute a precedent for the measure to grant incentives to the rail sector , for which I am rapporteur .
In conclusion , I support a vote in favour of Mr van der Waal 's amendments and proposal .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr van der Waal on his patience in recommending this second reading on a common position .
I would inform colleagues that on this occasion it appears that New Labour coincides with Old Conservatism .
The emphasis has to be on dealing with the problem of over-capacity and in this regard I welcome Mr van der Waal 's comments that we must ensure that the amount of funding is secured not just for 1996 but for 1997 and 1998 and indeed urge the Council to extend the scrapping programme right up to the end of 1999 .
We must ensure that the fund will apply until the position of over-capacity has been resolved .
As has been mentioned overcapacity is possibly as high as 20 % in the European tanker sector .
Therefore , I particularly support the extra scrapping system in this sector with the aim of removing at least an extra 10 % of capacity in the first year .
I would remind colleagues that the provisions in this common position are to liberalize and open up the market .
There are three parts to the common position : liberalizing , re-structuring and promoting the inland waterway sector .
I hope that all three will carry equal weight .
With regard to the last common position on the granting of aids for transport by rail , road and inland waterway , this is particularly welcome as it will streamline decision-making and reduce bureaucracy .
My one concern is that while we welcome an emphasis on combined transport , and particularly in the UK under a Conservative government trying to transport more freight by rail and take it off the roads wherever appropriate , it must not be to the total detriment of conventional freight operations .
Let us not lose sight of the good old lorry .
Perhaps the Commissioner would like to comment on that .
Mr President , it is a question of taking a final decision on what we considered in February in Parliament , when we delivered our opinion on a package of measures for inland waterway transport .
The most important concern of the amendments in my view is that ways are now being proposed to stimulate and develop inland waterways in all Member States , not least my own country , Sweden , which has a lot of water and many lakes .
Transport by rail and transport by inland waterway are more environmentally friendly alternatives to road haulage , which has grown alarmingly in recent years .
We must do something about this , because road haulage vehicles emit exhaust gases in an entirely different way .
We therefore support this report .
Regeneration programmes of various kinds and incentives are important if this route is really to be taken and if the volume of road haulage traffic is to be reduced .
The amendments proposed point in that direction .
In this context , severe criticism of the Council is warranted , since it has not understood this .
We therefore vote for the amendments tabled since , in our opinion , they will lead to more and better transport using environmentally friendly methods .
Mr President , as Commissioner Kinnock unfortunately cannot be with us , let me say how delighted I am that it is Commissioner van den Broek who is standing in for him , since inland waterway transport is an area where Dutch bargemen in particular have long distinguished themselves .
I too would like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur for working so quickly and for producing a report which not only recognizes the very serious problems currently facing inland waterways , but also offers prospects for the future .
It is perfectly clear that the inland waterways can and must play an important role in our long-term transport policy .
It is , of course , mainly up to the inland waterway sector itself to make the best of the new opportunities available , but the governments can and must offer it a helping hand here .
I would ask for special attention to be given to the tanker sector , where many firms are already in deep water .
The two letters which our committee sent to Commissioner Kinnock form an important element in our approach .
Following earlier talks , I regard these letters as a gentlemen 's agreement between the Commission and Parliament .
Can I assume that the Commission also sees them in this light ?
Can Commissioner van den Broek assure us that the Commission is aware of the need to prevent unfair competition and market distortions from inland shipping companies in Central and Eastern Europe ?
When can we expect agreements to be signed with the countries in question ?
What form will they take ?
Will Parliament be involved ?
Finally , could Mr van den Broek perhaps also take this opportunity to tell us what he intends to do about the insuperable problems that still exist at the frontiers with the countries of Eastern Europe , particularly for road transport ?
I should like to start by saying how pleased I am to have the honour of standing in for Commissioner Kinnock this evening , and I should particularly like to thank Mr van der Waal for his words on the subject .

It is indeed a matter of particular interest to me , because I actually began my career as a lawyer dealing with collisions on the inland waterways .
Mr van der Waal will be pleased to hear that the first case I had to deal with - cases were always called by the names of the vessels involved in the collision - was ' The Lord is king ' versus ' It always happens to me ' .
I am sure this is how things will continue on our inland waterways for a long time to come .
As honourable Members are aware , the proposals under discussion today form an integrated package of measures designed to increase the competitiveness of the inland waterway sector .
This answers Mr Cornelissen 's question : the Commission is indeed aware of the need to make this sector more competitive and to clamp down on unfair competition as much as possible .
I hope he will understand that I prefer to leave it to Mr Kinnock to explain exactly how the Commission intends to step up its efforts in this field and how Parliament can be involved .
The measures we are discussing are designed to enable the inland waterway sector - which is having to get by under its own steam , as it were , in a liberalized market - to maintain and increase its share of the total European transport market .
This is very much in line with our ideas on ' sustainable mobility ' .
The first proposal , on the systems of chartering and pricing in national and international inland waterway transport , aims to liberalize inland waterway transport by harmonizing the legislation which the Member States concerned are currently introducing , with full liberalization by 1 January 2000 .
The second proposal concerns the expansion of structural improvements over a three-year period from 1996 to 1998 . These measures will operate in tandem with the process of liberalization and also enable the Community to provide financial assistance for the national scrapping funds in the Member States concerned .
The third proposal , on aid for transport by road , rail and inland waterway , will provide the Member States with subsidies for investment in inland waterway terminals and fixed and mobile loading and unloading equipment up to 31 December 1999 .
The new provisions which the Council has included in its common position are in line with the aims of the Commission proposals .
On the second proposal , the Council felt that the Community 's contribution towards the cost of structural improvements should be limited to 1996 .
The Commission has no problem with this , since the aim is still to reduce the fleet capacity by around 15 % in three years .
It is up to the Member States collectively to ensure that adequate funding is provided to achieve this objective .
The Commission has therefore accepted the Council 's amendments , and on behalf of Mr Kinnock and the Commission , I would now ask Parliament to approve the common position .
The Commission has examined the two amendments tabled by the Committee on Transport at second reading very carefully , but I am sorry to have to tell you that Mr Kinnock and the Commission are unable to accept them .
Let me explain why .
Amendment No 1 is intended to enable the Member States to introduce accompanying social measures for operators leaving the inland waterway transport sector voluntarily .
This was rejected by the Council , a decision with which the Commission agrees , since this possibility is already provided for in Article 9 of Council Regulation No 1101 / 89 .
Amendment No 2 concerns the Financial Statement on the budget line for scrapping schemes in inland waterways transport , and the description and general purpose of the measure .
The Committee on Transport considers that there is at least 20 % overcapacity in the tanker sector .
This is why it is proposed that an additional scrapping scheme should be carried out in the tanker sector during the first year of the Commission programme , to reduce the tanker fleet by at least an extra 10 % .
The Member States concerned are to set up separate scrapping funds with new funding arrangements .
The Commission considers this amendment superfluous , since it already has the opportunity under the existing regulation to allocate more of the funding available for scrapping tankers , if it feels this is necessary .
Furthermore , amending the Financial Statement would , from a procedural point of view , have no effect on the actual text of the legislation .
In my opinion , the common position is consistent with the objectives pursued in the Commission 's proposals , and I therefore feel I must call on Parliament to support it .
At the same time , I should like to express my appreciation for all the work that Mr van der Waal and the Committee on Transport as a whole have done .
Before I end , I should just like to come back to three questions that were raised by speakers .
Mr van der Waal referred to the letters which the Committee on Transport wrote to Mr Kinnock , one of which suggests that a new group of experts should be set up on inland waterway transport .
The committee will be receiving an answer in the near future , the gist of which I already know .
Suffice it to say that Commissioner Kinnock does not feel that this new group of experts needs to be set up just at the moment , and he will certainly wish to give you further information on this when he can .
However , he also said that the Commission will , of course , be remaining in close contact with the socio-economic sector which covers inland waterways , and that it will be consulting the sector within the existing committees and ad hoc groups in order to find out its opinions , recommendations , and so on .
In other words , Mr Kinnock sees no particular reason to intensify contacts with the sector by setting up a new group of experts .
The second question you put to him in writing was whether the ' old for new ' system could be extended for a further five years .
He will be informing you that the Commission does not necessarily oppose extending the system , but he feels it is a little premature to be talking about it and deciding on it now .
He would prefer to let his decision on this depend on market developments , and he would agree with the committee that the report on market developments which it has asked the Commission to draw up during the first half of 1998 could be used as a basis for deciding whether an extension of the system is justified .
That is all I can tell you from the information I have available .
I have certainly not been able to explain things as clearly as Commissioner Kinnock would have done , but I think I have at least given you some idea of what he is thinking .
Mr Wijsenbeek asked whether we can ensure that it is not automatically the smaller tankers that are the first to be scrapped , now that the NATO pipelines are being used for commercial purposes .
Mr Kinnock 's experts alongside me here have assured me that the current system is based on the principle of first come , first served , irrespective of size , and that differentiation does not need to be applied artificially , since it is simply a question of who is first in line , large or small .
Finally , Ms McIntosh asked about the question of funds for the scrapping scheme .
I am informed that the Member States have given assurances that the funding needed will definitely be made available .
That concludes my reply .
I should like to apologize for any points that I may not have explained entirely clearly , but Commissioner Kinnock will certainly be more than happy to provide you with any further information which you may require .
With all due respect to Mr van den Broek , we are aware that the system will operate on a first come , first served basis , but the problem is that it will be the larger vessels which come forward first , because they are worth more .
That is why I should like to know whether Commissioner Kinnock will consider introducing differentiation in future schemes stretching beyond the year 2000 , so that it is not just the larger vessels which are taken out of service , since this simply reduces the scope and effectiveness of inland waterway transport .
Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner van den Broek for doing his best to answer our questions .
Since one or two letters of reply to us have been drafted , I would ask him to urge Mr Kinnock to read our two letters through again very carefully .
I do of course know what these letters say , since I signed them on behalf of the committee , and I would point out that we are not asking for a new committee to be set up - in fact we specifically say that this is not what we want - we simply ask whether our objectives can be achieved through the existing committees .
To avoid any unnecessary correspondence , I would ask Mr van den Broek to take the matter up with Mr Kinnock and ask him to read our letters once again .
Mr President , I will faithfully pass on these requests , of course , together with the question that Mr Wijsenbeek raised .
I think I know what the answer to that will be , but I would prefer to leave it to Mr Kinnock to reply , as would Mr Wijsenbeek , I presume .


Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Air carrier liability
The next item is the report ( A4-0228 / 96 ) by Mr Sánchez García , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 95 ) 0724 - C4-0209 / 96-95 / 0359 ( SYN ) ) on air carrier liability in case of accidents .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , air carrier liability in the case of accidents in international carriage by air has hitherto been covered by the provisions of the Warsaw Convention and other supplementary instruments , which together make up the so-called ' Warsaw system ' .
This convention provides that the airline is presumed to be liable for damage and sets the limit of liability at USD 10 000 .
However , it also provides that the airline may be exempted from liability if it proves that it took all necessary measures to avoid the damage , and that it may pay a lower amount of compensation if it proves the contributory negligence of the injured person .
The inadequacy of this system of subjective liability and the lack of an automatic mechanism for adjusting the amount of compensation paid have given rise to unilateral action on the part of many signatory states , whereby the limits established have been raised .
For example , the Montreal Agreement of 1966 increased the limit to USD 75 000 for all flights to , from , or with a planned stopover in the United States .
Similarly , over the last few years , the majority of European countries have introduced liability limits which are higher than those provided for under the Warsaw system , for both national and international flights .
The result of this unilateral , albeit necessary action has been a growing disparity of national rules concerning air carrier liability - a situation which threatens to lead to the fragmentation of the present internal civil aviation market .
Furthermore , the aim of Community air transport policy is to ensure that flying is perceived to be the safest way to travel , and this objective is undermined by the current system regulating liability , whereby the passenger is viewed as someone who must necessarily take a risk .
There is also an inconsistency between the rules on liability and the Community 's consumer protection policy , in that passengers and their families are forced to endure situations of uncertainty when they attempt to claim amounts of compensation which are higher than the established limit , apart from having to face long and costly procedures .
In these circumstances , the Community considered it necessary to take steps to create acceptable conditions for the air transport sector , ensuring common liability rules and guaranteeing fair treatment for users .
The proposal for a regulation which is before us today reflects this commitment .
In its proposal , the Commission has retained the essential features of the present system , since despite its inadequacies , the Warsaw system constitutes an internationally recognized and uniform legal basis .
With this as its starting-point , the Commission has attempted to adapt the regulatory provisions to current needs , eliminating all limits and ensuring simple and rapid procedures , thereby substantially improving the protection of users and the position of carriers .
I agree with the substance of the Commission proposal .
The aim of the amendments contained in my report is to make a number of improvements and refinements , though of course without changing the underlying philosophy of the text .
In this sense , I believe it is appropriate to increase the limit for objective liability proposed by the Commission from ECU 100 000 to ECU 120 000 .
In fact , this amendment does no more than reflect in legislation what has long been the practice of most airlines .
In no case will this increase be to the detriment of the airlines , not even in terms of insurance premiums , as was demonstrated by the Commission 's prior studies . Moreover , ECU 120 000 is an amount which is more appropriate to present times .
As regards the elimination of all the liability limits provided for in the convention , I believe that such a measure is consistent with the goals of minimizing risks in the air transport sector and enhancing consumer protection - bearing in mind , moreover , that for the airlines , it will involve only a minimal increase in operating costs .
Likewise , I considered it appropriate to delete the reference to the amount to be paid to meet initial costs , in the belief that the provisions to that effect of the plans of the individual airlines are more advantageous than the Commission 's proposal for a sum of ECU 50 000 .
Finally , I wish to highlight an issue which I believe to be of the utmost importance : because of the structure of the Warsaw system , any amendment of the rules requires a prior agreement between the contracting parties .
The effects of the Community 's action will evidently be restricted to Community airlines , with third-country carriers operating within Community territory being excluded .
Given the legal impossibility of extending application of this legislation to third countries , I am calling on the Commission to step up its efforts in the negotiations on the Civil Aviation Agreement .
Let me take this opportunity , Mr President , to bid farewell to Parliament , since I am leaving tomorrow .
I should therefore like to thank everyone , and especially the members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , for treating me with such courtesy .
I am returning to the Canary Islands .
Thank you .
Thank you , Mr Sánchez García .
We wish you every success in your future professional or political career .
Mr President , I would join with your good wishes for the rapporteur and congratulate him on his report .
At least his name will be enshrined in Parliament even if he goes .
I hope that he has a good journey and does not need to avail himself of any of the provisions of this carrier liability .
This is a complicated report , as anyone who has listened to the rapporteur would agree .
It is an attempt to update the Warsaw Convention of 1929 and to harmonize existing voluntary agreements amongst European airlines , as the rapporteur has said .
There are a great number of agreements here .
The Warsaw Convention is very much outdated because it was adopted at a time when air transport was thought to be a very risky business .
You can tell just how long ago that was because 1929 was the year I was born .
Nobody ever thought much about flying in aeroplanes in those days .
I welcome the Commission proposal because it improves the situation for people who need to claim compensation in the event of an accident , both in terms of the amount they will receive and the speed with which they will be helped .
To do this , the Commission proposes abolishing the Warsaw Convention limits which , as I said , are completely out of date , bringing in a more objective definition of liability rather than a subjective definition - although here , I agree with the rapporteur when he suggests that the figure should go up to ECU 120 , 000 rather than ECU 100 , 000 because that brings it more into line with existing IATA agreements and would cause less confusion .
I also welcome the provision for emergency payments and , in particular , the widening of the area in which one can take action , allowing people to take action in the courts of the Member State in which they are domiciled .
That is a big improvement .
I support the various arrangements the rapporteur has mentioned , including the amendments asking for full information rather than just adequate information to be given to passengers and others .
One issue that caused problems was the case of third-country carriers .
Ideally I would like to have seen all of them subject to the new EU regulations .
We have some precedent for this in areas such as denied boarding compensation .
As the rapporteur has said , the Montreal Convention , although it applies to the United States , does in fact include air carriers from outside the United States .
Nevertheless , when this was fully discussed in committee , we had to accept the very strong legal view of the Commission that this would not be possible .
But in conjunction with the rapporteur , I put forward amendments which were accepted , suggesting that the Commission should seek to incorporate in its negotiations for civil aviation agreements with third countries a commitment to applying the provisions outlined in this regulation .
If this is successful I feel that , as most airlines offer reasonable compensation on a voluntary basis and many of them are signing up to the IATA agreement which their own regulation overlaps , there will eventually be not only uniformity in what is offered to European Union passengers , but also a more realistic level of compensation , no matter which airline they use .
Mr President , I would also like to add my congratulations to the rapporteur and wish him every success for his future career , and just say to Mr Megahy that , obviously , 1929 was an extremely good year .
There is a general consensus that the Warsaw Convention needs to be modernized and there are various attempts to do so .
If the Commissioner or any one has any doubt why there is an urgent need to so , I would simply remind colleagues about the Lockerbie disaster .
Pan Am aircraft No 101 was bombed and destroyed over Scotland .
The bereaved are still trying to sort out compensation claims , subject to the Montreal Intercarrier Agreement .
Compensation has not yet been fully paid out .
Pan Am subsequently went out of business .
I heard particularly disturbing news through the newspapers recently that Pan Am may be resurrected as a different company but maintain the same name .
In all honesty , we in this House must ensure that all outstanding claims should be met before another airline by that name should be allowed to carry passengers - certainly in the European Union .
The lack of uniformity in arrangements for air carrier liability across the European Union is a particular point of concern , not just to the Commission but also to the European Parliament .
I wish to look in particular at the Commission proposal and a number of our amendments .
I regret to inform the rapporteur that as far as Amendments Nos 3 , 6 and 16 are concerned the Commission text is much clearer .
I understand that there may be some confusion , particularly as it is very much a legal text , between what is meant by both ' domicile ' and ' permanent residence ' .
The Commission text for both Amendments Nos 6 and 16 is much clearer .
It is quite right that we introduce what is known as this fifth jurisdiction for those who currently have their domicile or permanent residence in a European Union country .
It would be quite wrong for this House to seek to remove that jurisdiction .
Amendment No 4 raises the strict liability of European Union carriers to the sum of ECU 120 , 000 rather than the Commission proposal of ECU 100 , 000 .
I certainly support that figure as being more realistic .
We should remember that total liability would be unlimited .
But over this figure the claimant would have to prove that the airline was at fault .
My direct question to the Commission is : how would this new situation change , i.e. that of unlimited liability ?
Where we can prove an airline was at fault , how would that situation be so different to the situation with Pan Am where so many difficulties compounded the question of compensation ?
In conclusion , I welcome the provision that this would apply to domestic as well as international travel , fifth jurisdiction and domicile and permanent residence .
The fact that the European Union action reflects that already undertaken by IATA and to be followed by ICAO will enhance consumer protection and fair competition in the European aviation sector .
I congratulate both the rapporteur and the Commission on bringing forward this proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the text before the House today on air carrier liability in case of accidents represents a very interesting step forward .
I therefore thank the rapporteur for it .
This proposal for a regulation in fact achieves a quite satisfactory balance between the parties : on the one hand , the position of the air carriers will be strengthened by a precise redefinition of liabilities on both sides ; and on the other , the rights of air passengers will be better protected by the introduction of the principle of objective liability of the carrier .
In addition , this proposal introduces a system of emergency payments and extends the possibilities of legal recourse .
Of course , it is regrettable that it is purely a Community regulation and that there has been no in-depth revision of the Warsaw Convention .
Such a course of action is still desirable to improve the level of compensation available to passengers .
It is also to be hoped that this move will serve as an example for improving passenger protection on a worldwide scale .
While we are awaiting the revision mentioned above , the report before us today puts forward a number of improvements to the Commission proposal , with a view to ensuring greater consistency between the Community document , the Warsaw Convention and the IATA agreement of 31 October 1995 .
For this reason , my group will vote in favour of the report .
Mr President , I can be brief as much of what I wanted to say has already been said by the rapporteur and by my colleague Tom Megahy .
It is true that the Warsaw Convention is outdated and needs upgrading .
There is also a need to harmonize the various agreements that exist at present .
One of the problems with regard to air carrier liability is that passengers do not seem to be the primary concern .
They seem to be a secondary issue when there is a major accident .
For example , Miss McIntosh has quite rightly pointed out that the Pan Am victims ' relatives are still awaiting compensation .
And there is no guarantee that the relatives of the victims of the TWA aircraft which crashed in the Atlantic will not have a similarly long wait for any compensation they may be entitled to .
That is an intolerable situation as we approach the next millennium and nearly 100 years of aviation .
The Warsaw Convention seems to be biased towards the airlines .
I agree it is important that in any negotiations third countries must accept EU legislation and practices .
There I echo the point made by my colleague Tom Megahy , because in civil aviation at the moment we are seeing a growth in a kind of flags of convenience situation .
What are known as flags of convenience in the maritime sector are now spreading to the aviation sector .
In particular , Eastern European registered aircraft are now plying their trade on a regular basis within the European Union : what are the rights of people involved in an accident in one of those aircraft ?
That is something we need to clarify with any country which decides it wants to join the European Union .
I thank the rapporteur for his report .
I know it will get a lot of support and it deserves a lot of support .
I wish him well , back in the Canary Islands .
Mr President , I should like to begin by joining you and other speakers in wishing Mr Sánchez García every success in his future career - and more particularly , of course , in thanking him for his report .

I would remind the House that the Commission has been very active on the issue of liability since 1989 .
We were , and still are , concerned at the fact that the situation is so muddled and confusing , and offers passengers little protection .
The advantage of the Warsaw system has always been that it has provided a certain degree of uniformity , though not in the matter of the maximum level of compensation .
Passengers ' rights and the obligations of the airlines currently depend on the place of departure and the type of service , in other words whether the flight is domestic or international .
Air carrier liability under the Warsaw Convention is also limited to USD 10 000 to 20 000 , unless the passenger can specifically prove negligence on the part of the airline .
After two decades of fruitless discussion , the question of liability is now finally receiving the attention it deserves .
The IATA has even scored a notable success in putting together an agreement , which is something the governments have not managed to do since the Hague Protocol of 1955 .
The Commission supported this initiative from the start , and will continue to do so until it is completed .
However , we wish to ensure that this agreement between the IATA companies is not just applied by a few airlines , which would produce a most unwelcome situation in the European Union at least , and this was what led the Commission to put forward its proposal last December .
The main aim of the proposal is to improve protection for airline passengers .
It proposes to scrap the current maximum levels of compensation , so that passengers or their dependants are fully covered in the event of injury or death .
The proposed rules will apply to all domestic and international flights operated by airlines from the Community .
The proposal establishes the principle of objective liability up to a maximum of ECU 100 000 .
It also requires the airline to offer or make an advance payment to the passenger or his immediate family , which will be extremely helpful in cases where a deceased victim 's family is facing serious financial difficulties , for example .
I would point out here , in reply to Ms McIntosh 's question , that this proposal actually supplements the provisions of the Warsaw Convention .
It is very rigorous in its definition of liability , and provides for an advance payment in cases of serious financial difficulty , alongside the unlimited financial liability .
This is why it will offer new scope for compensation following terrorist attacks , as Ms McIntosh mentioned .
In addition to the jurisdiction established by the Warsaw Convention , the proposal also makes it possible to bring cases before the courts in the Member State where the passenger is domiciled or permanently resident .
Finally , although they are not covered by the regulation , third countries are required to give their passengers clear and detailed information about all these facts .
I think that airline passengers can feel confident that this gives them adequate protection .




The Committee on Transport and Tourism clearly shares this view , since its amendments all support this approach , and I am therefore pleased to announce that the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 16 and 18 .


The Commission also accepts the following amendments in part : Nos 7 and 15 , which promise that , in negotiations , third countries will be urged to apply the regulation ; No 11 , which improves the definition of persons entitled to compensation ; No 13 , which introduces greater flexibility as regards the advance payments under Article 4 ; and No 14 , which gives passengers fuller rights to information under Article 5 .
The Commission is also prepared to accept the following amendments in principle , provided that certain changes are made to the text : Nos 3 and 10 , which make it clear that the regulation lays down only the maximum financial limits for liability ; No 12 , which increases the objective liability under Article 3 from ECU 100 000 to ECU 120 000 , in accordance with the IATA rules ; No 17 , which adds a new Article 7a giving air carriers rights of recourse ; and No 19 , which calls for an evaluation report to be presented in 1999 .

On the basis of the amendments which it has accepted , the Commission will be able to make a number of improvements to the proposed measures , without affecting the balance of the regulation .
I should once again like to thank Mr Sánchez García and the Committee on Transport and Tourism most sincerely for all their hard work .
There are a number of points which will undoubtedly be helpful in our discussions with the Council next month .
Mr President , I appreciate that this is not Commissioner van den Broek 's area , but one thing which concerns me is that the Commissioner has indicated his willingness to replace a reference to values in Amendment No 9 and a subsequent amendment with a reference to financial amounts .
Secondly , he has also indicated his willingness to change the reference in the proposal to the claimant 's domicile or permanent residence with a reference to his place of domicile at the time of the accident .
As I indicated in my speech I would much prefer that we kept to the original Commission text unless the Commission gave us some extremely compelling reasons for those two changes .
The key point about consumer protection should be where I , as a claimant , have my domicile or permanent residence at the time of the claim .
Why would the Commission seek to change that ?
Very briefly , Mr President , Commissioner Kinnock has followed the legal advice he was given on this point , which was that the definition supported by Parliament is probably clearer and better .
That is why he chose it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.05 p.m. )
Madam President , on a point of order under Rule 136 , concerning committees of inquiry : yesterday evening I and two other colleagues attempted to have access to the meeting of the BSE inquiry .
Politely but firmly that was refused .
I should stress that what we were seeking was simply access : we did not want to participate in the deliberations or to vote at the committee .
Having looked again at the Rules of Procedure , the position is not entirely clear as to whether the committee had the right to exclude other Members as opposed to the public at large from its deliberations .
I just want to mention to you , Madam President , that I will be writing to you asking for an interpretation from the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities of this matter .
Until that is clarified , I will make a political appeal to colleagues on the committee as far as possible to allow their colleagues to participate , in the sense of observing , what obviously is politically and agriculturally a very interesting and delicate question .
I have noted that , and we await your letter .
Madam President , I was dismayed to find out this morning that the only Dutch television station we can receive here in Strasbourg has disappeared from our screens .
Today we have the opening of the States-General and the Queen 's Speech in the Netherlands , and now we cannot watch them .
I would ask you , Madam President , to ask the mayor of Strasbourg whether she might be able to arrange for us to receive a Dutch station here in Parliament , so that we can follow the news in the Netherlands .
We take note of that .
Decision on urgency
Madam President , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has given a favourable opinion on this first request for urgency on Regulation No 805 / 68 , and the report will be ready for tomorrow .
Madam President , on a point of order .
You cannot really take the one request for urgency on its own ; you need to take the three together .
I am speaking from a budgetary point of view .
Whichever way you do it is immaterial but if we vote ' yes ' for the first one , we need to vote ' yes ' for the other two .
Parliament will make a fool of itself if it votes ' yes ' on the first and ' no ' on the second two .
Madam President , there are three separate reports involved here , and I would ask Members to look at the documentation .
You will see then that we are dealing with three reports with three different numbers , which were also drawn up at different times .
Yesterday evening , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development decided by a large majority in favour of urgent procedure for the proposal on the common organization of the market in beef and veal .
By a similarly large majority , the committee rejected the request concerning amendment of the support system for producers of certain arable crops , since this is not an urgent matter .
The funds in question will not be needed until 1998 .
That was confirmed to us by the Commission representative who was present .
Lastly , the committee also rejected by a large majority the request for urgent procedure on improving the efficiency of agricultural structures .
I would repeat : urgency for beef and veal , but not for the other two reports .
That was decided quite clearly by the committee .
The recommendation from the committee is to take three separate votes .
I shall now put to the vote this recommendation from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to vote separately on the requests .
( Parliament agreed to the proposal )
We shall now repeat the vote concerning the regulation on the common organization of the market in beef and veal .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Madam President , you have followed the rapporteur 's proposal and put the first item to the vote .
That request for urgency was approved .
According to his recommendation , you should now also put the other two items to the vote .
We wish to reject urgency for these , so that it is made clear to the Commission that we do not see this link between beef and veal , the support system , and the general pursuit of agricultural reform .
Madam President , I think this regulation requires us to balance our accounts .
Perhaps a former agriculture minister could be allowed to ask Parliament not to make itself look ridiculous .
The regulation on beef and veal deals with the expenditure side , while the other two concern revenue .
We cannot vote for the one without the others , unless we wish to appear irresponsible again , and I am afraid the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has already given that impression here .
There is something rather tragic in this attitude .
I would urge Parliament to be logical and responsible , so that this is reflected in our regulations , Madam President .
Madam President , I would simply point out that in view of the scale of this subject , we feel it is important to discuss the matter calmly , outside urgent procedure .
This would enable us to hold talks and work constructively with the Committee on Budgets , rather than making adjustments to a budget of ECU 1 billion in just a few hours , as Mr Rocard has suggested .
We therefore propose to take the matter seriously and follow the normal procedure .
Consequently , we wish the House to reject urgency .
Proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0422 - C4-0448 / 96-96 / 0212 ( CNS ) ) amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1765 / 92 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops and repealing Regulation ( EEC ) No 1872 / 94

( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
The information society - copyright and related rights
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report I have the honour of presenting to you was subject to the constraints of the ' Gomes ' procedure .
In other words , we are putting together in a single report the six or seven other reports compiled by the various committees in question .
Unfortunately , the final result does not measure up to our hopes and expectations .
We are bound to ask ourselves why should this be .
While we appreciate the obviously valuable contributions from each of the committees , we have to realize that because of the very scale of the subject - and the information society covers so many areas - the final report was bound to be a long one .
It therefore contains some 120 paragraphs , which inevitably gives the impression that it is neither forceful nor radical enough .
We would have hoped to be able to put the key points to the Commission in a few words , but this was not possible .
We have therefore repeated many of our hopes , and put forward a whole host of advice , fears , anxieties and uncertainties , with the result that the document is hardly a masterpiece of clarity and so will have a limited impact .
This is unfortunate , and we shall have to change our procedures in this respect .
If Parliament wishes to say more on the subject , it will have to use methods other than the ' Gomes ' procedure .
We shall also see what is produced by the amendments we shall be voting on , which may well not make our message any clearer .
Having said that , by looking carefully and reading through all the paragraphs , those who have the courage to persevere will find that the important issues are all there , though widely dispersed amidst a mass of considerations , some general and others more practical .
Such a broad approach , however , does not leave much room for the latter .
In one paragraph , for example , the fiscal arrangements have been decided on in the form of a tax , which has been weighed up , assessed and even had a figure put on it .
Such measures clearly do not belong in a report of this kind .
Where the information society in its present state is concerned , we should be talking about the main principles and not going into such precise details as a tax , especially when we have neglected to say exactly how this is going to be applied .
Such examples show that the general nature of the report impairs its relevance .
Having said that , I should now like to go over the important points in the report .
First of all , information is not just a commodity like any other .
It impacts on all aspects of life in society , especially our modern society .
Europe is facing a considerable challenge , and is ill-prepared to meet it .
We must redouble our efforts if we are not to be left by the wayside , because the whole situation changes every day .
It is more important than ever to take stock of the issue , confronted as we are by alliances between multinationals and by the fact that individual states have been completely overtaken in this area .
Not all of us have yet fully appreciated the nature of the phenomenon that is now under way .
I have been struck by the fact that the emphasis has been placed , first and foremost , on fears and anxieties .
Of course , these are very real and should not be ignored , but rather fully appreciated .
Above all , however , we must not forget the most important thing , which is to be in the race , if we wish to arm ourselves against all the concerns and dangers which are threatening us .
And indeed , the dangers are real , the threat posed by media concentration is real , free speech is under attack , social inequality and exclusion are both becoming worse .
All these things are true .
But unless we do something straight away , they will inevitably continue .
And , at the moment , we are not doing a great deal .
It must be said that most of the Member States are reverting to the tactics used in the last war , rather as in 1940 , they relied on the Maginot line to stop the tanks .
More or less the same thing is happening now in the way we view the public service and state monopolies .
We talk endlessly about the content of the universal service , and in the meantime the world is being criss-crossed with networks , service-providers are supplying these networks , companies are being set up , new services are being offered to everyone and we are being excluded , or at least our presence is less and less noticeable .
This is the message I should like to pass on .
I should like Parliament to pull itself together ; I do not want it to search through all 120 paragraphs for all the dangers that can be imagined and for things that should be done , nor to add yet another list of measures which it would be impossible to implement all together and , above all , quickly .
I shall therefore end my message by saying that it is time to pull ourselves together and get down to the essential issues .
Madam President , the future of the global information society is as fascinating as it is disturbing .
We are only at the beginning of an extraordinary adventure and I am not going to repeat the more or less apocalyptic assessments bandied about every day .
It is our task as politicians and Members of Parliament , and I say this to Mr Herman too , to identify what needs to be done now and immediately .
I think we are all aware that we are seriously behind the times .
Technology is advancing and every day it throws up a confusing panorama which is difficult even to analyze ; liberalization is proceeding , frequently in a wild unregulated way , but there is a risk of policy standing idly by and watching .
The essential rules for healthy development to counter disequilibrium and inequality are weak , or there is delay in specifying and implementing them .
Faced , for example , with pervasive networks like the Internet , faced with multi-media weakening and obliterating the distinct boundaries between personal computers , television , traditional broadcasts , telephone , satellite broadcasts , and faced with the greater and greater blurring between private and public , between personal and collective , that results from all this , the governance of information must make a very courageous leap , but so far there is no glimpse of this , at least no appreciable glimpse .
The report I am presenting on copyright and related rights , drafted over a long period on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , may look limited but actually it is not .
The harmonizing dynamic of global information threatens to give rise to a shredder which regards every message as a product or text to be used for purely economic ends , not something to be respected for its invention , language , creativity and art .
That is why the Committee on Legal Affairs emphasizes certain points which I would like to draw to your attention : first , if there is to be protection of an author 's work and of right-holders , this protection should be available regardless of the way the work itself is broadcast .
A film is a film , a musical performance is a musical performance , they create certain rights and require a certain kind of management and so on .
So we cannot be tied to the categories and instruments of the past .
Secondly , citizens must be guaranteed parity of access - that is in the text of our resolution - to works and services deemed to be of public interest .
Thirdly , which law is applicable to govern such a complex sector ?
Responding to the excellent Commission Green Paper which put this question , we consider , and it is a crucial point , that protection cannot be guaranteed merely by applying the law of the country of origin . The solution given in the cable and satellite directive , for example , is deficient because the criterion is inadequate in a global perspective .
Paragraph 14 is carefully drafted and we do not want to adopt forced and simplifying formulae . The law of the country of reception must be taken into account as well because this is fundamental if we are to prevent any undermining of the protection of works and avoid unscrupulous relocation manoeuvres .
Fourthly , the moral right of authors is , in our view , a fundamental masterstroke of the European model for protecting works and messages , because it establishes a relationship between author and work which is renewed every time the work is used and qualifies the work not as a thing or an object , but as a continual creation .
Finally we are aware , fifth point and here I will close , that to resolve the questions already mentioned , we need more than a careful and precise set of legal standards , which is necessary , more than the consistent application of the international conventions - I am thinking of the Berne Convention , Article 6b , and the need to ensure that every country conforms to it - we need Europe to speak with one voice and act with one will at the international level , especially , but not only , in dealings with the United States , to ensure that these Conventions are applied .
It is also indispensable to implement electronic identification systems for works , because otherwise we do not think protection will be possible .
Experiments are already widespread on these electronic systems for numerical coding of works , which must and will achieve a higher level of protection in the fight against electronic piracy .
We want an international convention , an international agreement , against illegal trade in pirated copies , which is more indispensable than ever today .
May I just add something briefly , because otherwise I will have failed to comment on the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the amendments presented by it as regards the Herman report .
We are disappointed that the Commission has not succeeded in agreeing on the proposal for a directive presented by Commissioner Monti , and intended to protect media pluralism in the single market .
This proposal for a directive is another decisive chapter in establishing clear rules during the actual shaping of the information society .
Without European intervention to prevent abusive and abnormal concentration of power , it will not be possible to build an information society where citizenship rights , the sense of belonging , and the widespread demand for knowledge and culture find effective , incisive and genuine responses and are not cynically sacrificed on the altar of an entirely apparent , quantitative and ephemeral growth , ultimately empty and impoverishing .
Madam President , in contrast to the previous reports , where we are in the process of forming the law , I would say that with the report which I am presenting today , we are on relatively solid ground , because Community legislation already exists in this field .
I refer here to Directive 92 / 100 on related rights and Directive 93 / 83 on intellectual property rights in the field of cable and satellite broadcasting .
I was appointed Parliament 's rapporteur for the report on the directive on rights in the field of cable and satellite broadcasting , and in the debates in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights we had the opportunity of an exchange of views with the Commission on the appropriate procedure for the approval of this convention .
In view of the fact that under the previous directives , the European Union does not exercise exclusive competence with regard to these rights , we are required to apply the procedure for so-called ' mixed agreements ' .
Since the European Agreement on Road Transport - the Court of Justice 's judgment in the EART case , that is - there has been the idea that there has to be a special procedure for mixed agreements .
It should be recognized that the Commission has acted quite reasonably in this context , and the procedure it has proposed is regarded as acceptable by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights . I believe that Parliament should also consider it acceptable .
The proposal for a Council decision provides firstly for the signing of the convention on behalf of the European Community , subject to approval , with the opinion of the European Parliament then being required before ratification .
I believe that this is the correct procedure . In this case , moreover , there are no problems , since not only is the European Convention on the protection of copyright compatible with Community law , but it also contains a special reservation , in Article 9 , whereby parties which are members of the European Community are to apply Community rules amongst themselves .
In other words , this convention will not require any modification of Community law .
It will strengthen Community law , and in fact the Council of Europe took account of the acquis communautaire in this field when drawing up the convention .
From the legal point of view , I regard the strengthening of the Community 's rules by the Council of Europe 's European Convention as a positive move .
With reference to certain legal aspects - and Mr Barzanti , for example , mentioned the principle of the jurisdiction of the country of origin of the broadcast - it seems that in the area of the information society , in view of the progress of digital telecommunications , whereby there is a kind of relationship between supply and demand , a kind of contract between disseminator and recipient , the law of the country of reception may be taken into account .
In the area of satellite and cable broadcasting , however , the principle which applies must be that of the unity of the act , whereby the law of the country of origin of the broadcast is taken to be the only applicable law , despite the problems which may arise from the point of view of relocation .
Indeed , I believe that the appropriate way to deal with the issue of relocation is not intellectual property law , but fiscal harmonization measures which prevent a company from taking refuge in the legislation of a given country , for example , while we continue our efforts to harmonize the law on intellectual property .
Finally , another important aspect of this convention is its conformity with the Berne Convention - as Mr Barzanti said , the Berne Convention is the cornerstone of this entire sector - and the 1961 Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers , Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations .
I believe , Madam President , that the European Parliament must approve the conclusion of this convention , so that it can be ratified without delay .
In this case - as in many others at the moment - I should like to emphasize the goodwill and spirit of cooperation between the Commission and Parliament on issues of a particularly legal nature , where it is always desirable for the Community institutions to act together .
I should just like to respond to what Mr Herman said .
He seems to feel that the whole debate is about getting everyone involved in the information society , but I think everyone already accepts that , and the real question is how we go about it and what role the authorities should play , including this House .
I also think , Mr Herman , that your report lays too little emphasis on the fact that as well as being the product of market forces , the information society is also man 's handiwork , and it is what the authorities decide to do with it which will determine whether it brings benefits for ordinary people and workers .
I would remind you of one of the main points made in the report by the high-level group of experts set up by the Commission , namely that the biggest problem with the whole of the information society which we are busy creating is how to ensure that the benefits are shared fairly , and the need for the authorities to be actively involved in the market on a regular basis .
And one of the problems here is that it appears extraordinarily difficult to juggle several long-term considerations at once .
The first thing we focused on when the single market was created was liberalization , and it was only later that we started thinking about the social dimension , and later still the social impact , and this is exactly what Parliament is doing now .
It seems to find it extremely difficult to bring all the strands together , and to stop looking at things in purely economic , social or legal terms .
It is now time to adopt an integrated approach , and I entirely agree with Mr Herman that the ' Gomes ' procedure is by no means the right one to use here .
But I have to point out , Mr Herman , that if you had been a little firmer in directing the procedure and not allowed it to drag on for so long , we could have dealt with the whole issue in Parliament months ago , instead of waiting until after the Commission had published its Green Paper on social impact .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the differences in the ground covered by the individual committees and in their contributions to this report already indicate the difficulties of coming to an agreement within Europe on the structuring of the information society .
It is not just a matter of procedure in committee ; there are also the different cultural and national experiences which become clear from the draftsmen 's various contributions .
What are the main points highlighted by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media ?
Firstly - and this will come as a surprise to many people who have a fixed idea of the committee - we took a basically positive view of the information society .
It is not seen as a wrong turn , culturally speaking , but as a great opportunity for cultural enrichment and a chance to increase democratic involvement .
Just as reading was not superseded following the emergence of radio and television - and nowhere does so much reading take place as in the societies which now have radio and television - the information society will in future only serve to create a new range of possibilities , with traditional modes of culture continuing to exist and not being suppressed .
Of course , the means by which these new opportunities are handled will have to change .
There will be changes in the role of teachers in education , for instance .
But in how many societies does teaching still look the same today as it did when you and I were at school ?
These changes are perfectly normal .
What the committee and I do not believe , however - in contrast to many public statements by Mr Bangemann and others - is that the information society and broad involvement in it are best achieved by unlimited commercialization and the dismantling of special regimes for radio and television , for example .
We are therefore making the point that there must continue to be a separate legislative arrangement for radio and television , with special criteria which may very well be graded .
Discussions must then take place on individual cases in this respect .
There is a need for continuity in decisions of the kind we have already taken here in the House on telecommunications infrastructure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , the successful development of the information society is the greatest challenge facing European businesses today .
It is the key to reducing unemployment and boosting the competitiveness of European industry .
Small and medium-sized firms too must be able to compete in the new developments , because this is where new jobs lie .
As politicians , we have to ask ourselves what these changes will mean for our society .
What do we need to do at European level to cushion the impact ?
First of all , the European Parliament needs to anticipate new developments at an earlier stage .
The Bangemann report and the Commission action plan date from May and July 1994 respectively , yet it is only now , two years later , that all Parliament 's reports are finally ready .
Parliament 's snail-like pace is in stark contrast to the rapid and irreversible progress of the information society .
We in the House must become involved and provide a stimulus , instead of holding things up .
Secondly , there will be a great deal of movement on the labour market .
In the digital age , firms will base themselves wherever the cost and tax advantages are the greatest .
The Liberal Group believes that our main task should be to give our citizens the best possible preparation for this , through education and training , through continuing education from primary school onwards , and by setting an example ourselves .
Governments at local , national and European level must stop talking and lead by example .
People should be encouraged to become involved , and the information superhighway is an excellent way of doing this .
But there will be a number of difficult political issues to be resolved first .
It is difficult for the authorities to resist the temptation to give priority to security rather than privacy .
The Union , for example , has given the green light to telephone-tapping .
The Liberal Group is not convinced that it is really necessary to sell democracy short in this way , or that more criminals are actually being caught .
Governments are also finding it more difficult to levy taxes , because it is hard to determine the value of transactions through the network .
Are we soon to see taxes being shifted from products or income to the use of raw materials ?
One final point : governments are being confronted for the first time with communications technology on a worldwide scale , and they therefore need to show restraint when it comes to legislation .
Censoring the Internet is a disastrous idea , since it will restrict freedom of expression and the free movement of services .
National legislation has no place in the transfrontier digital age .
Madam President , the information society gives enormous opportunities .
Certainly in my constituency , which has large rural areas close to the Welsh border at Kington , in the Golden Valley and at Newcastle on Clun , I have seen at first hand the way in which new technology is being harnessed to create new opportunities and new jobs for ordinary people .
It is exciting , a lot of good things can happen , but there are some fears .
There are some very real fears that what we could actually be seeing is the concentration of power and privilege in the hands of the urban areas .
It is all very well saying that the massive liberalization of telecommunications and the information society will make jobs available .
The thing that worries many people is that these opportunities will be concentrated in just those few hands .
I read the report from Mr Bangemann .
It worried me .
It had a sort of macho liberalization about it : we must liberalize , because if we liberalize it is going to help and it is going to work .
There are many people in rural areas who fear that what we are going to see is exactly the opposite to what that report suggests .
We need to make sure that there is a universal public service .
We need to make sure that there are adequate incentives , that there is good funding for local schemes which can work , that all corners of the European Union are strategically linked ; and we need to ensure that all tariff barriers are at a flat rate within the European Union .
My great fear is that all we are going to do is to give to the favoured few and take from the many .
Madam President , I would like briefly to draw attention to the potential impact of the information society on equal opportunities .
I am speaking for the Committee on Women 's Rights in this respect .
Although there are obviously positive and new opportunities which must be welcomed and exploited , there are dangers for those who may become second-class citizens of the information society .
Many women in particular may be excluded from the benefits because they do not have access to the training and the technology .
For example , recent studies have shown that only one in seven of Internet users is a woman .
It will therefore be necessary for awareness and resources and programmes to be aimed specifically at women and girls , taking into account their interests .
Secondly , the impact of the information society on the nature of work will create new employment and working practices which will have a particular impact on women : for example , an increase in tele- and home-working .
Social protection for home workers therefore becomes more necessary .
That should take into account health and safety aspects and the potential for social isolation and insecure employment situations .
The Committee on Women 's Rights expects that the Commission and the social partners will address the issues of home- and teleworking and prepare proposals which recognize the effect of these new working practices .
Thirdly , since we know that information technology is being exploited for the portrayal of violent and interactive forms of pornography and racism , we must recognize that efforts at a global and European level are required to combat this .
In this Parliament and in the Commission we have the opportunity to plan so as to ensure that the citizens of Europe - men and women - benefit from the developments of the information society and from information technology .
I hope we will ensure that equal opportunities are at the forefront of our planning .
Madam President , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy expresses its satisfaction with the Commission 's Green Paper on copyright and related rights in the information society .
We would like to stress that determined protection of intellectual property rights , and an approach based on the principle of equal treatment to the rights of all those who participate in the market , are prerequisites for the broadest possible development of the information society .
Within that framework , I believe the existing situation concerning copyright and related rights should be the cornerstone of the information society , and that in addition , the importance of the principle of national treatment , the principle of freedom to conclude contracts and to choose the applicable law that will govern the contract , is extremely great .
However , I would also like to stress that there is a need for some level of harmonization - or indeed clarification - of these matters , such as :
the principle of the exhaustion of rights , so that copyright will not be exhausted internationally , -the principle of distribution rights , so that the exhaustion principle will not apply to the transfer of intangible copies of works , and finally , -the principle of reproduction , to cover digital reproductions and exclude exceptions related to private use.The committee would also like to stress the importance of voluntary licensing schemes in the management of rights and in technical identification systems .
In that context , we recognize that technical identification systems will facilitate the normal exploitation of digital works and help to counter piracy .
We also recognise the need to establish harmonized rules to prohibit the manufacture , import and use of devices meant to circumvent technical measures for the protection of copyrighted works .
Finally , Madam President , we ask the Commission to collect detailed information on the economic value of activities in Europe related to works covered by copyright .
Madam President , Members of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mr Barzanti is a fairly full one and for that reason I will only dwell on some of its points .
First of all , concerning the harmonization of laws in the Member States dealing with authors ' rights .
It is of course desirable for that harmonization to take place at the highest level , but being realistic , if we want harmonization to be achieved within the most appropriate time scale , we must begin by aiming at an intermediate level of protection .
Furthermore , provision will have to be made for effective means of monitoring the implementation of and compliance with the laws in question .
Then , concerning the matter of rights acquisition and management , the development of the creation of multimedia works complicates the problem of protecting copyright .
Indeed , the creators of such works will have to secure authorization from each author or rightholder , for all their works that they are thinking of using .
There is therefore a practical problem , that of collecting information about all the rights involved .
This is where the one-stop shop can play a part .
Of course , its precise role does not seem well enough defined .
Whether it is to operate simply as a centre for identification and the collection of information on existing rights , a thing that would simplify procedures for all the likely users , or whether it is to function as a body for the collective management of the rights associated with a given work , is not clear .
I also want to mention the issue of moral rights .
The new ways of using works inherently presuppose special treatment and adaptation .
In that event moral rights must be regarded as an obstacle and will more and more often be the subject of negotiations , because they ought not to be regarded as a source of risk .
Though it is true that contractual freedom must play its part in maximizing the information society 's potential , there are risks of infringement , mainly for new authors , who may try to waive their rights and might later regret it .
Perhaps we should consider setting barriers so that this waiving of rights will not be total .
The last point to which I should like to draw your attention concerns private copying .
It seems essential to redefine what this means in the context of the information society , and effective sanctions must be introduced against private copying .
This last point is as fundamental as respect for moral rights , if we want to protect creative richness and ensure correct remuneration for authors .
The Commission 's proposals on private copying are therefore awaited with great interest .
Madam President , I should like to thank Fernand Herman for his excellent report and the other rapporteurs for their reports .
I do not want to deal with a retrospective view but to look to the future , as Fernand Herman said .
On 24 July the Commission produced a new communication on the information society from Corfu to Dublin and the new emerging priorities .
And that is what this House should now be preoccupying itself with , not with a retrospective over the last two or three years .
The fact is that in Corfu in June 1994 we set down the programme for the information society .
We worked out the concept but the problem now is that we have moved on two years and we need carefully to audit how far this process has been developed and what needs to happen in the future to set a new agenda for the European Union .
As with so many issues in the European Union we start very well .
There is common cause amongst the Member States , the Commission , Council and Parliament and then , on any issue , a year or two years down the road we find that the Member States start to back off .
They get concerned about budgetary considerations and , as a result , we lose the competitive advantage that we have gained in so many areas .
We are in the same situation now with the information society .
I say to the two Commissioners present today and to Members of the House that we only need to look at what the Council is proposing on the budget for Info 2000 and on the information society to see that the Council 's support for information technology does not even stretch to maintaining the budget lines that are necessary for the coming year to really develop information technology for the European Union .
I want to look specifically at the four headings that Commissioner Bangemann identified in his new communication which , no doubt , we will be discussing in this House in two years ' time - because of the length of time it takes us to deal with things .
He talks about improving the business environment , investing in the future , putting people at the centre and meeting the global challenge .
These are four clear political agenda items which we in the European Union have to address .
The information technology Council meets on 8 October .
We should be saying to our Commissioners that we want them to come back after 8 October to give a statement to the House , to inform us what the Member States are now saying on information society and information technology developments .
Are they going to support the budget line issues ?
Are they going to put in place the sort of legislative and regulatory measures necessary to develop information technology ?
Are they going to provide the networks which will allow people to take advantage of the benefits of information technology in schools and public places ?
Let us put to one side the conceptual arguments of the past .
We are beyond that now .
We need detailed , concrete proposals .
We need the support of the Member States .
We need the budget lines for the Commission to implement its programmes and we need a proper coherent strategy in Europe if this programme on information technology is going to benefit our people - our young people in particular .
Otherwise , the United States and the Far East will get that competitive advantage and once again Europe will have lost out .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that here , as on so many other occasions , Parliament is performing its task very well .
Today , we are not considering Parliament 's legislative role , but its function as a sounding-board for the social realities which surround us .
These reports , therefore - as general ones , which perhaps have a number of technical shortcomings - reflect society 's concerns .
Society is now at an historic crossroads , like few before that come to mind : perhaps the discovery of the Americas , I do not know .
It may be an even more important , more revolutionary situation , since the social realities that we now have to face will have a greater impact on our lives , and will affect our very being in a more intimate way , than any others in the past .
At present , the two tendencies between which humanity has always vacillated are in the process of crystallizing : fear of the unknown and the challenge of discovering new lands .
And that is what these reports reflect : noise and confusion .
We have no clear idea of what is going to happen or where we are going .
And the reason why we have no clear idea is because of the emergence of what is undoubtedly the fundamental debate : market forces or legislation ?
Should we give priority to the liberalization of the market , the promotion of industry , leaving the rest to come of its own accord ?
Or should we , on the contrary , take the view that the way to create order is through legislation , since the market left to its own devices will never bring about social order ?
And at this crossroads , we must ask ourselves : is the law capable of creating that order ?
Because there is no doubt that our present legal instruments are unable to provide a response to these new social facts , and are incapable of bringing order to these new realities which are emerging .
And the other major question which we must ask ourselves today is : does it make sense to debate and address , within the context of the European Union , realities which are a global phenomenon and must undoubtedly be examined in international forums ?
Of course , I realize that , as always , it is the law which will provide our Ariadne 's thread , and the thinking must come from a European Union which speaks with one voice .
This is because all these new realities are calling into question the two basic principles of our legal orders : the distinction between the public and the private sectors , and the dual concepts of territoriality and sovereignty - the foundations of our national legal orders , which are now beginning to crack .
And we must seek this Ariadne 's thread , in order to be able to find our way out of the labyrinth of social demands : firstly , as regards the relationships between private individuals , by seeking to strike a balance between copyright and the rights of other persons with legitimate interests which require legal protection , as well as addressing the issues of the protection of privacy and public freedoms , especially the right to information .
Also , our thinking must take account of certain general interests which we cannot ignore - beginning with the general interest of promoting creative activity in Europe , of defending what has been the distinguishing feature of European copyright and is inseparably linked , in cultural terms , to European creative power .
Lastly , there can be no doubt that we must take account of other general interests which fall entirely within the concept of public order - especially the interests of groups such as children , who must be protected from this uncontrollable avalanche of new technologies .
Society as a whole must be protected from organized crime , which may exploit this unregulated scenario for the benefit of its corrupt interests .
And we must consider the question of international public order in terms of the law that is to be applicable .
I believe , therefore , that the response to all these issues must be to recognize that the European Union constitutes the essential framework for joint action .
Because the European Union contains the seeds of a political structure whose purpose is precisely to meet society 's new challenges .
And finally , Madam President , in the face of this noise and confusion , we must return to our traditional legal principles : those which enabled the Sabinians and Proclians to respond to the social realities of classical Rome , and which are still relevant today .
Madam President , information is not any old commodity , and perhaps it is not even a commodity .
Mr Herman was right to say so in his introduction ; he made it clear in presenting his long and painstaking report which is an important document , indeed fundamental , at an important time for information , and which has our support .
In the years ahead it will in fact be information that will make the difference in every area of application . Think of the economic opportunities offered to small and medium-sized enterprises where the development of technology will bring time-saving and efficiency , thus allowing the entrepreneurs to be entrepreneurs at last and create new jobs .
In social policy the new technology already affects a vast range of areas , from health to tax . There are thousands of other encounters between technology and telecommunications , including the organization of the needs of the citizens as consumers , from deregulation - that is , less bureaucracy at public authority counters - to the possibility that the public may finally serve the private .
In this scenario - as Mr Barzanti rightly said - policy threatens to stand idly by and watch .
Our institutional role requires that we do not allow that to happen .
So we must work even harder to preserve respect for private life and for there to be a strict separation between public and private , between the collective and the individual . In conclusion , there must be certainty about rights : the right to respect for subsidiarity , the right to free movement - arguments so dear to Commissioner Monti - copyright , a moral and material right combined , and ultimately the right of the final user .
Madam President , I shall be speaking about copyright as it is applied to the field of multi-media because it can be considered , as a result of its complexity , as a laboratory where various questions are raised and call for new responses .
Copyright also concerns culture , economics and the question of freedom . It brings into play diverse interests which need to be reconciled : the interests of authors , those of producers and distributors and those of the consuming public .
Copyright has two aims , and those aims contradict each other : protecting authors and producing new products quickly and in large quantities .
The Commission Green Paper is an exhaustive list of the different issues but it is less secure when it puts forward solutions which have not yet had time to mature .
The Barzenti report , for its part , puts forward some important ideas which are still necessarily general and which need to be emphasised and supported .
It speaks of preserving the richness of the European concept of moral rights as opposed to the American concept of ' copyright ' , aimed at harmonising the laws on copyright and related rights in the 15 Member States of the European Union , making progress on a study of technical systems for identifying works which can be rapidly used , already providing for sanctions against anyone who tries technically to eradicate the protection systems that have been created , at promoting cooperation between the Member States and linking their work with the competent international organisations , the WTO , the WIPO and the TRIS , without forgetting the important discussions taking place at the Council of Europe and UNESCO , and including agreements with third countries ' copyright protection clauses , in an attempt to make all of the rules on this subject universally applicable .
Some of these points raise difficult questions and I would like to refer in particular to the concepts of copyright concerning employees .
Nana Mouskouri , the rapporteur for the Committee on Culture for this report , emphasizes the role of libraries and cultural and educational establishments , the importance of informing and raising the awareness of small independent producers on questions of copyright , refers to the desirable interdepartmental cooperation at the Commission so that all discussions can be carefully linked on aspects of content and technology , and insists on the urgent need to rationalize all of this work through the collective question of rights .
I shall conclude by saying that we can see that there are , however , more questions than answers but Europe must know that it cannot lose the multi-media battle , it knows that it is lagging behind and it knows that copyright lies at the very heart of the matter .
This is a field where subsidiarity means that this matter must compulsorily be dealt with at European level which is the only efficient way of doing so .
Madam President , the report contains many important observations on societal effects , but also some contradictions and uncertainty as regards the long-term consequences .
The Committee on Regional Policy , for example , fears centralization , while the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , for its part , believes in decentralization .
The Committee on Women 's Rights sounds a warning .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy approves of teleworking , but we are not told anything about the risk of weak negotiating positions or the lack of creative contact with work colleagues .
The question is : how are we to guard against the commercial information flow leading to unintelligibility , lack of quality and fragmented awareness ?
Finally : who takes power when everything is geared to reducing public control ?
The Commission 's neo-liberal arrogance is scaring to any democrat .
Madam President , I should like to thank our colleague Mr Herman for his very broad approach , which has paved the way for what I consider to be the first genuinely broad debate on the information society in this House .
Clearly , this topic concerns a development which is nothing short of a global revolution .
Its impact on our everyday lives and on global relations is enormous , and it is therefore a good thing that we should have the opportunity to discuss various aspects at the same time .
I myself am among those who wish to stress the fact that these opportunities which are provided by the information society require clear political guidance .
Just as Mr Svensson has said , some believe in decentralization while others perceive the dangers of centralization ; there are those who are glad that jobs are being dispersed through tele-working , while others consider this development risky .
Our duty as politicians is to lay down the framework for this .
I myself wish to stress education , to which attention is laudably devoted in this report .
As the Committee on Women 's Rights has previously said in these debates , we have no reason to allow the development of a two-speed information society .
The proposal that a tax of half a percent should be imposed on data traffic , in accordance with Mrs Cresson 's model , is an interesting one .
I should like to hear what members of the Commission think about this .
It would not be a bad idea if this revenue were to be used for education , to enable women and other people in disadvantaged positions to join the information society .
However , would the tax have to be collected mainly from manufacturers of the information society 's technical infrastructure rather than users , since we ought to encourage users to join the information society , to ensure that everyone has the opportunity ?
In Finland we used to have a tax on data transmission , but we abandoned it very quickly because in reality it was hampering the development of the information society .
It was levied from users of data communications , not from producers .
Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Herman for working at such speed and trying to guide us through the revolution that we are in the middle of .
I would like to concentrate on the regional and cultural social aspects .
We must have the guarantee of a universal public service reaching into even the remotest places , for example to the 90 inhabited islands in my constituency .
We do not want a two-speed Europe with an information society benefiting only the industrialized regions .
We do not want the marginalization of the peripheries and the over-centralization which could occur .
The information society really can enhance lives for people on the periphery .
Distance learning is developing very rapidly in the UK , for example .
We have hopes that it will help the creation of a highlands and islands university , linking all the colleges right across my vast terrain through this modern technology .
On the cultural side , I welcome the special role for public service broadcasting in minority languages because the cultural diversity of our Union must be one of the things we treasure the most .
Each language is a vital part of Europe 's heritage and the information society will assist the nurturing of these precious languages .
I want to see free access to information networks for schools , cultural bodies , libraries , community centres , etc .
We must make sure that this information society makes it possible for people to be in control of information rather than information controlling the people .
Unless we emphasize the social and regional aspects , however , the positive advantages of the information society may be lost to us all .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it appears that the Commission 's aim in this document is not really to protect human beings from an information society which can be devastating in terms of people 's private lives - as vaguely hinted in the text - but also for the individual who is turned into a labour commodity in the name of this concept which is becoming a ubiquitous one in Community documents : competition .
Are not people allowing themselves be brought to the level of mere service-providers ?
What kind of protection is to be given to those who work in the media industry , now and in the future ?
Are they going to be paid on a piecework basis , as they were in the nineteenth century ?
A fine advance in social policy that is !
What kind of society are you trying to build ?
I am speaking here to the Members of the Commission , naturally , but also to my colleagues .
The information society can be a great asset , as we all know , but it is only available to a small number of people , whereas the benefits should be distributed fairly .
The document we have here , which purports to be in the interests of free competition , will only lead to more inequality .
People will become more and more like commodities .
Through the information society , in fact , an ever wider gulf is being created between the Europe of humanist values and an unrealistic , possibly even suicidal Union that would like to impose a development model on what is an extremely unstable economic and social situation .
Such an approach smacks of a colonialism that no longer seems to me to be appropriate .
Perhaps you feel that colonialism is rather a strong word to use , but it fits the facts .
The idea of competition as advocated by the Commission sits uncomfortably alongside social progress .
In this case , applying ultra-liberal beliefs to Europe is colonialism in disguise .
Why ?
It is for the Commission to supply the answer .
How ?
Here , sadly , the Commission has already supplied it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Herman has covered the main views of our group .
I should nevertheless like to point out once again that his report has of course been modified by the others , so that the main features of our position do not emerge .
I think it is a good thing that Mr Herman has now produced a further report , following a two-year gap .
The situation has changed completely in the meantime .
Two years ago , only a few people wanted to speak on this subject .
Today , many people wish to air their views , and in those two years since Mr Bangemann and his group presented a report , an action plan has been drawn up and many changes have taken place .
I believe it is important that we in Parliament should discuss this question , in order to show the public where the path is leading and to invite them to discuss it too .
Mr Herman called on us to pull ourselves together in order to achieve a specific goal , and the reservations must not be allowed to stand in the way of everything .
The development of the information society represents one of the greatest challenges for Europe .
The new services offer our citizens not only undreamt-of scope for information , training , entertainment and use of a wide range of facilities , but are a challenge for our Member States and for the regions in terms of education in schools .
As has been said many times , we really do have a great responsibility here to connect our schools to the Internet , to provide media education in schools , and especially to do all we can in universities to ensure that teachers are trained in media education .
Nothing is more important than to make children and young people accustomed to using the screen every day , even at primary school level , and to eliminate any anxieties and perhaps fears through this media education .
And it is not just in Europe that initiatives are being launched to connect schools to the Internet : in America , they are already the order of the day .
As rapporteur for the report on trans-European telecommunications networks , I am in fact sorry that we spend a great deal of time talking , but hesitate when it comes to implementing these telecommunications networks and then express a large number of reservations .
I feel it is extremely important - and this is made clear in the report - to bind in the weak areas of Europe , the weaker elements in the Community .
By comparison with our international trading partners , the providers of new services in Europe suffer a number of competitive disadvantages , such as high telecommunications costs , partially inadequate bandwidths for networks and a lack of risk capital , as well as Europe 's fragmentation into national markets , which prevents European firms from developing sufficient benefits of scale .
Creating and maintaining a truly European internal market for the services of the information society must therefore be our principal concern .
The Commission has recently presented a communication and a proposal for a directive on the establishment of a procedure for the exchange of data on legislative cooperation regarding services in the information society .
This is a welcome move , since fragmentation into national legislative procedures will put Europe at a further disadvantage .
I see it as extremely important that we should pursue this legislative initiative , so that we can then in fact develop uniform legislation in Europe .
We should at least receive information on legislation in good time , so as not to create unnecessary obstacles .
Finally , during the budgetary procedure , we should definitely reinstate the budget lines which were included for Info 2000 or the trans-European networks , because while we can adopt white papers on employment and make fine speeches here , unless we create the relevant budget lines , the preconditions for the development of Europe will unfortunately not exist and will be obstructed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at this turn of the century , the information society is no longer just a passing fad .
It represents a priority for Europe which should be reaffirmed at both Union and Member State level .
The Commission 's communication on Europe and the information society which followed Commissioner Bangemann 's report was , we should remember , warmly welcomed by the Council at the Corfu summit in 1994 , when it was hoped that the various measures envisaged in the action plan would be carried out on schedule .
We should now commend the Commission on its determination to implement this action plan .
Let us also remember that the question of the information society , which is the key issue in Mr Bangemann 's report , has been given priority status , in particular by the German and French presidencies in 1995 .
It is therefore gratifying to see that some of the initiatives are taking shape in terms of both rules and practical applications in various parts of the Union .
We should also welcome the new partnerships between towns , regions and the private sector .
We are now seeing that the information society has made significant progress at European level .
Here , to refresh our memories , are just a few examples : the approval of a liberal regulatory framework for the telecommunications sector ; the adoption and implementation of research and development programmes under the fourth FPRD ; in the fields of information technology and telecommunications , programmes have been adopted with the aim of encouraging the development of networks and the implementation of pilot projects under the auspices of the G7 ; and , finally , there have been many initiatives connected with information superhighways in the Member States , particularly France .
Our group believes that Mr Herman 's report is heading in the right direction .
In particular , he stresses the urgent need for an action plan with priorities for implementation : research and development , bringing services on stream and promoting operational applications in areas of public interest - education , health and social exclusion - and standardization .
Similarly , the approach set out in the report in terms of industrial and telecommunications policy , like the description of the legal aspects and social consequences , is well judged .
As a result , the Union for Europe Group will support Mr Herman 's report , while nevertheless expressing certain reservations about the creation of a European regulatory body in the communications sector .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating Commissioner Bangemann on being a champion of the information society that is so critically important for the future of Europe and our competitiveness .
We need that , despite the degrading of focus we have seen over the years , which Alan Donnelly described so well a few speeches ago .
I wish to make two quick points .
Firstly , the information society provides us with an opportunity to equalize the differences that are a consequence of distance in the Union , particularly for rural areas , one of which I represent .
We need to take up that challenge , particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises that are particularly prolific in the economies of those regions .
Funnily enough , in many respects I welcome the idea of taxation or a small levy on information , because here we have an opportunity for hypothecation of taxation and actually putting money back in and reinvesting it in an area where it can be spent .
Also , we need to ensure that technologies like ISDN have equal access - in the UK it is very expensive to get access to that .
I would warn Parliament : firstly , we have to be a lot quicker than we have been over this report .
Secondly , would it not be much better if we built a more virtual parliament , rather than the investment we have seen in this building opposite ?
Billions of ecus have been spent on that , when we should instead be immediately improving our own electronic technology in this Parliament .
Madam President , both the Green Paper from the Commission and the report by Mr Barzanti adopt a stance of critical openness towards the challenge of new information technology .
This is something different from the line of ' we must join in ' , as has been pointed out here this morning .
It is a position for which the House owes thanks to both parties , and one which it should support .
One thing is particularly important to me in this context , namely to protect the individual freedom of artists and their works against the interests and technological pressures of marketing .
Certainly , as Mr Barzanti said , what we must do here is to stress and not abandon the achievements of traditional copyright in the Berne Convention .
However , I wonder whether the nineteenth-century copyright geared to the originality of the author and the copyright law based on intellectual property are sufficient to meet the new technical challenges .
Today , in my view , the point is more the individual freedom of the author to assert his rights , together with freedom of public access .
Art cannot and should not become information .
Rather , it should facilitate information and freedom of information .
Only when it is free to do this can we ensure that the information society does not become one of deformation .
Mr Bangemann , I should like to address myself to you directly , and of course to Mr Herman , as rapporteur , and Mr Barzanti .

You , Mr Bangemann , were the main player at European level in the creation of this information society .
We are now in the midst of it , for better or for worse .
What is still a matter for dispute - and I believe we must dispute it very seriously - is what kind of society this should be .
We need to dispute what kind of face it should have in the future .
We need to dispute what kind of responsibility the state should have in this new game .
The responsibility of the state must be different from in the past .
The state will have to take responsibility for regulation , and has already done so .
Regulation is a means of creating stability .
For example , it is understandable that there is a wish to control the Internet at the moment .
It is understandable that people wish to secure more protection for the individual through controls .
What the state should do - and you and we will bear considerable responsibility here - is to ensure this protection on the one hand , without restricting the freedom of speech of the individual and the business world on the other .
This will not be easy .
It will depend on striking an even balance , and on this balance also being established at international level .
It will involve setting up a new moral code which incorporates the old moral ideas which we certainly have throughout the world , but adds something new to them .
And we shall have to fight for that new element .
In this new world , it will not be possible to have the right for everyone to impose their own interests , for anyone to be able to publish as much pornography as they like , for anyone to feed as much violence as they like into the Internet .
But there must be the freedom for anyone to publish views which they consider right and relevant .
This is a border area where it will be very difficult to strike the right balance .
That is one side of things .
However , the state has a second and , to my mind , far more important responsibility here .
It must create a basis on which all citizens - and all regions , as has been pointed out - can have access to this new network and to these new opportunities which are developing at present .
Computers , hardware , software , the Internet , the Worldwide Web - they are all just means of providing access to information .
Access to information is the crucial element , that is what is new .
It will be new to search for things , to obtain knowledge .
It will be new to create a new quality of education in Europe and throughout the world .
And it will be new to create intellectual capital , as the current jargon has it .
How will Europe participate in this ?
What opportunities are we to give our citizens ?
Universal service alone is not the answer .
Even with universal service - at least as we understand it at present - the costs are still too high .
How will the future look ?
How will we connect our citizens and the regions ?
Do you not think , Mr Bangemann , that it is time to discuss how we are going to connect all the schools , all the universities and libraries in Europe to this new infrastructure ?
Do you not think it is time that we , as political agents of change , gave expression to our responsibility for this process by establishing a European initiative to open up access to these new sources of information for schools , regions and libraries ?
Do you not think we should ensure that there is no discrepancy at European level , that we do not reach a situation of having some countries which , because of the cost structure or because they are lagging behind in this process of development , cannot become involved as soon as others ?
What is your answer to these critical questions , which have yet to be resolved ?
I would call for us to embark on this process at an early stage , and to find a truly European answer .
Mr President , the European Parliament welcomes the fact that the Commission has recognized , in its Green Paper on the information society , that if we support the development of the information society , we must at the same time support this being accompanied by a precise definition of the rights of the parties involved .
Where does privacy stand in the new information society ?
Does the individual have any opportunity of determining what data are entered in the system ?
And , conversely , who can check that the information which our children , for example , sit and lap up from the Internet should be made public in the first place ?
If ordinary people are to be able to choose among information on the Internet , we need to be prepared for this .
And that will only be the case when we concentrate specifically on looking after and educating both children and adults .
Another point which concerns me is who can afford to surf the Internet ?
If it is the same people who can afford to surf in Barbados , then we have a problem .
Ordinary people cannot afford to leave their telephone lines open and connected to the Internet .
The information society is therefore not for everyone , but only for the few .
However , it is a development which is under way , and we should be pleased that it is happening and that we can follow it .
We should simply stay in control of this development - it should not be in control of us .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Herman on an excellent report which I think certainly has captured the imagination in terms of how we must proceed into the information age .
Of course Mr Bangemann 's original report was in itself very visionary in that it described the type of future that we want to see here in Europe , because one thing is certain : if Europe is going to be competitive in the next century with the United States and the developing countries in Asia , what we need to do is develop our key technologies , in particular in the information industries , to ensure that Europe and the single market will be a success , not only for the present , but for the foreseeable future as well .
This involves ensuring that the information infrastructure is actually present and can be used freely and cheaply at a rate which benefits businesses , communities and society as a whole .
The freer and the quicker that information can move about the community , the quicker the improvement to the economy can be .
That infrastructure is like the arteries of the economy .
The arteries of an economy are like the arteries of the human body .
I would particularly like to draw attention to the emphasis on broadcasting , because in the past terrestrial broadcasting developed in a way which was limited in terms of bandwidth and in terms of the amount of information that could be passed around .
The new infrastructure , whether it is through digital techniques in satellite or through fibre-optic techniques , actually increases the number of channels that can be delivered throughout the Union and this will add to and proliferate the amount of information circulating within the Union .
This in turn will develop the need for software to make it easier for people to access the information they need .
If there are hundreds of channels , people need to be able to access the information they are after quickly and easily rather than flicking through channels in a way which we have done previously with conventional television equipment .
This means that our research and technology institutions and our universities need to be involved in developing this new software if we are to stay in competition .
Unfortunately , at this stage the running is being made by American companies and we are much slower in catching up on development of this software .
With the initiatives that are going on in the European Union in developing this software , I would like to think that we can actually catch up and eventually take the lead .
Mr President , starting out from the premise that the law must be applied for the benefit of all , we are today faced with an issue of crucial importance for the world of culture and communications .
We are in complete agreement with Mr Barzanti when he emphasizes the need to strike a fair balance between the protection of copyright and the protection of rights which may reasonably be invoked by consumers ; and we are especially concerned that this balance should be maintained .
It is for this reason that we wish the protection of copyright and related rights to be given priority over any other imperative in the use of these new technologies .
On the other hand , we believe it is unacceptable for exclusive rights to be improperly granted to transmit information which ought to be disseminated by all the communications media to the widest possible public .
This is a debate which is familiar to the House from numerous reports , and in which my group will continue to maintain this stance .
Not long ago , here in the House , the European United Left warned Parliament of the need to be aware of the possible dangers : the new dangers which the introduction of new technologies into the information society might bring .
We thus considered it important to table an amendment providing for a report to be drawn up on public service in the Community , in which account is taken of the effects of the rapid development of the information society , on the basis that protection of the artist is one of the key principles for ensuring freedom of access to the new media .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Role of public service television
The next item is the report ( A4-0243 / 96 ) by Ms Tongue , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the role of public service television in a multimedia society .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I simply want to express my full agreement with the report presented to us .
I would only emphasize that public service broadcasting , as has just been said , has specific features and particular aims to pursue .
These features and aims need to be updated today in the context of the mixed system and the prospect of globalization of the market .
There is no European model of public service , but there are common problems .
As a public service , the public broadcasters are located in the market and must try to compete without craving unjustified privileges .
They must certainly accept the challenges of competition but if , for instance , - as Commissioner Bangemann pointed out just now - resources seem unlimited and there is no point in maintaining past attitudes , it has to be specified that while this is potentially true , the technological resources are enormous , yet the economic resources have to be there to grasp them and the technical and material resources have to be there to exploit them .
So this is the point : while the public service is part of the market and as such cannot expect monopolistic privileges or some kind of special position , dominating advertising income and so on , because it is a public service geared to society , it has a right to such funding and such support as can further strengthen independence , autonomy and the presence of new services , in the new productive capacities which are necessary today because the public service must be equal to the challenges which it too must take up .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Bangemann has already ushered in this debate .
What interests me is how he did in that quiz show , at what point he thought of the name and answered the question .
And I am also interested by his attitude to popular music .
I can remember the popular song ' Join us on the yellow waggon ' being a great success some years ago , but now we do not hear it quite so often .
Turning to the matter in hand , there is no doubt that everyone here wishes to have the dual system .
In all the countries of the European Union , we need public service broadcasting , and of course private broadcasting as well .
I know that public service broadcasting - in Germany , at least , but in other countries too - was built on the traditions of the early years , and that this founding period was also an important one for the Federal Republic , especially as regards the emergence of a basic democratic order .
As some of you may be aware , for a number of years I was chairman of the Broadcasting Council of the Norddeutscher Rundfunk , so I know the strengths and weaknesses of public service broadcasting .
And who does not have weaknesses ?
I have the impression that this report is trying to highlight the position of public service broadcasting at the expense of others .
In my opinion , it will not help us to make progress in future discussions if we launch an attack on private broadcasting in this report at European level .
Things do not have to be done in this way : the important assets of public service broadcasting can be enhanced without resorting to attacks .
The PPE Group has tried to remove the negative tone from this report , and has partially succeeded .
I hope that we shall have some further success .
For that , our amendments will have to be adopted .
Public service broadcasting is not only being discussed in this report .
We also had an intensive discussion as regards the substance of public service broadcasting in connection with the television directive .
And we shall be doing so again .
It is not a good thing that the public service broadcasting lobby is intervening on such a scale , for example with regard to Article 1 , that everything which is emerging there in terms of new services also has to be classed as broadcasting in order to be involved on the basis of national legislation .
I think everyone is entitled to be involved , it is simply not right that it always has to be funded , and so I can only give public service broadcasting the good advice not to operate so superficially all the time here .
That does not help any of us to make progress .
We have also discussed the topic of public service broadcasting in the debate on rights to sporting events , on the basis of the own-initiative report by Mrs Castellina .
I said on that occasion too that it is not very helpful for us to create images of an enemy , and to extol public service broadcasting as the only true guardian of broadcasting culture .
The point has already been made that we can see weaknesses in public service broadcasting which need to be eliminated in order to make it strong in two ways - strong in competition with private broadcasters and strong at European level against the background of the discussions taking place worldwide .
We need rules which apply across the board , which provide scope for all the fields of interest in Europe to be developed .
My advice is to take a far more relaxed approach to the subject - and I say this to Ms Tongue in particular - without making the unfortunate experiences in our own countries the watchword at European level .
Nor do I believe that we can deal with and resolve here the problems which exist in Italy , and perhaps in the United Kingdom .
Our concern should be to develop the pan-European dimension , so as to create a sound position for public service broadcasting in the future and ensure that it has the capacity to survive .
I believe we are on the right track , provided we do not create images of an enemy and do not respond to others simply with prejudice .
Mr President , an own-initiative report by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , as approved by the Bureau of Parliament , is today giving us an opportunity to express our views on the role of public service television in an increasingly media-oriented society .
I would take this opportunity to say yes to public service television , provided that its terms of reference are well defined and that it meets criteria of quality and morality which justify its public financing and guarantee viewers , whoever and wherever they may be , access to information , culture , education , sport and fiction .
Moreover , this does not rule out partnerships between public service television and private , theme-based channels , if such a choice were to be appropriate .
The audiovisual sector cannot be treated as an ordinary commercial product .
The new services are being called upon to expand - and Mr Bangemann will not contradict me - but they will need consumers ' money for this , and they will not be accessible to everyone .
The constant spiralling of television rights for sport in general , and football in particular , should make us stop and think .
On the one hand , the cost of these rights plays a part in increasing the price of players and , on the other , it forces the channels into an increasingly frenetic search for ever more profitable advertising , in order to pay for these rights .
Even worse , it also has the effect of leading the channels to show the cheapest possible films , thereby offering us an excess of American productions .
I would ask those of you who advocate a liberal , enterprising and commercial approach if you really believe that you can market everything ?
Have you ever imagined a world in which education , sport , health and public order would form part of a purely commercial environment , leaving market practices a free hand ?
No , ladies and gentlemen , trade and free enterprise are not everything .
Sadly , we have seen how freedom can turn sex into a marketable commodity , no doubt to the point where it has created consumers for the product , given rise to fantasies and generated a trade which , I am afraid , is all too profitable .
We are already seeing racism and xenophobia being marketed on the Internet .
Let us beware of exploitation of the weak by the strong .
The State should be the guarantor of morals as well as public health .
In saying yes to public service television , I am giving it the necessary power .
Mr President , the Tongue report - and how could it be called anything else with such a fervent author ? - is a courageous and exhaustive report .
But , in my opinion , it is not a completely balanced one .
Defending public service in television is something which obviously has to be done but confusing public service with public television is both inconsistent and an error .
Public service may and must be performed by public and private operators alike .
It should also be present in all broadcasting systems , be they digital or analogue , by cable or satellite .
It is a duty for Member States to create the conditions which allow this to be so .
And it is the duty of operators to take a social approach to their duties and to fulfil the obligations implied in this .
What are the priorities for a public service in the European Union ?
To offer quality and diversity , setting up a cultural reference from this point of view .
Informing and stimulating the discussion of ideas , consolidating the sentiment of citizenship .
Contributing to the strengthening of the European spirit , distributing products of various origins and fostering exchanges and co-productions between the Member States .
Promoting means of access for different groups of citizens to the airwaves and not just the traditional approach of setting aside time for political parties and both sides of industry , thereby contributing towards a renewal of the very exercise of democracy .
Public service in television is a fundamental concept in a democratic society .
Reference should be made to this in the Treaty on the Union , which is now being revised .
It is neither fair nor useful that we should limit this public service to public operators .
If private operators also cooperate I think that public television as we know it now will see that its days are numbered .
To conclude , Mr President , I call on the Commission to take a more far-reaching approach to the concept of public service in the Green Paper on new services , and I call for this as an urgent matter because time flies in the world of telecommunications .
I call on public and private operators alike to use the enormous power they have to win over viewers and audiences instead of being won over by them .
Finally , I should like to call on the Member States to assume their responsibilities , setting a solid economic base for the European programme-making industry , now making some progress with the Guarantee Fund , giving backing to Europe-wide distributors already in existence and wholeheartedly assuming the costs of the public service as the best way of revitalising democracy .
Commissioner Bangemann , you are amazed at our concern about the public service and tell us no-one wants to call the public service into question ! Now , if our committee has decided to choose this very issue of public service for one of our extremely rare initiative reports , it is because we are giving notice , in the new situation being created by the new technology and the ongoing processes of liberalization and privatization , gravely threatening the public service , not that there is an intention to eliminate it , but certainly that there is a tendency to marginalize it because it is not in a position to stand up to competition on the global market .
Hence the need to reaffirm its role and importance and demand the measures required to ensure the performance of that role .
On regulatory measures , we are very concerned that the directive on defending pluralism promised us for many years - and the existence of a strong public service is essential here - should have been further adjourned by the College of Commissioners .
And when I say regulatory measures I also mean regulatory measures which allow the public service to be autonomous from the market .
In fact the characteristic feature is being autonomous from the market , more independent , and being able to perform a role which commercial television , dependent on the market , cannot perform .
Commissioner , do you know what market demand is today ?
It is almost entirely video games and pornography .
Do we want the great information society , with all the new technologies , to have been invented just to provide us with a few video games , some TV shopping and a spot of pornography ?
Do we entrust the school , with its very important educational role , to the rules of competition of the market ?
Certainly we do not .
The television of today has a much greater impact on the education of children than school itself .
Therein lies the delicacy of the problem and the need to preserve a role for the public service which cannot be preserved just by applying the idea of universal service .
To extend the principle of universal service to telecommunications , to confuse that with public service broadcasting , would in fact be a very grave error .
And that is why , Mr Bangemann , this Parliament 's Committee on Culture is not raving when it asks for the public service to be strengthened .
The same line is taken in the document from the Information Society Forum , which you yourself created , and it lays great stress on this concept .
The same line is taken in the resolutions from the Assembly of the Council of Europe , extremely concerned , like us , about the marginalization of the public service . The Court of Karlsruhe itself , in your country , Commissioner , pronounced judgement along these lines stating that it is unthinkable that the public service should not maintain a central role because that is a constitutional principle .
Mr President , first of all I want to congratulate the rapporteur for her passionate expression of a point of view which finds wide convergence even inside the Commission .
In a sense this report completes the debate on the Television without Frontiers directive and also the debate in this Chamber on the transmission of major sporting events .
For these very reasons , and following on from the debate which has already taken place inside the European Parliament , it has to be said that it is necessary , and certainly important , to provide guarantees to ensure the future of public television .
It is not a question of limiting the role of commercial television , or having them compete against each other . They have different roles but precisely because they are different , precisely because there are differences between the various countries , there is a need for measures to ensure that public television is properly guaranteed and supported and can develop an important and crucial function in building European citizenship .
In fact in this respect - as the rapporteur said - it fulfils a role that is more than multicultural , that is European , not national , to guarantee education and information independent of the respective governments and achieve the full potential of pluralism .
For these reasons public television should not be confused with commercial television , it must have its own leading role , but nor must it become state television in a negative sense .
The new technology raises enormous problems , but precisely for these reasons there is a need to guarantee a proper future for public service television .
Mr President , maintaining public service television in the Member States is an extremely important issue .
For this reason , we have to thank and congratulate Carole Tongue for taking on this difficult report .
Like her , I believe that we must strive to maintain this very special area of broadcasting . Let us not be naive .
We must recognize that the expansion of the information society has changed the terms of the debate . The main problem today is ensuring equal access to the channels that have increased in number as a result of new technology , which is more important than the power struggle between public and commercial television .
But we all know that geographic , social and cultural differences are hindering open access .
However , I believe that public service television will only achieve its objectives if it meets three requirements .
The first is respect for viewers , regardless of age , origins or situation .
Public television therefore ought to be pluralist and democratic , and should stop imitating the commercial television channels in their mad dash to increase audience ratings .
The second requirement is for public service television to fulfil its educational role , particularly in terms of visual education .
It is all too often forgotten that viewers , especially very young ones , have to learn how to decipher images .
Thirdly , public service television should be helping to instil responsibility in those who watch it .
It is therefore to the viewers as citizens that it should be addressing itself .
Finally , I should like to say once again that in order to establish a truly European audiovisual sector , we need public service television that is open and dynamic .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are indeed having a debate here .
And that is why I now have the chance , for the first time , of taking up Mr Bangemann 's final words and turning round this privilege to some extent .
Clearly , Mr Bangemann , we have the same preferences in terms of what we do not particularly enjoy watching .
The key political difference between us , however , is that both Ms Tongue and myself , like the committee , take the view that the European system of public service broadcasting should not be developed backwards so as to resemble the American PBS , with all the rest of the market being served purely on a commercial basis .
That is where the political difference lies .
For this reason , public service broadcasting must also be in a position to offer something across the range of sport and entertainment .
This means that public service broadcasting - I agree with you - must engage in competition , but it must be able to do so on equal terms .
So the Commission , for example , should not prevent the rights to sporting events from being purchased jointly and on a pooled basis , through the European Broadcasting Union .
If each of the national public service organizations had to bid on its own against the big combines - and Ms Tongue referred to the example of the two World Cups in football - then the game would be over once and for all , with public service broadcasting on the losing side .
To enable competition to take place on equal terms , including the financial conditions , the Commission must therefore make it clear that the funding of public service broadcasting through fees paid by the users and / or some form of mixed financing does not contravene the aid provisions of the Treaty .
It must also be clear that public service broadcasting has full access to new technologies .
And a final word to Mr Hoppenstedt : the problem was not the insistence that any new services should automatically be classed as broadcasting .
It was he who prevented a possible compromise from being reached on a sensible basis , but perhaps we can still put that right at second reading .
Mr President , the debate and vote on this issue in committee made it clear that , in general terms , public service television plays - and , I believe , must continue to play - an important role in almost all the Member States of the European Union .
Even allowing for the growth of private sector broadcasting , it seems clear that foreseeable developments will not prevent public service broadcasters from keeping at least some of the functions that might be seen as essential features of the audiovisual landscape .
Hence public service television is necessary , in the first place to guarantee a variety of programming and to ensure that legitimate commercial considerations do not result in broadcasting which focuses excessively on the most profitable programmes with the largest audiences .
Similarly , it must perform the important function of raising the general level of programming quality .
There is no doubt that the necessary and legitimate pursuit of economic returns is an obstacle to the commissioning of quality productions which involve a high commercial risk - a risk which public service broadcasters must be prepared to take .
Likewise , and from the point of view of both government and opposition , we would surely agree that public service television must also play the very important role of providing independent information . And , to this end , rules must be established in all the Member States guaranteeing such independence and preventing interference by the public authorities .
These considerations should not lead us to conclude that the role of public service television should be restricted to broadcasting minority programmes - in other words , that it should play a marginal role .
On the contrary , the existence of minimum audience levels , the variety of programming , and the guarantee that this varied programming will reach all homes can be regarded as fundamental principles of public service broadcasting .
From this perspective , I should like to highlight two requirements set out in the report regarding the immediate future of public service broadcasting : the need for self-regulation of programming , in order to eliminate any danger of an undesirable influence on viewers ; and the need for the public authorities to give a boost to ensuring that public service broadcasters lead the way - as the rapporteur says - in the development of new audiovisual technologies and the provision of public access to those new technologies .
Mr President , we entirely agree with Ms Tongue 's report on the fact that public television must exist and must be properly financed .
It must exist , because its voice contributes to maintaining pluralism along with television generally , but it must exist within a system where the public service mission is clearly defined .
It must be financed , because it is a public service with a social mission requiring subsidy .
Our point of disagreement on the report is how this financing should come about .
We do not think a report on public television can ignore funding methods which guarantee the existence of public television and the quality and balance of the vast televisual panorama constituted by private and public television as a whole , because only as a whole can it accomplish a real mission of public service .
This financing should be transparent , directed clearly to each stage of the public service mission that television must accomplish , with year-end losses no longer written off . Paternalistic methods which hinder the growth of public television and the identification of inefficiencies must go .
We must get away from ambiguous forms of mixed financing : fees , subsidies , advertising , write-offs of losses which grant public television privileges it is incapable of profiting from .
I wonder which European countries are really satisfied with their public television . With the exception of the United Kingdom - and I presume that Ms Tongue is thinking of her own English public television - which other country has first-rate public television and been very successful in defining funding methods transparently and separating the funding from advertising , public finance and fees ?

On behalf of the Liberal Group , I have to say that the Tongue report is no more than a hymn of praise to public service broadcasting , which it seems to regard as a kind of priest watching over the souls of the viewers , a loving parent in the living room .
If only that were so .
What the report asks in return is that PSB should be exempt from the strict European rules on competition and concentrations of power .
The Liberal Group rejects these proposals .
Let me briefly explain why .
Firstly , the Liberals also support a dual system which has a strong public service broadcasting sector providing information , documentation and individual cultural identity , but which also has room for commercial broadcasting .
Not a concentration of power , but freedom of choice .
Secondly , the same European rules should apply to public service broadcasting and to commercial stations offering capacity for public services .
Thirdly , efficiency and professionalism will make public service broadcasting more competitive than huge subsidies .
The Ververs committee in the Netherlands has already taken the lead on this .
Fourthly , the provision of universal services is not the sole preserve of public service broadcasting , and it is perfectly possible for some of its tasks to be entrusted to private companies .
Fifth , damaging concentrations of power and exclusivity are totally unacceptable , and the Court of Justice 's ruling of 11 July reversing the decision to grant the EU the collective rights to major sporting events is to be welcomed .
We must require both public service and commercial broadcasting to be generally accessible and affordable .
Sixth , the breakdown of established roles in the media world , far from driving a wedge between the two forms of broadcasting , is causing great confusion and distortion of competition , with public service broadcasting being more or less forced to become more commercial .
The new commercial broadcasters , on the other hand , who are totally reliant on the market for their income , are finding themselves subject to rules which have nothing to do with a free market , such as quotas and investment commitments .
Commissioner Bangemann , with his forthcoming green paper , and Commissioner Monti have a great responsibility .
Which firms are allowed to provide public services ?
What are public services , in any case ?
What are the national and European rules governing television subsidies , and what are the criteria and restrictions that apply ?
Finally , let me make it clear that the Liberal Group can only support this report if a number of amendments are adopted and a considerable number of paragraphs are dropped from the resolution .
Mr President , Carole Tongue 's report , for which we are grateful , gives us some idea of what public service television could be like in each of the Member States .
It would be independent of political and economic bodies , have high standards of content , and continue to fulfil its role of disseminating democratic values . By the same token , public service television would also provide information honestly - since objectivity in this area has been hounded out of existence in recent years - and in a pluralist way , as well as entertain , improve and educate .
It should not be deprived of the means required for it to become part of the information society , since it represents the only way for citizens to be able to access the new services without discrimination , whether economic , social or geographic .
In view of the Commission 's recent refusal to draw up a directive on media concentration and pluralism , this report deserves to be more than an own-initiative one , and I am addressing Mr Bangemann here in particular .
Is there any future for public service television in an environment dominated today and sewn up tomorrow by four or five groups whose restructuring activities show their global power every day , and represent a formidable onslaught on digital broadcasting ?
So , in order to strengthen the independence and durability of the public sector in Europe , there should be a political will to maintain and expand the means of production .
More specifically , in France for example , the Commission seems to be actively encouraging the government to restructure French companies through privatization .
Ideological blindness on the part of governments and the Commission has led them to ignore important assets such as skills , new advanced technologies in action , and a material and technical heritage - go and see them for yourselves : digital buses , studios and so on - in order to enhance the interests of the financier , Mr Butler .
Mr Butler has hit the jackpot !
For a contribution of 50 million francs , he will receive a gift of 1.4 billion from public funds , in addition to the assets I have just mentioned , in return for axing 660 jobs out of a total of 1040 .
After what Mr Bangemann has just told us , I think that there are questions to be asked regarding potential jobs as well as job cuts .
The same thing applies in the telecommunications sector . As you well know , prices for longdistance telecommunications and for big companies are falling , but they are certainly not doing so for the man in the street .
The public service is not yet public enemy number one , but if we are honest with ourselves , it may well be so in the future !
Mr President , I salute Carole Tongue for her commitment and her eloquence in this cause .
I declare my own interest as an occasional producer for public service as well as for commercial channels in the United Kingdom .
I will return to that in a moment .
I would say to those who have spoken in the debate - Mr Arroni and Mrs Larive - that we should remember what the market can do .
We accept that , we accept the vitality and the vigour of the market .
But the market gives neither genuine diversity in all circumstances nor universality of service where most needed .
I shall refer just to things happening in my own country .
The BBC and Channel 4 are two entirely different forms of public service : one comes from a subvention ( the licence fee ) , the other is financed by advertising .
One is the first and the other is the latest and perhaps the last innovation in the field of public service .
What is happening to the BBC now ?
Carole Tongue has referred to that .
The BBC is crawling with consultants telling it to turn towards advertising ; telling it to make deals with the very people who are trying to destroy it .
Only today it has announced that it cannot compete in the sports field , because enormous financial resources are now being deployed to take away those staples of the mass audience which the BBC needs in order to preserve its own diversity and , indeed , its own audience .
Channel 4 , which has been the best possible way of serving new interests with a public service remit in a public trust without private shareholders , is now being told by elements within our government that it must privatize .
There is no single argument for this in terms of programme quality ; no single argument for it in terms of the diversity of services .
It has the morality of a bank raid .
It is a simple attack on the resources which that channel has brought to quality programming in our country .
I apologize for speaking primarily about the situation in Great Britain .
Broadcasting is one area in which we can still take some pride , and we have a deep feeling of shame about the sort of broadcasting that Europe may have to endure within ten years .
Mr President , after listening to what the previous speaker has to say , I ask why cannot we have pride in the television of the public broadcaster and in the television of the private broadcaster ?
That seems to me to be the sort of television that we want .
I have no doubt at all that public service television has played , is playing and will continue to play an important and valuable role in serving the viewing needs of the public .
I have no doubt this is true in each country of the European Union but I , as a British Member , am happy to pay tribute to the very high standards and the leadership that the BBC has given in public service broadcasting .
However , we must not overestimate the role of the public sector .
Nor should we neglect the valid and valuable role that the private sector has played and is playing in television .
If this were a debate about the press we would all have very strong reservations about a public sector press .
I am not too sure why we should make the overstatements that we do about public sector broadcasting .
I abstained when this report came to the committee because I believe it does not achieve the fair and correct balance that is necessary .
Let me deal with just a couple of issues .
On sport , it is wrong to ignore the important financial contribution the private sector is now putting into sporting activity across a whole range .
This helps sport and the public interest in watching sport , I would say , in three distinct ways .
Many more minority sports are now broadcast because the private sector is there .
Sports bodies have more funds , a fairer share of the money , and they are able to put that money back into the sports themselves by developing facilities and training to bring people into those sports .
The sportsmen and women themselves are now getting a fair return for their skills and it is their skills that make the sporting activities worth watching .
On another issue , I support the occasional financial assistance coming from the Community for broadcasters with a pan-European remit , such as Euronews .
I am not convinced , however , that this support should be open-ended for all time .
Such programmes need an audience to justify their raison d 'être and there is no better discipline to make them seek an audience than the discipline of the marketplace .
High subsidies for high-quality programmes that nobody watches is not a sensible way to spend our money .
We are on the threshold of a major growth in television broadcasting , the age of digital television is upon us , but I am sure that we should not just have controls and regulations that keep the private sector out and allow the public sector to become flabby , lack innovation and fail to keep up with the public 's wishes .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking my party colleague , Carole Tongue , for her excellent work , not only on the report itself but also in making it possible for us to debate this very important subject in Parliament today .
As Carole points out , television is still the most influential organ of our mass media .
It is therefore immensely important that the programmes broadcast feature quality , pluralism and objective information .
We must shield our children from violence and pornography and at the same time provide high-grade entertainment and information .
Television must take on its responsibility .
Television sets patterns , not least when it comes to violence .
Well resourced public-service TV companies are a guarantee of this .
Support from the EU and the Member States must be improved .
Television is also an indispensable forum for the seventh art - the film industry .
In a time when so many small , independent cinemas have had to give way to large multiplexes , which make astronomical sums of money showing American mass-market products , television often offers the only chance we get to see alternative and / or foreign films .
The TV companies thus play a very important role in this context too , namely by giving European audiences access to the cultures of their own countries and continent .
What is shown on television reflects the spirit of our time , but it is also part of the opinion-forming process .
Let us therefore fight together to ensure that this opinion-forming is worthy of our democratic and humanist culture .
Mr President , there is one point made in this report which I should like to underline : the public funding of public service broadcasting is legitimate .
And I would add that , in many cases , it is also essential .
The reason for this is simple : public service broadcasting provides a service to society in many areas which cannot be totally funded by the market .
There is a need for a service of this kind , so as to guarantee cultural diversity , encourage linguistic pluralism - especially in small communities - promote European production and bolster cultural and educational services .
And in the multimedia society which is now being created , our citizens must be offered such a service . If the market is unable to provide this service completely , then it is the job of public bodies to do so .
In our society , there are certain areas which cannot be judged in terms of competition pure and simple . And one of those areas is the obligations of public service broadcasting in relation to society - obligations for which public funding provides appropriate compensation .
I shall give you a good example : the Basque language is spoken by some 800 000 people , in an area in close proximity to 50 million French speakers and 35 million Spanish speakers .
In these circumstances , it is most unlikely that the market will promote the use of the Basque language in the audiovisual media on its own account .
It is for this reason that society must fund public service broadcasting , since democracy presupposes tolerance and respect for cultural diversity ; and , in our society , public service broadcasting helps to guarantee these principles .
By providing information at local and regional level , moreover , it serves to foster European integration on the basis of respect for cultural identities , self-government and subsidiarity .
It is important for the European Parliament to send the clear message to the Commission that , on this issue , the rules on competition alone are not enough to build a united and pluralistic Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that we are at a turning-point in the development of broadcasting .
That is why the decisions taken on Parliament 's position are exceptionally important , because we are moving more and more onto the defensive , since broadcasting as a cultural asset is increasingly being called into question .
I would refer to the hearing , convened by the Commission , which took place yesterday and dealt with the issue of a regulatory framework for broadcasting and telecommunications , on the basis of a study whose contents can only be described as extremely disappointing .
It attributes hardly any further scope to public service broadcasting , and the ' new vision ' set out there relates solely to the multimedia market , which is geared to maximizing profits .
We cannot accept this , and we demand from the Commission the green paper it has promised which is meant to make it clear how the new services are to be structured . The point is that we have to decide what is still broadcasting and what is not broadcasting in an age of multimedia globalization .
The fear which has been expressed here many times , that we have our backs to the wall in terms of cultural developments , is unfortunately not without foundation .
From what we hear , we shall only be dealing with side issues , so we can concern ourselves with the protection of young people , for example , but no longer with general public access , information , education and entertainment , which are among the original purposes of broadcasting , and must remain so in a digital age which may be opening up new technical opportunities , but should not tempt us into giving up old ingredients which have become valuable to us .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our colleague Carole Tongue from the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media has today put before us an important and much-needed own-initiative report , and I would like to join in praising the quality of its contents .
I should also like to take this opportunity to tell the rapporteur just how highly I regard her work in the audiovisual sector , and Mr Bangemann how much benefit he would derive from listening more to what we have to say on the matter .
We are all well aware of the explosion in the number of television channels offering their services throughout the world .
But no one is complaining about this . A multiplicity of channels ensures freedom of expression and maintains a modicum of democracy .
So it is a necessary part of that freedom , but as everyone also knows , it is not enough on its own .
Like the rapporteur , I am deeply attached to public service television .
It stands for and guarantees access on the widest scale to quality television , whose task should be to promote the cultural riches of the European Union .
It enables all those who do not have the money or the equipment to receive all the private channels to have access to culture .
The European Union must therefore ensure at all costs that public service television is maintained and allow Member States to control its financing , in return for which the public channels would undertake to abide by a clear specification that reflects the reasons why they were established .
A network of European public television channels of this kind can and must become the prime vehicle for broadcasting European productions , and must be a driving force behind private television channels in this area .
This is important for the advent , at long last , of a genuine citizens ' Europe .
We would very much hope , Mr Bangemann , that you will listen to us on this occasion .
Madam President , it is naturally a duty , but also a pleasure for me - and I must say this to Mr Caudron - to listen to him and the other Members of Parliament .
We have of course taken account of the report by Ms Tongue in our own discussions , and will continue to do so .
I would only say that , to my mind , the assessment of the role of public service broadcasting in the report - as Mrs Larive pointed out - is a very positive and optimistic one .
I would ask you all to look at public service broadcasting just as critically as private broadcasting .
One cannot allow standards of quality to fall , for example , simply because public service broadcasting is involved .
A critical approach to quality is what we wish to see , and we believe that the simplest way to achieve this quality control is competition with private broadcasters .
Then the viewers or listeners will do exactly what suits them .
But now a point arises - and here Ms Tongue is quite right - namely the question of where public service broadcasting stands at present in this competition .
Here there are both advantages and disadvantages .
Certainly , financing through fees or other forms of public funding is an advantage in competitive terms , but on the other hand , the almost total exclusion of public service broadcasting from private revenue represents a disadvantage for it .
In this context , we have to decide what we wish to have .
Here I would take up what my friend Mr Barzanti said .
Of course we shall tackle the question of public service and public broadcasting .
However , I must point out to Members , if they would just listen to a Commissioner - the Commission always listens to Parliament , if you would just listen to me for a moment !
There is of course , as there must be , a debate on public service .
Naturally , the question is to what extent we can produce European rules on this .
For example , public service broadcasting and television is regulated differently in every Member State - Mr Barzanti is right , and Mrs Castellina always sets great store by such national differences .
It would certainly be wrong simply to throw a European solution over them and accommodate everything under it .
I must also correct what was said in the debate regarding controls on media concentration .
The Commission has not rejected these .
We have held a policy debate on the basis of a first draft by my colleague Mr Monti , in which there were not many supporters for the approach .
It was a very European approach , and the point was made that , at least for the time being , media concentration is a problem for the individual Member States .
If it becomes an international problem , it will also become a European one , and so we have to consider what we can regulate on a European basis .
Mr Monti and I are both among the most determined supporters of controls on media concentration .
We have not rejected them , therefore , as Mrs Pailler suggested , but are engaged in a process of discussion , and our wish is to regulate what can be regulated at European level .
Let me make a final comment on the concern of Mrs Castellina - which came through in other speeches too - that public service broadcasting is being marginalized .
First of all , this has nothing to do with the new services .
It all depends on how the new services are defined , and the Commission has opposed the idea of including too many new services under the concept of broadcasting - in agreement with the majority in Parliament - quite simply because the licensing conditions and the controls have to be different .
You cannot make every new service subject to these strict rules , but of course we have no objection at all - and I would say this to Mr Kuhne in particular - to public service broadcasting using the new services , or indeed providing them .
That is not our difficulty .
Our difficulty was only - and I hope it does not become a problem - that too many of these new services are regarded as broadcasting .
One final word on marginalization . I am very sorry , Mrs Castellina , that everything fell over in front of you when you mentioned my name .
That is of course an effect which I did not intend to have .
But I must say that I am pleased about one thing , which is that public service broadcasting no longer has a de facto monopoly on disseminating information and opinions , but now has to compete with other sources .
I definitely cannot complain about the fact that people can now obtain information through private broadcasters and news stations .
Having someone who possesses a de facto monopoly and uses it , even with the best of intentions , cannot be an ideal form of democracy , Ms Tongue !
The Commission is not demonizing either public or private broadcasting .
Like Mr Hoppenstedt , we are relatively relaxed .
However , we should like people to prove themselves , and if public service broadcasting is as good as Ms Tongue believes , then we need have no fears as regards its future .
Thank you , Commissioner Bangemann .
The debate is closed
The vote will take place in a moment .
Madam President , my point of order concerns respect for the agenda .

Yesterday , we adopted an agenda in which the period from 7 to 9 p.m. was reserved for meetings of the political groups , as at all our part-sessions , with the committees meeting from 5.30 to 7 p.m.


I have now just been informed that at least two committees , the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , have arranged meetings between 7 and 9 p.m.

This is unacceptable , since the group meetings are essential to enable us to discuss and define our positions for the votes .
I should like to know who has authorized these committee meetings outside their allocated time , and I would ask for them to be cancelled and rearranged in their usual slot between 5.30 and 7 p.m.

I am very willing to note your protest , Mr Pasty .
I understand that it is urgent matters which lie behind the meetings of these committees .
That being so , I would suggest that you raise the question in the Conference of Presidents , of which you are a member .
Madam President , I should like to raise a point of order .
I think that Parliament should be able to take its decisions freely and without constraint .
I was therefore somewhat shocked to see that someone had placed a veal crate on the floor below , just when we were about to discuss the issue .
If it is there to symbolize free speech , then I can certainly accept that .
But at the same time , let me appeal to the farmers from Alsace that when they come to Parliament on Friday , they bring some live animals with them .
Thank you , Mr Jacob .
I am sure that these incidents will not prevent the House from voting quite independently .
Votes
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for an amending directive on a solvency ratio for credit institutions on which we are about to vote is to be welcomed .
Its main purpose is to extend risk weighting at 50 % of mortgage-backed loans in respect of offices or multipurpose commercial premises until 1 January 2001 , this provision having expired on 1 January 1996 .
The possibility of risk weighting at 50 % has previously applied to only four Member States , and is now being extended to all the Member States of the European Union on an optional basis .
The weighting of credit risk , in other words the backing of credit granted by a bank with own capital , constitutes a basic principle of bank supervision law .
This proposal to retain risk weighting in the Union and extend it to all the Member States is indexed to the economy .
It is justified by a whole range of safeguards against risk and raises no problems as regards the rules of competition .
As for the risk factors , there is a lending limit of 60 % of the value of the property .
This value is established on the basis of strict criteria , and the premises must be additionally secured .
An upward trend is discernible in Europe .
Failure to approve this proposal for a directive would mean an increase of 0.25 % in interest and amortization costs , which certainly cannot be justified at the present stage .
I would therefore ask the House to approve this proposal .
Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , you told me that you wished to make a brief statement .
I would in fact have liked it to be a little more brief .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
We agree with the stance adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs as regards the Commission proposal .
There has always been a need to extend the transitional arrangements in the directive , which relates to mortgage-backed loans in respect of offices or commercial premises .
The business and financial implications are so great that we therefore now support this compromise .
van der Waal report
It is entirely correct that conditions must be created for the inland waterways to take on a greater role as a transport system .
Developments in recent years have unfortunately shown that the greatest growth has occurred in road transport , which is very worrying from the point of view of our common environment .
It is thus of the utmost importance to devote more resources to environmentally friendly transport systems , such as the railway and the inland waterways .
Major structural investment is needed in these areas , instead of what is now happening - billions of kronor spent on motorways and unnecessary bridges , such as the Øresund Fixed Link project .
In this context , the Council has adopted a stance which is , to say the least , a cause for concern , and the European Parliament must react vigorously against it .
De Esteban Martín report
Madam President , speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group , I would like to thank Commissioner van den Broek for his reply to the debate on this report on human rights in the European Union .
He promised a series of measures from the Commission to deal with the sexual exploitation of children within the European Union , to combat sex tourism and to arrange the close monitoring of paedophile networks both on the ground and on the Internet .
Events over the last few years in England and the recent terrible discoveries in Belgium have shown all too tragically the need for these measures .
But such measures can only work successfully if there is a unity of purpose amongst Member States .
I would like to know whether he is confident that he can take with him , when introducing these measures , the representatives of the United Kingdom Government , who seem willing to sacrifice any European measures , no matter of what importance to the people of Europe , on the altar of Euro-scepticism and subsidiarity .
It is necessary that we use Europol , the police and customs liaison organization based in The Hague , to exchange information on these matters .
We need new legislation at European level to control not just paedophile networks , but pornography and neo-Nazis and racists on the Internet .
The question is whether we get the necessary support .
Equally , I would like to congratulate the Commission on the fact that 1997 will be the year against racism and to thank the Commission for its support for the EU observatory to monitor racism , xenophobia and anti-semitism , to be set up in line with the recommendations of the Consultative Commission and endorsed at the Florence summit .
I hope it was a slip of the tongue when he said he hoped that the anti-racist clause will be incorporated in the treaties .
May I point out that Commissioner Flynn has already said that there should be an anti-racist clause within the Community treaty , a far better place than the vague promises of the third pillar .
Finally , human rights within the Community should allow citizens to join and to leave religious organizations freely , without allowing these organizations special tax status which is denied to other cultural and social organizations .
Madam President , the Dutch members of our group voted against the Esteban Martín report for various reasons .
First of all , we feel that there is a clear distinction between the traditional basic rights and other socio-economic and cultural rights , some of which are perfectly justified , but are political objectives , not human rights .
We also object to the fact that many of the paragraphs call for Community action to be taken .
We agree that racism needs to be combatted , but this is something to be tackled at national level .
The Member States have all acceded to the European Convention on Human Rights and are more than capable of making sure that these are respected .
Moreover , some of the freedoms have been interpreted rather liberally , so that freedom of expression , for example , is required to respect the bounds of privacy and personal reputation , but no mention is made of blasphemy , pornography or obscenity .
Finally , I should like to explain in particular why we voted against paragraph 93 , since this is something that is only too likely to be labelled as a victory for the far right .
The tendency which the left has of attaching this label to those with less extreme views than their own simply distracts attention from the real problem .
Statements such as that in paragraph 93 show Parliament in just the same extreme and totalitarian light .
The fact that the parties of the far right pursue ideas and practices in this field which we reject does not automatically mean that they should be excluded from politics or government , in our opinion .
There is no need for this , provided that they operate within the rules of our democratic system .
We are not forced to adopt their methods or approach .
Madam President , we have been treated to the annual joke about human rights , since the most basic of all human rights is the right to express one 's thoughts and opinions freely !
Yet the French Government , which I believe you support , Madam President , is preparing to hold a vote - in the name of the new dominant and totalitarian ideology , namely antiracism - on a law which judges not actions , words or writings , but in fact the intentions and ulterior motives that are supposed to lie behind them .
In other words , the French Government is going to set up an ulterior motives police , which is an unprecedented step backwards in terms of freedom and justice .
This law is not aimed just at a few National Front MPs , but threatens the freedom of millions of French people .
The parents of pupils - and I believe that you , Madam President , were involved with an organization of this kind - who choose to educate their children at a school with few immigrants , having obtained an exemption from the catchment area , will risk being prosecuted under this outrageous new law introduced by the French Government .
Employers will no longer be free to choose their staff without laying themselves open to prosecution .
The same thing goes for teachers whose freedom will also be threatened ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) ... will be threatened by a law on ulterior motives , a law fit to cause civil war that must not be passed , or it will mean the end of freedom for us all .
Thank you , Mr Le Gallou .
I would also point out , for your information , that I am here in my capacity as a Member and Vice-President of the European Parliament and President of the sitting , and not in the role in which you addressed me .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , voting on a report devoted to human rights issues should make the House pause and reflect on a dreadful paradox .
Historically speaking , the most generous declaration - that of 1793 , in fact - was adopted by the government with the most pronounced terrorist tendencies of the period .
A similar phenomenon occurred after 1945 , when the USSR signed the Universal Declaration at the behest of Stalin .
The United Kingdom , on the other hand , which has never adopted a bill of rights , has not committed any crime of the magnitude of those committed by Robespierre and Stalin .
This should inspire a certain modesty on the part of those who draft such declarations .
I would add that the great philosopher Hegel has explained why it is that the quest for perfect freedom , through ever broader declarations on human rights , inevitably ends in terror . According to Hegel , when an individual assumes the role of a universal conscience , he becomes intolerant of the slightest opposition from others .
In this way , a love of all men is effectively transformed into hatred for everyone .
That is why I believe that national declarations on human rights are enough .
We do not need them at European level too .
From the point of view of those concerned with freedom , this report is not a proper report on the human rights situation in the EU , because apart from a few items it reveals hardly any facts ; nor - secondly - is it calculated , with its accumulation of 126 paragraphs and 24 amendments which cannot be studied with the necessary care in the short time which is available , to produce serious proposals for improvements .
Thirdly , on many points it dwells too much on questions of implementation , the responsibility for which lies with the Member States , thereby infringing the principle of subsidiarity and undermining the rights of national parliaments .
Fourthly , large sections of it consist of a listing of decisions previously taken and a frequent repetition of demands , so that it comes to represent only a rather confusingly assembled and overloaded catalogue of demands with no relation to reality . And , fifthly , on some important points it is hardly tenable , in strictly legal terms .
We believe in full respect for human rights , but do not think they will be genuinely served by approving this confused package of demands , which touches on everything from the environment , through armed forces , to the conduct of trials in the United Kingdom , but does not deal with any of it seriously , and we are rejecting the report as a whole .
We did not feel that it made sense to support individual paragraphs in the document , which would often have been appropriate , because they were taken too much out of context .
We therefore abstained from voting in such cases .
Madam President , I should like to thank Mrs De Esteban Martín , who unfortunately is no longer present .
In developing her initial position , she did a remarkable amount to enable many points , not least those raised by our group , to be discussed in connection with this report on human rights .
I am sorry that she has not been supported by her own group today to the extent that she deserved , but we shall have to bear that in mind .
With the adoption of this report today , we have taken a major step forward , since the European Parliament now once again has a basis for its work which entitles it to talk about human rights violations outside the European Union as well , since those who fail to acknowledge what is going on at home do not have the right to criticize what is happening outside .
As for the statements by Mr Le Gallou and Mr Blot , I would only say that they have the right to talk such nonsense as they do , since talking rubbish is a human right as well , and this is after all the human rights debate that we are holding here .
To that extent , their otherwise somewhat disturbed utterances are acceptable today !
Both left- and right-wing extremism should equally be rejected .
In practice , there is often no longer any discernible difference between the two .
Both forms are to be condemned .
The report by Mrs De Esteban Martin on respect for human rights in the European Union covers far too many subjects for us to be able to consider them in depth .
We are therefore being invited to cast a single vote on 125 proposals that are very different in content and very unequal in value , some of them being extremely questionable , such as the one that I complained about in the debate preceding this vote . This explains our reluctance .
In addition , one essential problem , to which the IGC should now be giving consideration , is not covered although it has recently been raised by several Member States : the absence of any procedure for appealing against the decisions of the Court of Justice when it gives a preliminary ruling , or rules on an appeal for revocation , on the interpretation or validity of a Community act .
After all , the Court 's decisions can shed totally new and unexpected light on certain provisions of the Treaty , as we saw recently in the case of the Bosman judgment .
The absence of any right of appeal in such cases seems to us to be a serious violation of a fundamental human right - the right to a fair and full legal hearing .
And the fact that this kind of shortcoming quite often has an impact not on a particular individual , but on an entire nation , is of course an aggravating circumstance .
Admittedly , in the event of a debatable judgment , it might be conceivable for the Council to amend the Community regulation in order to clarify it .
But even then it would be necessary for the case to be referred to the Council by the Commission , which has a monopoly right of initiative and thus a blocking power .
It is easy to see that this is not a healthy situation .
The nations of Europe cannot allow their destiny to be steered , with regard to fundamental points and with no power to react , by a Court of Justice which sometimes interprets the Treaty in a completely different way from what the national parliaments had assumed when they adopted the initial text .
It is thus becoming essential , today , to devise a procedure enabling the most debatable judgments of the Court of Justice to be referred to the national parliaments , and even to the nations themselves .
This report on human rights in the European Union is both comprehensive and extremely important .
It is therefore hardly surprising that it has provoked much heated discussion among Members of the House .
It is very unfortunate , however , that we have not managed to reach even something approaching a consensus .
Of course , there are among us certain Members with whom it is impossible to discuss human rights . They deny their existence , they deride them and glory in the process .
It is impossible to reach an agreement with them , but it should be possible to do so among the democrats who are present .
Certainly , the left in Parliament rightly supports a broader concept of fundamental human rights .
It has no hesitation in including social , economic , cultural and ecological rights .
And it is right to do so , for where are the rights of those without work , a livelihood or a roof over their heads ?
Certainly too , the second largest political group in Parliament supports a classical concept of human rights , generally based on the freedoms and the right of property that are the building blocks of liberalism .
However , I regret that we cannot reach agreement on certain basic issues . These include the condemnation of all forms of racial , sexual or religious discrimination , all the forms of physical and moral torture still practised in some Member States , the poverty caused by unemployment , and the lunatic pursuit of profit at any price .
Can we not also agree to condemn absolutely any racist , xenophobic , not to mention anti-democratic ideas or ideologies that we see emerging , sometimes even here in the House ?
In France the situation is getting out of hand - the evil beast has awoken !
Democrats in the European Parliament should not be divided on such a fundamental issue as the need to assert and protect human rights .
The matter is altogether too serious !
Let our collective conscience wake up to the real problems , challenges and crises which await us .
If our concern for human rights is ever to become more than simply lip-service , we shall need to adopt a considerably more discerning approach .
Hollow theories and vague ideologies must not be allowed to distort our sense of moderation and reality .
We need to give less emphasis to certain elements , and more to others .
Even if the rights of race and nationhood are , most regrettably , not yet classified as human rights , everyone should still have the right to retain their racial and national identity .
Everyone should have the right , now and in the future , to keep their language , culture , traditions and national identity without fear of discrimination , yet none of this is acknowledged .
Anyone who is genuinely concerned about human rights must ensure that people have a right to security that is more than just an empty promise .
An effective campaign against crime on every scale is urgently needed , and is something which the man in the street above all has a perfect right to expect .
Looking to the future , it is our young people and our children in particular who have the right to protection and to physical and spiritual integrity , and I would add here that the unborn child also has a right to protection and to life .
Anyone who does not recognize this has no right to talk about human rights at all .
Finally , when will we realize at last that we cannot talk about rights without recognizing responsibilities ?
Look how much harm has already been done by glorifying rights and scorning responsibilities !
We vote in favour of this report , because we think its content is good .
What we are opposed to is that the EU should take over functions of the Council of Europe .
We do of course think that racist crimes should be punished , but we do not favour a general ban on racist organizations .
We are glad that this report has finally been put to a vote .
We have voted for the report and most of the individual paragraphs , since we consider that the protection of human rights is in principle a general concern of humanity that transcends national frontiers .
We therefore do not think that the EU should become a legal person with authority to sign the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights , which is in any case quite unnecessary as all EU Member States are obliged to have ratified the Convention as a condition of membership .
We have therefore supported Amendment No 19 from the EDN Group .
We also want to stress that the multitude of concrete demands for human rights put forward in the report are and should remain a matter for the Member States exercising their sovereign decision-making prerogative and for intergovernmental cooperation .
While this annual report is good on the whole , I would draw special attention to certain points .
If homosexual persons are under threat of deportation to third countries , where they risk victimization or reprisals on grounds of their homosexuality , these aspects must weigh heavily in the consideration of their cases : the authorities should err on the side of caution and not go ahead with the deportation .
With regard to paragraph 56 , I would prefer it if Europol and SIS did not go ahead at all .
But if that happens , these databanks must under no circumstances contain information of a personal nature , for example details of racial , religious and political affiliation and sexual disposition .
I want to stress how important it is that persons who for reasons of conscience refuse to perform military service are not subjected to imprisonment or any other penalty .
An equivalent form of civilian service must be offered as an alternative to military service .
It is important that the EU Member States take any action necessary to ensure that sex tourists can be prosecuted in their home countries and to prevent sexual abuse of minors in the children 's home countries .
Finally , I wish to stress the importance of having international provisions on human rights but do not think that the EU should concern itself with these questions , because the EU is not the whole world and the Member States must act for themselves in large international organizations .
The Danish social democrats in the European Parliament first and foremost welcome the fact that Parliament is keeping a watchful eye on the human rights situation in the EU .
Unfortunately , there is still a need for it to do so .
The only way to improve matters is to go on drawing attention to the problems and to show the world how wrongly things are being done .
At the same time , we have to say that we find Mr Haarder 's amendment aimed at banning the principle of the closed shop very strange .
This is not because we are against freedom of choice as regards trade unions , but the amendment contains a hidden agenda which stems from a hatred of trade unions and is an attempt to destroy the work which the unions have built up over many years .
Furthermore , we find it curious that a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties should have used a report on human rights to raise the question of trade union law .
He must be aware that trade union law , the right to strike and trade union matters in general are areas which lie outside the scope of the Maastricht Treaty .
I have voted in favour of the report because one of our most important tasks as elected representatives in Parliament is to safeguard human rights and freedoms .
I voted against or abstained from voting on certain parts of the report , for example the right to an abode , which I do not think falls within the field of human rights .
I did not vote against these aspects because I think they are unimportant , but rather because they should not be tied in with the subject of this report .
Madam President , you asked us if we would accept a list of names of people who could give an explanation of vote in writing .
The rule is that Members have to be present .
Clearly today it is very difficult because you gave the names later , but I think we can only accept the names of people who actually voted in the debate this afternoon .
You cannot give an explanation of vote for a vote you did not participate in .
You are quite right , Mr Ford , but we have checked .
We shall indeed make sure that those Members who put their names down were actually present .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.26 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Equal treatment in social security
The next item is the report ( A4-0256 / 96 ) by Mrs Torres Marques , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 86 / 378 / EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in occupational social security schemes ( COM ( 95 ) 0816 - C4-0422 / 95-95 / 0117 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , the Commission has proposed to draft a Council Directive amending Directive 86 / 378 / EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in occupational social security schemes .
First of all , I should like to emphasize that we are not going to deal here with the general social security schemes but analyse exclusively supplementary schemes which certain companies offer to their employees and which in many cases are of enormous importance .
Given that the scope is limited , it must be asserted that this draft Directive is a technically complex and politically controversial one .
Therefore , it has been the subject of a number of debates in the Committee on Women 's Rights to try and see if we can find solutions which are more viable and balanced .
The proposed amendments to the Directive which the Commission is now suggesting to us are based on the case-law of the Court of Justice in respect of various cases , the most famous of which is the Barber Judgment , although others since then have fleshed out that interpretation .
The situation is the following : as we all know , Article 119 of the Treaty on European Union stipulates equality of remuneration for men and women .
But since the case-law of the Court of Justice considers that this article is not applied to compulsory social security schemes , where they are directly regulated by law , the same is not true of occupational social security schemes .
As far as the Court of Justice is concerned these cases of occupational social security schemes are considered as part and parcel of remuneration and , consequently , may not be the subject of any derogations or distinctions .
Furthermore , it is worrying that what is happening to the case-law of the Court , as a consequence of the principle of equality , is that this is being used not to guarantee women the same income as men - as many reports have shown this difference is now reaching the order of 20 % less for women than for men - but that certain advantages are being withdrawn from women even those benefits that everyone used to acknowledge they were entitled to : for example , access to retirement at an earlier age .
It is the hard and fast rule that women carry out their occupational duties with a great feeling of responsibility and their value is acknowledged .
But all of society knows that , without any specific benefits , women are given the fundamental role of bringing up children , i.e. new generations , and managing the domestic economy .
The main solution for this subject , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is for us to take advantage of the Intergovernmental Conference so that , when revising the Maastricht Treaty , we should consider equality between men and women as a fundamental right of all European citizens and that this must include any positive measures needed to turn that aim from a Utopian one into everyday reality .
However , this means that we must , for the time being , work with the Treaty as it stands .
I am , therefore , presenting a set of amendments and I would like to take this opportunity to address my very sincere thanks for all of the support and contributions which I have received from all the different political parties and I think that all of these significantly improve the Commission proposal .
They can be summed up as follows : including atypical and part-time working in this social security scheme .
These are types of jobs which are now becoming quite widespread and which are mostly held by women which is why we must protect them .
A second set of amendments concerns accounting which , on the pretext that statistics show that women 's life expectancy is longer than men 's , works to the disadvantage of women when carrying out the calculation of contributions and pensions .
Yet it is not proven that women workers live longer than men workers and , therefore , they should not be prejudiced against in this way when pensions are calculated .
Another amendment is aimed at making it possible for women taking part in social security schemes to have access to their pension rights .
One of the proposals which I consider to be the most important is the institution , both for men and women , of greater flexibility in the choice of pension age , in conditions which obviously still have to be defined .
Would it not be more natural and in keeping with the lifestyles we have these days , for people to be able to choose at any time within a fixed period , for example between 60 and 70 years , whether or not to retire early or prolong their retirement age ?
Why should someone who wants to continue working be forced to retire whereas someone who really needs to stop working much earlier has to carry on until the retirement age ?
Finally , I should like to refer to a final amendment which has just been presented by the PPE Group and which I find very interesting and which I agree with fully .
It applies to both sexes and means that anyone who has worked for their whole lifetime should not see their legitimate expectations dashed .
I hope , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that these contributions , as well as those already made by the Committee on Social Affairs , will be accepted and allowed to improve the Commission 's proposed text .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Torres Marques on her excellent report on a technical subject which is in fact a very topical one at the moment , although it may not immediately appear to be so .
Pension schemes are coming under pressure in various European countries , systems are being reorganized , and equal treatment for men and women is an extremely sensitive issue , especially for women .
I would make the point first of all that Parliament and the Commission must not allow European directives to be used as an excuse for cutbacks affecting women , as already often happens with equal treatment .
This is why I have two reservations concerning the Commission 's proposal .
Firstly , women must not be held hostage to the financial interests of the insurance companies .
Employers ' contributions for men and women are calculated differently on the basis of actuarial data , making women more expensive to employ , which is a handicap when it comes to recruitment .
Many lawyers disagree with the Court of Justice here , Commissioner , and claim that this in itself is contrary to the Treaty .
We therefore wish to see this discrimination abolished .
Secondly , formal equality of treatment does not automatically guarantee that women will have equal rights in practice .
The unequal situation of women on the labour market is often reflected even more acutely in their pension rights , and this is why they will not have truly equal rights until measures are taken in the context of the pension systems - including the supplementary systems - to compensate the low-paid and to cater for interrupted careers and part-time or atypical work in which women predominate .
Pension calculations must gradually be brought into line and compensatory measures introduced , such as establishing the right to a decent minimum pension with a low threshold , giving even people doing part-time or atypical work decent pension rights , and introducing or ensuring the wider acceptance of equivalent qualifying periods .
My female colleagues in the Belgian Parliament have submitted this package of demands to their government , and hope that they will be considered .
I hope that you too , Commissioner , will be able to support our amendments at European level .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we shall soon be celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty of Rome . However , Article 119 of the Treaty , which provides for equal pay for men and women , is still not being properly applied .
Because this article is directly applicable , because there are always some courageous souls brave enough to test it in the courts , and because it does not allow derogations from the sacrosanct principle of equal treatment , the provisions of any directives containing such derogations are now redundant , I am pleased to say . For the obvious reasons set out by the rapporteur , whose work I would commend , we now have to amend the 1986 directive implementing the principle of equal treatment for men and women in occupational social security schemes .
On the subject of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Women 's Rights , I shall confine myself to the one concerning the fixing of an identical age limit for men and women .
There should be no question of infringing the rights of the sex with the more favourable retirement age in order to ensure equal treatment .
For once , women can claim pension rights earlier than men , but overall these are much smaller , as women have been subject to discrimination in terms of pay for decades of their working lives .
The worst affected are those who will soon be drawing their pensions . And I know what I am talking about , since I myself am a victim of such discrimination .
I therefore hope that Parliament will adopt the amendment in question which I have tabled on behalf of my group , and I would also thank the rapporteur for her positive comments on this just now .
In conclusion , I should also like to take the opportunity of urging the Council to approve , at long last , the proposal from 1987 to amend the 1979 directive on equal treatment for men and women in statutory social security schemes .
Otherwise , we are really going to find ourselves in a comical situation , whereby wage earners will continue to be discriminated against in statutory schemes as regards retirement age and survivors ' pensions , while this will no longer be the case in occupational social security schemes . This is because the benefits paid through statutory social security schemes are not regarded as remuneration within the meaning of Article 119 .
In some countries , including my own , the vast majority of wage earners and self-employed people draw their pensions from statutory social security schemes , rather than occupational schemes .
It is high time that we tried to end sexual discrimination in terms of survivors ' pensions and retirement age here too .
Moreover , it would above all be men who would benefit from the ending of such discrimination , provided women are not penalized in order to ensure equal treatment for them .
Mr President , the aim of our work today is to guarantee greater protection for women in paid employment , in line with the treatment of men .
It is unthinkable today that a woman working in a factory or an office should be discriminated against in terms of social security .
It is six years since the European Court of Justice laid down that all forms of pensions must provide parity of payment between men and women .
Today the Commission is planning to modify the regulations in force so that this principle is fully adopted and consistently updated .
The proposed amendments , which our group will unanimously support , in fact point to the introduction of flexible pensions permitting retirement at varying ages .
In calculating pensions , account must be taken of periods of inactivity in the life of a working woman , due to pregnancy and looking after small children .
It is also necessary to guarantee social security for part-time workers , which is a formula for enormous opportunities to revitalize the labour market .
Part-time is the formula which will soon offer the most job opportunities .
Finally actuarial factors , that is the different life expectancy of men and women , must not be used in calculating social security .
There must be an identical system for the two sexes , while recognizing the greater natural longevity of the female sex .
In conclusion , this directive is a chapter , perhaps one of the most important , in the achievement of total equality in working conditions between men and women .
There are still too many differences and too many punitive restrictions on the other half of the universe , women .
We are not saying women work more or less than men . But we are saying that their work contributes equally to the functioning of society and we demand that they be treated accordingly .
Mr President , the Liberal Group is quite happy with the Torres Marques report .
Commissioner Flynn , you and the Commission have taken all this very lightly , and only seem to want to incorporate the case-law of the Court of Justice into the 1986 directive , without considering the adverse effects of this on female workers , which is why we feel our amendments are particularly necessary .
I am also very disappointed with the Committee on Social Affairs , which has failed to put forward a single amendment and has simply buried its head in the sand .
This , to me , is all the more reason to make the Committee on Women 's Rights responsible for the equal treatment directives and the code of good conduct .
The following are the points at issue here .
First of all , the system of having the same , fixed retirement age for women and men must be changed to allow them both to choose more flexible pension arrangements .
Secondly , as Mrs Van Lancker said , the same actuarial system must be used to calculate the employers ' contributions for both women and men .
The higher payments make women a more expensive option for the employer and thus constitute indirect discrimination .
I also wonder whether women working outside the home still have a longer life expectancy than men .
Should not the contributions be reduced for women who do not smoke , or for women in general , simply because there tend to be less of them in prison , using up taxpayers ' money ?
Thirdly , part-time workers must no longer be excluded , since this too represents indirect discrimination .
Fourth , Commissioner Flynn , I hope you will support our amendments and urge the Irish presidency , as I now do the forthcoming Dutch presidency , not just to support our amendments , but also to press on with the Commission proposal from October 1987 , which was intended to fill the gaps left by the first two directives .
As we approach the twenty-first century , Parliament must do everything in its power to eliminate direct and indirect discrimination in both the statutory and the supplementary social security systems .
The key words here must be flexibility and choice for both men and women .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the amendment of this directive could represent a further step towards the achievement of equal treatment and the difficult implementation of Article 119 of the Treaty .
The amendments tabled by Mrs Torres Marques , whom I would congratulate , principally concern the inclusion of workers with atypical or part-time contracts in occupational social security schemes .
In view of the fact that this category of worker consists mainly of women , and that the directive to be amended concerns implementation of the principle of equal treatment , it is imperative to include such workers in these schemes , since failure to do so will clearly represent discrimination against women .
If the amendment of the directive is restricted to rectifying the present inconsistencies between primary and secondary Community law , then we shall continue to legislate belatedly and on the basis of faits accomplis .
The amendment of this directive therefore offers us the opportunity to implement the principle of equal treatment with greater consistency , and I believe that we must take advantage of that opportunity .
Commissioner Flynn , this may not be a very kind thing to say , but I have the impression that when you drafted this directive , you were thinking more of the interests of the pension funds than those of equal treatment for men and women .
To be quite honest , I am amazed that you have not taken the opportunity offered by this amendment of the fourth directive to deal with the problem of the actuarial factors , which several people have already mentioned .
The Court has always said that higher employers ' pension contributions for women are not covered by this directive and are therefore permitted .
This was your chance to put that right .
Parliament , I am glad to say , has actually taken steps to do so , and I therefore sincerely hope that the Commission will take our proposals on board , because it is absolutely ridiculous that employers should have to pay higher pension contributions for women than for men .
What is more - and I know that the Commissioner is someone who always follows the Court 's judgments to the letter - when it comes to the judgments regarding retrospective action and the time from which women , and in particular part-time workers , can claim their pension rights , I have noticed that the Commission is choosing not to apply Article 119 , as the Court has done this year , but instead has gone back to the Barber judgment of 1990 , which means that 14 years are effectively lost for many , many women .
I wholeheartedly support the proposal to have the same retirement age for men and women , because women find themselves in the vicious circle of being expected to care for their families because they retire early , and therefore being expected to retire early to care for their families .
We have to put an end to this situation as soon as possible .
I entirely agree with the idea of flexible retirement .
Equal treatment means equal rights and obligations for women , men and pension funds .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking Mrs Torres Marques for a very good piece of work on a very complicated question .
There is one area in the report which I would like to comment on in particular , namely the question of atypical jobs .
The term ' atypical jobs ' in fact covers a form of labour exploitation prevalent in the cottage industry system that preceded industrialization in the mid-eighteenth century .
At that time , entrepreneurs placed jobs with people working in their homes , mainly women , at very low hourly rates .
There are many examples of this type of employment today in Europe and , with the development of the information society , it is on the increase .
It is mainly women , young people and immigrants who get caught up in this system .
For many it is a first step into the labour market , for minimal wages and with little or no social protection .
It is thus very necessary to take account of this form of work in the social security system and to exempt atypical jobs from any provision for company-based or occupational social security schemes .
It represents indirect discrimination against women and young people , who thus risk becoming the cottage workers of the twentieth century .
Mr President , the fact that we need to address ourselves to the subject of equal treatment for men and women in occupational social security schemes is in itself extremely regrettable .
Campaigning for equal opportunities means nothing other than striving for men and women to be recognized as equals .
All the Member States of the European Union put fine words on paper .
In this report , the Commission too has expressed admirable intentions in the form of fine words .
But these will do little in practice to remedy the lack of equal opportunities ; that is why the Commission and the Council must listen to the fundamental demands of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
To overlook the particular contribution of women to child-rearing and their self-sacrificing attention to the social needs of dependants , whilst at the same time participating in the world of work , would be to misunderstand the concept of equal opportunities .
For many reasons , so-called atypical contracts of employment are becoming the only way for an increasing number of women to earn a living .
These women are especially dependent on equal treatment in social security schemes .
The same applies to part-time workers , as we have just heard .
I very much hope that , by adopting this report , we shall move one step closer to real and tangible equality of opportunities .
Mr President , equality between the sexes in my opinion is , above all , equality of opportunities and equality of responsibility .
Therefore , I should like to talk of parity rather than equality .
This far better expresses the concept of co-existence between men and women based on a sharing of rights - e.g. access - and duties - e.g. tasks - while leaving intact the differences of outlook and practicalities which might be seen to differentiate the two sexes .
However , nothing justifies the discriminations in legal texts such as those existing in Directive 79 / 007 and 86 / 378 which call for derogations to the principle of equal treatment .
Article 119 of the Treaty demands that treatment between men and women be equal .
The Court of Justice confirms this position .
The excellent report drafted by Helena Torres Marques refers to revision of the 1986 Directive .
This is all well and good but it is not enough .
The IGC must amend the Treaty so that it includes the fundamental right of equality between the sexes , but yet more is needed .
Directives are as nothing unless behind them there is the political will , in States , and social awareness , among the public .
Unfortunately , in the case of equality this small detail is as yet lacking .
Mr President , I really have very little time in which to speak so I will not be able to talk about the technical and legal aspects of this question but I would like to make a compliment and three tiny remarks .
I must compliment the rapporteur on a well documented explanatory memorandum and her proposal . I would like to make some remarks to emphasize that social equality is not the same as egalitarianism , and that , in some cases , confusing the two concepts can lead to positions which fail to understand those positive derogations and discriminations which the fight against inequality in society calls for but which egalitarianism cannot accept .
When we mention applying the principle of equality of treatment as one of the main objectives of the European Union 's social policy - if such a policy existed - we ought to remember that Article 117 of the Treaty of Rome asserts the principle of equalization in progress which , for example , would prevent the retirement age for women coming up closer to that for men when it would be more favourable to bring the retirement age for men down to that of women , on the basis of arguments of egalitarianism , since in that way we will not achieve social equality and make any progress .
Mr President , Friday this week - 20 September 1996 - will be the 90th anniversary of the day when Tsar Nicholas II signed the declaration guaranteeing Finns - both men and women - general and equal suffrage .
Finland was the second country in the world - and the first in Europe - where women were granted the right to vote .
At the same time , Finland became the first country in the world where women were eligible to stand for election .
This was a step towards greater equality in the Nordic countries and Finland .
Article 119 guarantees equal treatment of men and women in employment in the EU countries .
A directive adopted in 1979 provided for application of the principle of equal treatment in statutory social security systems .
Is it not high time to implement these proposals ?
Equality between the sexes is something which we Finns take for granted , but this attitude is not universal .
In many countries , legislation still exists which discriminates against women , for instance in the field of social security .
The EU should now lead the way and eliminate such practices .
The point of departure of the proposals for a directive of 1987 is the individualization of social security .
In Finland the system has operated this way for a long time .
A social security system based on the individual is the only humane option and the only one which promotes equality .
It should also be extended to home workers , both men and women .
In Finland , for example , if one takes the under-40 age group , women are now considerably better qualified than men , and many earn more than their husbands .
Social security systems based on the family detract from the status , freedom and human dignity of the lower earning spouse , irrespective of the sex of the partner in question .
In addition to becoming individualized , social and pension insurance schemes absolutely must be extended to parttime workers and they must be made more flexible .
This would improve women 's opportunities to lead more independent and many-sided lives because many women have to stop work completely or reduce their working hours for a longer or shorter period of time in order to bear and care for children .
Many Member States ought to review their social legislation with a view to realizing genuine equality , and the EU should help them to do so .
This report by Mrs Torres Marques , for which I thank her , and the proposals which it contains and which have been approved by the Committee on Women 's Rights should be adopted .
Mr President , the social security systems of the various Member States still discriminate between the sexes .
Women are still worse off than men .
It is very good that we have once again been able to use the Court of Justice to promote the equal treatment of men and women , but things should not be taken too far through the Court .
We should ensure that it is not the judges who legislate , but the politicians .
So like the rapporteur , I am somewhat disappointed that the Commission 's proposal does not go any further than the case-law of the Court , and that the Commission has not taken any new initiatives and built on what the Court of Justice has started .
We have therefore ended up in a situation where women 's rights are , in some cases , being curtailed .
This applies , amongst other things , to pensions and coverage for part-time workers .
I hope that we can rectify this by supporting the amendments tabled by the rapporteur , and that the Commission will take note of Parliament 's amendments .
In terms of statistics , women are not those who are most supportive of the EU .
It is our task to show women that the EU is doing something for them , and we can use this proposal to that effect .
Mr President , first of all I would like to take the opportunity of expressing my thanks to you , Mrs Torres Marques , on your excellent report on what you rightly call a very complex and technical matter in the area of occupational pensions .
The Commission very largely shares the concerns you have expressed in your report and in the motion for a resolution before us this afternoon .
The principle of equal treatment between women and men is a fundamental principle of Community law .
It is important to ensure its effectiveness and transparency in order to avoid any possible confusion on the part of national authorities at all levels called upon to apply that Community law .
It is also essential to ensure that European citizens are fully informed of all of their rights in this particular area .
This proposal for a directive aims to ensure that an act of secondary Community law , namely Directive 86 / 378 , on equal treatment for men and women in occupational social security schemes , is consistent with the provision of primary Community law , namely Article 119 of the Treaty , as interpreted by the Court of Justice .
In its Barber judgment of 17 May 1990 and in subsequent interpreting judgments the Court of Justice of the European Communities recognizes that all forms of occupational pensions and , in turn , all forms of benefit deriving from employees ' occupational social security schemes , constitute an element of pay within the meaning of Article 119 of the EC Treaty which provides for equal pay for men and women .
Article 119 of the Treaty is directly applicable and may be relied upon by individuals before the national courts against both public and private employers .
It does not permit any derogation from the principle of equal treatment .
Consequently , certain provisions of Directive 86 / 378 providing for derogations from the principle of equal treatment , particularly with regard to retirement age and to survivors ' benefits - that is Article 9 of Directive 86 / 378 - became invalid as far as salaried workers are concerned , since such persons can invoke Article 119 of the Treaty before national authorities .
This article , as a provision of primary law , prevails over Directive 86 / 378 , which is an instrument of secondary legislation , and it also prevails over any national legislation .
I should clarify , however , that Article 119 of the Treaty does not apply to self-employed workers , in respect of whom Directive 86 / 378 remains wholly valid .
In the interests of legal certainty and of clarity , and in order to ensure consistency with Article 119 of the Treaty , the Commission presented this proposal for a directive amending Directive 86 / 378 .
The proposed amendments serve only to transpose the case law of the Court , and this proposal for a directive is hence of a purely declaratory nature .
I should emphasize that consistently with the declaratory nature of the proposal the Commission has intended merely to amend the provisions of Directive 86 / 378 which , in the light of the case law , turned out to be invalid .
The proposal does not aim to be a complete codification of all of the Court 's case law concerning equal treatment in the area of social security , nor does it aim to introduce new law going beyond the existing case law .
It goes without saying that it would be impossible to introduce any new provisions inconsistent with the case law since this could be achieved only by a Treaty amendment .
It is important to note that the Commission has on several occasions consulted government experts , Europeanlevel pension funds and actuary representatives , the Advisory Committee on Equal Opportunities and the social partners on the proposed amendments of Directive 86 / 378 in the light of the Barber judgment and subsequent judgments .
There has been a broad consensus for adjusting the text of Directive 86 / 378 to make it consistent with the Court 's case law on Article 119 of the Treaty .
I am very sensitive to your concerns about the possible impact for women of this case law as it is reflected in the proposed amendments .
According to this case law , in order to apply equality of treatment between women and men , the rules of occupational pension schemes could , and I emphasize could , increase women 's pensionable age or , in certain cases , provide that in order to ensure equal benefits , contributions paid by the employer in certain schemes - and I am talking here about funded schemes - could be different for women as against men .
But just allow me for a moment to remind you that we are here in an area of social protection where the autonomy of the social partners is relevant and matters such as pensionable age and the organization and financing of occupational schemes are subject to negotiations between the interested parties and , in particular , between employers and employees .
So the Commission 's room for manoeuvre is very limited - and everybody knows that - since it is obliged , like any other institution or person , to follow the case law of the Court of Justice .
To go further than the Court 's case law is not appropriate at this time because it would be impossible to obtain the necessary consensus and such a step would , in any event , go beyond the purely declaratory nature of this proposal .
Furthermore , the Commission could not propose any measures which did not fall within the scope of Article 119 of the Treaty .
Consequently , it is not possible to accept the amendments concerning the taking into account of actuarial factors - Amendments Nos 2 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , and 10 - because they go beyond the existing case law which specifically states that actuarial factors may be taken into account since their use falls outside the scope of Article 119 .
To go against the case law on this point would be to introduce new law and would , in any event , go beyond the scope of Directive 86 / 378 .
The reason I cannot accept the amendments concerning atypical workers - and many of the contributions refer to this , including part-time workers - is that they are unnecessary - only because the case law already specifies that discrimination against this category of workers can constitute indirect discrimination .
Similarly , Amendments Nos 11 , 12 , 13 and 14 are also unnecessary because they take on board points that are already in the case law and consequently it is unnecessary to deal with them here .
I would like to thank you for your support and commitment in the area of equality of treatment between women and men .
We are allies in this area , but I would like to say that the acquis communautaire at the European level is very important and an example for countries outside the European Union .
Our task is to ensure the full application and effectiveness of a fundamental principle of Community law , and this proposal on which your opinion is requested seeks in every sense to fulfil that objective .
I would like to make a comment concerning what Mrs Lulling said because I thought it was quite relevant .
What Mrs Lulling was asking was whether the Commission would be in favour of extending full equality to areas that are not covered in the directive .
I would answer ' yes ' to that .
We did , if you remember , put forward a proposal in 1987 , the purpose of which was to complete the implementation of the principle of equal treatment in both statutory and occupational social security matters .
It is still on the table of the Council , Mrs Lulling , and it would be prudent at this time to consider studying the possibility of updating that 1987 proposal .
It is my intention , as a consequence of what I have heard here regarding these matters , to do so .
I thank the House for its attention .
Mr President , I think there must be a misunderstanding , because Commissioner Flynn started out by congratulating Mrs Torres Marques on her excellent report and said that the Commission shared our concerns , but then I heard through my headphones - though it may have been something to do with the interpretation - that despite all the congratulations and the concern felt by the Commissioner , in the same way as everyone else here , he cannot accept our amendments because there is no consensus as to whether they are covered by the Court 's case-law .
Can the Commissioner enlighten us on this , because I can understand his concern , but not the fact that he is not prepared to do anything about it ?

Mrs Larive , I think the Commissioner tried to explain that , but because the point does indeed leave scope for misunderstanding , it would be as well for Mr Flynn to tell us more .
Mr President , I do not think there should be any misunderstanding about what we are saying here .
We are proposing a tidying-up operation .
There were some inaccuracies in the 1986 directive , vis-à-vis the case law , and this is a declaratory proposal to bring about the changes necessary to satisfy the case law as it has been enunciated .
We are not writing in all the case law but everything is covered so far as all the case law is concerned in the recitals .
I have gone through the amendments and have analysed what their purposes are .
Some are unnecessary because they are already covered while others are not acceptable because they would mean changing existing law .
We do not have the authority to do this because of the constraints of Article 119 .
For example , Amendment No 1 talks about the exclusion of part-time workers but this is unnecessary because the point is already covered .
Recital 5 also deals with that matter .
Similarly , all the amendments have been analysed in the light of what is possible under the existing Article 119 and whether the case law already deals with it .
In fact , there is nothing that has not been taken on board which the amendments would entitle us to do .
Mr President , I know that time is short , and I do not wish to take up very much more of the House 's time , but this is a parliament , where people are supposed to listen to one another 's arguments and discuss them .
I noticed that there were quite a few of our arguments which Mr Flynn did not discuss , nor does he appear to see any reason for adopting any of the amendments which the Committee on Women 's Rights worked so long and hard to produce .
He says that he does not intend to amend existing legislation : why does this directive have to be amended , in that case ?
Existing legislation is being changed in favour of the pension funds and women are losing out , and that is something Parliament refuses to accept .
I should be very glad if the Commission started treating this House as a parliament and gave our arguments proper consideration .
It has signally failed to do so in this debate , but I can already assure the Commissioner that before the final vote tomorrow , we shall be asking for the matter to be referred back to the committee .
Mrs van Dijk makes certain allegations and , as she says , it is here in Parliament that we should exchange views on these matters .
I have looked at all of these amendments in a rather positive way to take on board whatever I could , if I was permitted to do so under the terms of Article 119 .
I have looked in particular at this question of atypical work and the nature of atypical work because it is reflected in several of the amendments .
The objective of Amendment No 5 , for example , is to include atypical work .
I am simply saying to you that the atypical nature of work is already covered insofar as atypical workers are members of the working population .
If you think and if Parliament feels that Amendment No 5 would give some substance to what you are seeking to achieve and add something extra that is not already covered I would have no difficulty in accepting your amendment .
But I must advise you , as Commissioner , that according to the legal advice I have received , it is an unnecessary amendment because it is already catered for .
That is the only reason .
I would also go one step further .
You have made certain comments about other matters concerning some amendments and a position that you would like to see adjusted .
It was for that reason Mr Blak 's point and Mrs Lulling 's point were so relevant .
What are we talking about here ?
We are talking about occupational pension schemes .
We are not talking about statutory schemes .
I was straightforward enough in my submission to state the possibilities where this could be very hurtful to women 's expectations insofar as certain types of schemes are concerned .
But Article 119 does not allow me to adjust that at this time .
I would be quite happy to bring the points that you make to the attention of the Council and to defend them , but , although I know that the amendments as they are currently constituted have taken a lot of time to put together and I can see the thinking behind them , the matters referred to are already covered , insofar as the atypical worker is concerned and there is no need to pursue them further .
If it is of some importance to you and you press the question about Amendment No 5 then I will take it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
Posting of workers
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0265 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on the posting of workers carried out in the framework of the provision of services ( C4-0327 / 96-94 / 0346 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Peter ) .
Mr President , five years after the first Commission proposal was submitted , the European Parliament is at last able to deal with the common position at second reading .
The credit for having enabled us to do so belongs primarily to the Italian presidency during the first half of 1996 , as I have already remarked on other occasions .
The purpose of the directive is to ensure that the principles of the internal market on the one hand - freedom to provide services , in this case - and of economic and social cohesion on the other are not mutually exclusive .
With continuing labour market integration in the EU , the need for rules has become increasingly urgent .
Competition is distorted and it is socially damaging if workers from a low-wage Community country travel to a Member State with significantly higher wages and salaries , and do the same work as local workers for less pay .
The workers concerned receive vastly inadequate recompense for the value of their work ; and local companies cannot compete with cut-price offers resulting from wage dumping .
The same applies to the posting of workers from non-Community countries .
The proposal for a directive rightly begins by establishing the principle of minimum rates of pay and the entitlement of posted workers to annual holidays .
The existing legislation of the Member State concerned on safety at work and working hours must also be adhered to when workers are posted , from the very start and with no exceptions .
The fact that the proposal for a directive now enables posted workers to apply to the court responsible for their place of work to have their conditions of pay and employment reviewed is a welcome improvement .
Overall , the proposal for a directive has been much improved during the consultation period .
A good example is the discussion regarding whether or not to set a compulsory threshold .
Whereas the original intention had been to suspend completely the key provisions on minimum rates of pay and annual holidays for the first three months of a posting , a compulsory threshold is now no longer specified .
Instead , limited exceptions to the rule are possible .
Firstly , the principle of subsidiarity is taken into account , in that the Member States may , after consulting employers and employees , opt not to apply the provisions on minimum rates of pay for the first four weeks of a posting .
Secondly , it appears sensible , as far as supply contracts are concerned , to grant an eight-day exemption from the provisions on pay and holidays , now that it has been made clear that this exemption does not apply to the construction work covered by Annex 1 .
And , thirdly , the provisions on minimum rates of pay and paid annual holidays may be waived if the amount of work to be carried out during the posting is insignificant .
It is for the Member States to determine what is meant by ' insignificant ' .
The crews of merchant navy vessels are excluded from the scope of the directive .
The Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , for which I am rapporteur , thinks it important in this context to specify that posted workers engaged in port dredging and in assisting shipping in port fall within the scope of the directive .
Furthermore , the committee calls on the Commission , in connection with the reporting obligation imposed on it by the directive , to pay particular attention to the means whereby posted workers are informed about the content of the directive .
Mr President , as rapporteur I advised the committee to refrain from adopting any amendments to the common position , and the committee concurred .
I would also ask the House to reject tomorrow the three amendments which have been tabled .
There are at least two good reasons for doing so : firstly , in the years of deliberations on this matter , the views of the House have generally prevailed ; and , secondly - and more importantly at present - any amendment could jeopardize the qualified majority in the Council .
Surely no well-meaning person would wish to do that ; after all , it is high time that the proposal became a directive , to fill out the foundations of the emerging European social union and serve as one of its cornerstones .
Mr President , I wish to thank Helwin Peter sincerely for the detailed work he has done on this dossier over the last five years - he has helped us a very great deal .
Commissioner Flynn gets a great many brickbats in this place , but I would like to praise his role in the successful conclusion we hope will very soon be achieved with this dossier .
At times the flame on this particular candle was flickering fairly badly but he kept it alive until the Italian presidency came along and the Italian presidency managed to bring it forward to a point where a compromise was possible back in June .
So congratulations to him for the valuable part he has played as well .
This proposal on the posting of workers is a very significant proposal indeed , in its own way as important as the earlier directive on works councils .
We therefore feel that if we are to be mature in our dealings with this proposal we should do exactly what the rapporteur has proposed , and that is adopt the common position without any amendment this week .
In fact the common position as it now stands builds upon Parliament 's first reading position in some ways .
In relation to the threshold , for example , or the inclusion of third-country nationals , it actually goes further than Parliament 's first reading position .
So we want to see this adopted as quickly as possible .
The best way we can help that process is to adopt the common position without amendment this week .
This particular proposal is based on Articles 57 and 66 of the Treaty .
It therefore relates to freedom of movement and freedom to provide services in the single market , which can be very important and positive things in the operation of the single market .
But without the provisions of a directive like this one , they can also be very negative and very destructive .
In Britain we have a long-running comedy show called ' Auf Wiedersehen , Pet ' .
It tells the story of a group of construction workers from my own region , a region of high unemployment , who live in a shack on the construction site in which they are working in Germany .
It is a funny saga of the mishaps and adventures of this group of men , who live beyond the margins of German society in the shadowy areas outside German law .
The problem is that in real life the situation is not funny at all .
Many thousands of people in regions like mine are being forced to live in this way and it simply is not funny .
I am not picking on Germany here , or German employers : any combination of Member States could be chosen to make the same point .
Back in my constituency , week in and week out , people who have fallen foul of this situation bring their problems to me and to my office .
People who have suffered injury at work , who suddenly find that they have no legal employer , who cannot seek redress or compensation , people who are not only not paid for the work they have undertaken but find that their social security contributions have not been kept up by their supposed employer , or people who have virtually found themselves trapped , paying extortionate rents on tied accommodation controlled by their employer .
Not all these problems will be solved by the posting of workers directive but it will give us a framework within which people can be protected and can exercise these freedoms : the freedom of movement and the freedom to provide services .
Freedoms are only meaningful if they involve genuine choice .
This directive will provide the ground rules to allow workers to exercise genuine choice in the operation of those freedoms .
It is very much , therefore , to be welcomed .
More than three years after the first reading and more than a year after we debated the issue , the Council has finally come up with a common position .
I think we should congratulate everyone involved - the rapporteur , Mr Flynn , and especially the Italian presidency which did so much to bring this common position about .
The PPE Group supports the Council 's decision , because now is the time to decide on this matter .
However , there are still a few points we should like to raise .
We had intended to present our comments in the form of a statement attached to the directive , and Mr Peter has just mentioned these in his speech .
They concern the crews of merchant vessels , the scope of generally binding collective agreements , and the monitoring of minimum requirements by the Member States .
However , the Rules of Procedure make no provision for statements of this kind , which sometimes means that the House is simply gagging itself , I believe .
But we intend to raise these points again in an oral question at a later sitting .
The PPE Group welcomes the fact that European workers are no longer to be discriminated against in comparison with the nationals of the countries in which they are employed .
This is something which the ETUC in particular has long been waiting for .
The construction sector , above all , is hoping that this directive will solve a number of transfrontier problems , and it will be easier to combat social security and tax fraud by illegal contractors .
The posting of workers directive is a fundamental aspect of the single market 's social dimension , and is vital for preventing a competition war based solely on wage dumping .
It applies the principle of lex loci laboris , which means applying the law of the country in which a worker is employed .
The inclusion of this principle in the directive , to be applied as soon as it comes into force , means that workers will be assured of equal treatment from their very first day at work .
Foreign workers will be entitled to the same wage as local workers - doing the same work , naturally - and this will prevent employers from bringing cheap labour in from abroad and paying them much lower wages than local workers .
And a particular feature is that the directive also applies to workers and employers from outside the European Union who are operating here .
The PPE Group feels that this directive is so important that it is prepared to adopt the Council 's common position without amendment .
It is actually a considerable improvement on the original Commission proposal and is very much in line with the PPE Group 's proposals at first reading , which at that point went further than those of the Socialist Group , Mr Peter .
The sooner this directive comes into force , the better .
Mr President , it is easy to understand why maritime goods transport is being excluded from the scope of the directive .
This is in fact a totally international market , and the application of such measures would seriously impair the competitiveness of Community vessels and oblige shipowners , even against their will , to transfer their vessels to flags of convenience .
On the other hand , roll-on roll-off services - ferries - are an entirely different case , and we propose to retain them within the scope of the measure , through our amendment , for the following reasons .
The first reason concerns the principle of fair competition between Community shipowners , as reaffirmed by our rapporteur .
Let us take the example of cross-Channel services .
The annual wage costs of a passenger vessel vary considerably , depending on whether it is a French or British vessel .
The costs for a French vessel are FF 37 million ; for an identical British vessel , they are FF 29 million .
However , if you replace half the British crew with Asian sailors , the wage costs fall to FF 19 million .
Where is the fair competition here , if this sum is compared to the FF 37 million ?
I shall not dwell on the second reason , which follows on naturally from the first , since it relates to safeguarding the jobs of Community sailors .
I should in fact prefer to spend the little time I have left in dealing with another issue : the effect of a measure such as this on safety .
We have seen this in almost all accidents at sea , some of them with tragic consequences - the human factor is crucial , whether it is the initial cause of the accident or the handling of the crisis caused by the accident .
On board a vessel , however modern it may be , safety is first and foremost a human matter .
That is why the international safety management code calls for the formation of well-knit crews , whose members are properly trained to cope with emergencies and can communicate easily with one another and with the passengers .
Experience has shown that , on a passenger vessel , it is unrealistic to think that some crew members would have no role to play in a critical situation .
The crew as a whole must be trained in safety techniques .
Finally , I would stress that frequent crew changes , as take place on vessels with a rapid turn-round in order to avoid the extreme fatigue resulting from the very special pace of this work , cannot be regarded as an option unless the sailors live in the immediate vicinity of the port of embarkation .
That is why Members not voting in favour of our amendment will bear a great deal of responsibility as regards the on-board safety of passengers .
Mr President , as several speakers have already pointed out , this proposal is a case of take it or leave it .
In 1993 , our group supported the compromise which was then on the table , and we intend to do the same with this proposal , which is why we have not put forward any amendments .
However , I should like to draw attention to an issue which a number of colleagues have already mentioned , namely the working conditions of seamen .
The maritime sector is in absolute chaos at the moment .
In the ports near to where I live , it regularly happens that whole crews are given the sack or even walk out voluntarily because of the awful conditions in which they work .
I would point out that we are experiencing a period of globalization in the world economy , when trade is on the increase , and we shall be relying more and more on maritime transport .
This is therefore an issue that is going to have to be addressed in the world trade negotiations , in my view .
We cannot allow chaos to rule at sea when every other sector is well regulated for workers .
Mr President , consideration of the proposal for a Directive on posting of workers has taken an agonizingly long time .
This state of affairs has caused suffering in many countries , as the pay of workers posted to them temporarily has considerably undercut national wage levels .
Posting of workers has made it possible to find work on conditions , as regards pay , which may perhaps have been acceptable to workers from low-wage countries , but in my opinion were unsatisfactory even from their point of view .
The procedure in any case merely transfers unemployment from one country to another and increases pressure for cuts in pay and social security in Member States where levels of wages and social security are high .
This is a bad thing from everybody 's point of view .
The Council 's joint position does not in all respects accord with the objectives of the European trade union movement .
The exemptions , in particular , weaken the directive and will lead to problems of implementation .
Article 3 , which permits exemptions on the grounds that the amount of work to be done is not significant , is ill-defined .
It could be applied very differently in different Member States .
Bearing in mind that the first exemption already permits national decisions to be taken on the treatment of cases where the length of posting does not exceed one month , it could be asked whether this does not sufficiently cover cases where the amount of work to be done is not significant .
Despite this criticism , the most important thing is that the Directive , defects and all , should be adopted .
It will make it possible to establish that certain terms of employment of the country where the work is carried out should apply to workers posted from abroad , and it will also prevent dumping of labour from third countries throughout the territory of the EU .
The general applicability of collective agreements is the cornerstone of Finland 's employment contracts system ; Finland bases its regulations concerning the terms of employment of foreign workers precisely on this principle , and will now be authorized by this Directive to do so .
I should like to thank rapporteur Peter for his work and express the hope that the Council will bring this Directive into force speedily .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since this is something of a tête-à-tête , I can begin by endorsing wholeheartedly what both Mr Peter and Mr Hughes have said .

But since I am who I am , and I am a Green , I should like to add my pennyworth .
Firstly , there is of course the problem of the exemptions : a huge amount of case-law will be required to make this truly watertight .
Secondly , there is the urgent matter of informing foreign posted workers about their rights ; the Member States will have to do something here .
And thirdly , there is the problem currently affecting the United Kingdom with regard to the adoption of a proper definition of posted work , because many ostensibly self-employed British men go to Germany carrying their factories with them in the form of tool-boxes . There really is still a great deal to be done here .
It is now high time for something to happen , and that is why the common position must enter into force as quickly as possible .
To those Members who are jeopardizing that outcome by tabling amendments , such as Mr d 'Aboville , who has referred to the IMO guidelines - that is the International Maritime Organization , for his information - or by discussing European directives on maritime safety and crew levels for all vessels putting in at European ports , I would say that they might do better to cooperate with us , rather than trying to clarify these issues here and now .
They cannot be clarified rapidly , here and now , without serious risk of jeopardizing the solution of what really is a crucial problem .
Ultimately , the only issue at stake here is to re-establish the legal and civil - or occupational - status of posted work , which is currently being attacked and undermined from all sides .
Shipping , with its secondary registers and the use of flags of convenience , has indeed become a test case , and I shall be full of admiration for Mr Flynn if he succeeds in achieving stability in this area .
He would be able to take credit , once and for all , for having begun to redefine the status of posted work as an occupational category , a category with rights and with the appropriate protection . That is what we should all be striving for .
Mr President , it is very understandable that this directive on the posting of workers has given rise to many lengthy debates .
It has been discussed in the Social Affairs Council , where the matter has featured no less than six times on the agenda .
It has been discussed in employers ' and workers ' organizations , in the Commission and in Parliament , and presumably also in broader circles in the various Member States .
Denmark is known for several things in the EU context , including the fact that in Denmark , there are clear boundaries as to what is the subject of agreements between the parties in the labour market and what is actually a matter for legislation .
There is a concern on the part of some employers and workers in Denmark as regards directives in general and this directive in particular , namely that the directive will undermine the right to conclude agreements in Denmark .
The fact is that every time an EU directive has to be implemented , something is lost from the right to free negotiation , since implementation is never 100 % via the negotiating route .
The rest takes place by legislation .
In Denmark , people in the construction sector in particular are extremely sceptical about the directive .
However , it appears that the Council has made some reservations on this point in its decision .
But how do things look in the other sectors ?
The directive has not allowed for the problems which , in our view , may arise there .
In the actual report by Mr Peter , it is said that a compulsory threshold is no longer specified , and then a number of provisos are mentioned .
For example , in point 1 of the explanatory statement , it is said that : ' If the period for which a worker is posted does not exceed one month , the Member States may , after consulting employers and employees and in accordance with their usual procedures and practices , opt not to apply the provisions on minimum rates of pay . '
We then have to ask the question : is this not another way of saying that there is still a threshold of up to one month ?
And we would also emphasize that the role envisaged for the State in this scenario is an encroachment on the right of free negotiation between the two parties in Denmark .
It is further stated in point 3 : ' The provisions on minimum paid annual holidays and minimum rates of pay may generally be waived if the amount of work is insignificant . ' Is it the host country or the home country that determines what is meant by ' insignificant ' ?
When the FTF in Denmark - the union of officials and civil servants - also declares in this context that it sees the right to take industrial action as being threatened by this directive on the posting of workers , we must entirely agree with them .
The directive is a real threat .
We see this directive as another aspect of further harmonization in the area of agreements and in the labour market sector , and on those grounds we have to dissociate ourselves from this report .
It is absolutely essential to regulate in particular the general financial conditions governing the posting of workers carried out in the framework of the provision of services in another Member State , so as to prevent wage dumping , which has already started to occur in the Community .
Because of the serious undercutting of national wages , an unnaturally small supply of employment is available on the labour market in certain regions , particularly in the construction industry .
Moreover , there are considerable distortions of competition between individual firms .
This Council directive seeks to combat wage dumping and reduce distortion of competition in respect of the freedom to provide services , in order to create a level playing-field for all serviceproviders .
The provision in the directive whereby a Member State can decide whether or not to apply the measures for a onemonth period is therefore an important one .
A Member State must indeed be free to decide whether to introduce such a measure without any transitional period , as soon as the service-provider begins work , or whether to wait for a month at most .
It is important for Member States to have such discretion , because the posting of workers from high-wage countries to low-wage countries , especially on short assignments , does not require any additional red tape ; but in the reverse situation , when workers from low-wage countries are posted to high-wage countries , immediate application of the directive will protect local service-providers and shield businesses from distortions of competition .
We need to recognize , however , that this posting directive is only one step forward in the campaign against distortions of competition and to increase the competitiveness of firms , and hence job security .
It is equally important to make working time more flexible and to provide some much-needed tax relief on labour costs , particularly in high-wage countries , which will enable firms to become more competitive .
Mr President , previous speakers have mentioned the amount of time it took for the Council to arrive at a common position on the so-called posting directive .
To my mind , this lengthy decision-making period in the Council is just another sign that social legislation is shelved for as long as possible , if not completely blocked or killed off , in the institution of the Union which represents the national governments .
Mr Peter , the rapporteur , states in his report that Parliament 's will has largely prevailed in the course of the deliberations on the amended Commission proposal and the common position .
That is significant .
In the social arena above all , we , the European Parliament , represent the driving force within the Union .
Mr Peter 's excellent report is the best example of this : it does not provide the Council with any pretext for delaying further still the entry into force of the directive .
I hope that the entry into force of the posting directive will send out a clear social message , and that the people of the Union will pay heed to it .
I also hope that the directive will help the much-trumpeted European social union to regain some degree of credibility .
At this point , I should like deal at slightly greater length with the problem which in fact made it necessary to draw up and introduce a posting directive .
The livelihoods of workers in countries with high wage levels and high social standards , which are costly to maintain , are being threatened by workers from countries with low wages and social standards , especially in the construction sector , which is labour-intensive and depends heavily on the general economic situation .
We therefore need to make sure that , as a matter of principle , the same wage is paid for the same work in the same place , and if possible as from day one .
The critics of such legislation repeatedly object that it impinges on one of the four fundamental freedoms of the internal market , namely the freedom of movement of persons .
That may be true , but let me make one thing perfectly clear : this directive is a much-needed legal instrument to correct certain extremely negative effects of free competition .
It should protect workers in the host country , whilst at the same time ensuring that workers from low-wage countries do not have to work for peanuts abroad , so to speak .
And I am sure that implementation of the posting directive will not destroy the competitive advantage which workers in countries with low wages have on the free market .
After all , the present version of the directive does not go as far as that ; it provides for exemptions in this area .
It is now up to the individual Member States to push through implementation of this directive .
I agree with the rapporteur that its impact in practice will depend largely on the effectiveness of national monitoring instruments .
It is up to the Commission to keep a sharp eye on the Member States during the implementation process , and I hope that the report to be submitted to this House by the Commission a few years from now will state that wage dumping no longer represents a problem , particularly in sensitive sectors of the labour market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the directive on the posting of workers carried out in the framework of the provision of services is one that is urgently needed .
The ' shareholder value ' principle is very fashionable nowadays , and is put before human dignity on the spurious grounds that freedom of movement for workers should not be restricted , or on some other such grounds .
I should just like to describe the circumstances of workers who come to Germany from the United Kingdom , Portugal or the countries of Eastern Europe .
They earn between DM 5 and DM 8 per hour , and live in shacks or porta cabins in very cramped conditions .
Since they cannot afford to eat in restaurants , they live on bread and sausage , just so that they have some money left to take home to their families .
What about their human dignity , I ask myself ?
In my view , workers within and outside the EU must at last be placed on an equal footing .
What is more , no one mentions the fact that these practices distort competition .
Certain EU countries have already introduced excellent counter-measures ; others are filling their coffers because they have not yet passed any such legislation .
To my mind , the Commission must prevent such distortions of competition ; that is its job .
At the same time , it would be clamping down on economic crime and the social abuses connected with these practices .
I believe that this directive will brook no delay .
I therefore agree with Mr Peter that neither positive nor negative amendments should be accepted .
We shall reject them all , because we should not hold up the directive any longer and give the Council an opportunity to stall things once again .
I am most grateful to my colleague Mr Peter and to the Commissioner for having set the ball rolling .
I would just say a further word about media interest .
If we had been discussing the European limited company , there would have been several television crews in the gallery .
Unfortunately , when this subject is under discussion , they are not here !
Mr President , the proposal seeks to coordinate the legislations of the Member States with the aim of creating imperative rules which must be respected by companies which transfer their workers to another Member State of the Union .
Certainly such harmonization , which by definition goes beyond the territorial competence of the Member States , implies particular attention on the part of the Union itself .
These standards of protection must obviate that legal insecurity which accompanies the phenomena of transfer and respond to the demands of the workers . They must , in addition , cover conditions of fair competition .
We underline the fact that the directive is not intended to harmonize the material rules of the Member States , relating to the right to work and the conditions in which it is expressed , but it is intended to coordinate the regulations appropriate to determine a list of priorities .
We are of the opinion that the Union must put into operation a Community instrument which governs all the issues .
The directive , finally , deals with the status of the workers and with the tendency to sub-contract which is based on the principle of making to demand the work from non-national firms .
We trust that the Commission will effectively safeguard the industries of the south , so as to preserve their principles of concurrence and exercise it guaranteeing the relative social rights to the workers .
We attribute , finally , great importance to the planned duty of information and cooperation between the states , an obligation which should also be extended to the Member States which did not approve this common position in the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal for a directive - which has , incidentally , been rejected in the Council by the UK and Portugal - is based on the twin assumptions that the construction industry in the so-called high-wage countries is in need of protection , and that the posting there of workers from so-called low-wage countries constitutes wage and social dumping , which results in unfair competition .
The main cause of the wage and social dumping which is evident in some of the so-called high-wage countries is in fact the alarming rise in illegal terms of employment .
The response of this proposed posting directive is to render the legal posting of workers from low-wage countries in high-wage countries uneconomic , by increasing rates of pay .
Restricting legal posting in this way would therefore not make the slightest contribution to combatting the main evil , namely illegal employment .
The adoption of contractual or national minimum rates of pay not only serves to eliminate the wage-cost benefits of posting workers from low-wage countries in high-wage countries ; more significantly , it also becomes impossible , or at least much more difficult , for posted workers to find employment in host countries which have higher wage levels .
However , Article 48 of the EC Treaty , in conjunction with Article 7a , second paragraph , of the Treaty , secures the freedom of workers to obtain employment on their own terms in any Member State .
This right of free movement is a cornerstone of the completion of the internal market , and it applies even to posted workers working in another country under the terms of employment of their home country .
This right would in practice become virtually impossible to exercise if the proposed posting directive came into effect .
To impede or complicate the exercising of this right would unacceptably undermine the right to freedom of movement .
Unilaterally excluding wage costs as a factor of competition would suppress competition to the detriment of foreign service-providers in the construction industry , thereby infringing one of the fundamental principles of the European internal market .
Mr President , first of all I would like to offer my thanks to Mr Peter for his excellent report .
Also to thank Parliament for its generous response to what we have been seeking to do in so far as the final adoption of this proposal is concerned .
There is very strong support here in the House for the common position adopted by the Council on 3 June on the proposal for a directive on the posting of workers in the framework of the provision of services .
Indeed , Mr Konrad , I think it was your thought that was behind us all , in seeking finally to put this to bed .
That was the question about protecting freedom of movement as a fundamental right and pillar of the European Union and also , as Mr Peter said , to prevent wage dumping , social dumping and all classes of dumping .

I would certainly like to thank Mr Hughes and his colleagues , who set out the value added of this particular proposal and I also think it is appropriate to say thank you to the President-in-Office at the time , Mr Treu , who worked very hard to convince the rest of his colleagues that the final compromise should be put in place .
In approving this particular common position you will of course be opening up the door to a very rapid definitive adoption of the directive .
I would also congratulate you on the improvements that you have made to the original proposal for the directive , throughout the adoption procedure .
One of the Members said it was discussed at six social affairs Council meetings ; I think I counted nearly eight where this was being talked about .
As the Commission pointed out in its recent communication to Parliament , the common position now contains a number of important features which reflect the amendments that were proposed by Parliament in February 1993 .
In this very complex field of rules governing conflicts of laws applicable to employment contracts , we have managed to arrive at a text which is both realistic and maintains an essential balance between economic freedoms and the rights of workers .
In the light of all that , the Commission cannot accept the amendments before us today whose content is likely to jeopardize what we think is a very hard won balance .
There was reference to the question of ro-ro services , by Mr d 'Aboville in particular .
I have to say that roll-on / roll-off services do not involve posting within the meaning of this particular directive .
It is not an appropriate instrument for dealing with any problems arising in that connection and we cannot accept that amendment on that account .
I would like to say to Mr d 'Aboville that ro-ro vessels transport goods and passengers from one Member State to another , without any transfer of the vessels ' operating base to another Member State , and on completion of operations the ro-ro vessels return to their operating base .
In such a case workers are not posted within the meaning of the directive and , moreover , the law of flag generally applies to ro-ro vessels .
The posting of workers from a vessel flying the flag of one Member State to a vessel flying the flag of another Member State is very rare indeed , so we cannot accept that particular amendment .
Mr Wolf made a very important point about how difficult it might be to transpose this particular directive to national law and I think he has a fair point , but we do have a responsibility that Community law be applied effectively and efficiently .
I would like to say to Mr Wolf and the House that we will be watching the transposition of this particular piece of legislation very carefully , because its application will reflect the transnational nature of the provisions .
I can assure him the Commission is going to go through the provisions as applied in the Member States with quite a fine tooth-comb and also the action taken in the event of failure to comply with the directive .
Similarly , the Commission will also be vigilant in checking the steps taken by the Member States to make the information referred to in Article 4 generally available .
We have done this on a number of occasions in the past , quite successfully .
In addition , the Commission is prepared to help out the Member States in seeking the appropriate means for facilitating the application of the directive .
Finally , I would like to thank all of those who have been very generous in their praise of the Commissioner and of the Council in finally putting to bed this very important piece of legislation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Reduction in working hours
The next item is the report ( A4-0207 / 96 ) by Mr Rocard , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on a reduction in working hours .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , five minutes is scarcely enough time to consider ways of solving the problem of unemployment !
I shall refrain from criticizing our procedures here , because I know the reasons for them , but we must admit that they sometimes verge on the ridiculous .
Anyway , let us begin .
The motion for a resolution before the House today for the debate and tomorrow for the vote has only one purpose : to ask the Commission to study in depth , using all the modern econometric and computer-based methods , the feasibility and effectiveness of a new policy of social taxation designed to promote a marked reduction in working time so as to reduce unemployment substantially .
This report is the product of 18 months of work and debate in the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
What is at issue here ?
Mass unemployment is devastating Europe .
There is no reason to believe that it will decline substantially in the years ahead : the technological revolution is still destroying huge numbers of jobs , and the latest version of it , the ' information ' revolution , is only just starting to have what everyone knows will be a disastrous effect .
The services sector long ago stopped absorbing surplus labour from industry and agriculture .
Our governments - including the one I once had the honour of heading - have tried everything , through a vast array of measures , each more costly than the last , which have done little to change the huge and formidable scale of the problem .
But one approach has not been explored in sufficient depth : that of markedly reducing working time .
This is what we are saying and proposing in the report .
Is this approach an effective one in terms of job creation ?
It is open to question .
There is no certainty , but the issue merits further study .
That is what we are proposing to ask of the Commission .
Such a process is far too complex to be imposed by law all of a sudden and across the board ; it can only result from negotiations at company level .
The problem for the authorities is how to provide strong encouragement without taking the place of the social partners .
The idea of reducing working hours will only catch on if it proves popular , and it will not prove popular unless wages remain broadly unchanged .
Is this possible ?
Certainly not if the bill has to be met by businesses , which are subject to such fierce competition that this process will be acceptable to them only if unit production costs remain steady and social charges do not rise .
By the same token , all the governments are running budget deficits and cannot tolerate any increase in them .
The only financial reservation concerns the fact that the EU Member States spend roughly 4.5 % of GDP , or a total for the Union of ECU 350 billion , on unemployment benefits .
At the request of the PPE Group , I have agreed not to mention this enormous sum in the text of the resolution , because assessments vary ; but I would ask you to note its size .
This spending serves to support the unemployed , but does not create one single job .
If unemployment were to plummet , this expenditure would fall as well .
The money saved could be made available to firms to allow them to compensate - to the tune of 85 % or 95 % , as determined by negotiation - for any loss of earnings .
The new idea to be studied would be to alter social security contributions , and perhaps on occasion - for instance in the United Kingdom and Denmark - company taxation : these charges could be drastically cut by almost a half for a working week of less than 32 hours , and more than doubled for one of over 32 hours .
The calculation would have to be such that a company which neither changed its workforce nor its working hours would pay the same social charges - we are not in the business of increasing deficits - but a company which did significantly reduce working time would make substantial savings on its social costs . These funds could be used to compensate for loss of earnings , enabling the company not only to maintain the number of their employees , but also and above all to recruit new ones , thereby cutting the expenditure of the public authorities and social security institutions .
Calculations have revealed that we could expect several million jobs to be created swiftly in the Union .
There are no equally effective measures on the drawing-board anywhere else at present .
It is our hope that a large majority in the House will endorse what is not European legislation , but a request for an idea to be studied .
That is why we have agreed , at the request of the PPE and Liberal Groups , to change the title of the text from ' Resolution on a reduction in working hours ' to ' Resolution on a reduction and adaptation of working hours ' .
We have also accepted a series of amendments .
You will see these in the text tomorrow ; I have no time to describe them now .
Also , to avoid controversy , we have agreed not to refer to the huge volume of financial transactions involving unemployment benefits , which could be reduced .
In return , I have asked the Liberal Group - successfully , I believe - to withdraw its accompanying request for the Commission to carry out a study of the effectiveness of subsidized employment , since we are dealing here not with subsidized employment , but with a policy of redistributing social security contributions , which is by no means the same thing .
Let us not confuse matters .
Ladies and gentlemen , the House would bring much credit upon itself by submitting not only to the Commission , but also to public opinion at large , a sound and innovative idea which just might be effective at long last in combatting unemployment .
Mr President , first I should like to thank Mr Rocard and the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment for what is a very interesting and stimulating report .
Although , following the Essen Summit , governments have been instituting concerted policies on growth , training , labour market flexibility and social security reform , we have not given enough attention to the issue of working time and what contribution it can make to tackling our unemployment problem .
This is a theme which follows on from the White Paper presented by President Delors .
In Europe 18 million people are out of work while others work excessively long hours and it is incumbent on the Commission and Member States to examine closely and carefully what contribution the reduction in working time can make to solving the unemployment crisis .
At the same time we must acknowledge that it is not a panacea for solving unemployment .
It is not a substitute for economic growth .
It is not a substitute for regenerating areas hard-hit by long-term unemployment and bringing the long-term unemployed back into the economic mainstream .
However , it has a contribution to make and a contribution we must study .
In Ireland we have looked at what potential contribution can come from reductions in working time .
Our studies would suggest an extra 1 % employed - not trivial but certainly not an overall solution to the problem .
One of the reasons why working time has not been that high on the menu of suggestions has been because the issues it raises are so complex .
Those of us who are in the process of transposing the working time directive which came in for health and safety reasons know what difficulties we have experienced from both sides : from workers who are earning a lot of overtime and do not want to see that cut and from employers who are paying very low wages and expect to see their costs rise if they cannot subsidize wages by offering generous overtime hours to their workers .
So , it is not easy to reduce working time .
As I have said , those of us who are in the throes of doing that in order to meet the deadline of 23 November for the working time directive are already experiencing the flak .
There are already a number of things in train which are addressing some of these issues .
First , the transposition of the working time directive , although primarily conceived as a health and safety measure , will have an impact on reducing working hours and reducing excessive overtime .
Secondly , the opening of negotiations by the social partners under the social protocol on part-time work is opening up possibilities in that area .
It is important to acknowledge the difficulties and the issues involved .
Unless we have an honest examination we are not really making progress .
First , when we talk about sharing working time , we are fundamentally talking about sharing the income that work brings , whether it is shared through people voluntarily taking lower wages , through voluntary early retirement , through work-sharing options , through more family-friendly work arrangements , more part-time work , or whether through sharing that income through the redistribution of social security contributions which is a centre point of Mr Rocard 's report .
We must face up to the fact that we are talking about a redistribution of income and face what that involves .
In examining the potential for social security savings to fund reductions in working time without loss of pay to those currently in work , we need to acknowledge the deadweight problem .
In my own country about 3 % of the workforce leave employment or take up jobs every month so massive movements are already taking place with people moving in and out of work and with people already adjusting their working hours .
If we have to pay for what is already happening there are additional costs over and above the marginal cost of paying for the extras - the extra movement in working time that we may liberate as a result of implementing some of these proposals .
In undertaking an honest examination of what the report proposes , we need to look at the kind of arguments that will be challenged .
First , saying why is Europe producing its working time directive at a time when our competitors are working around the clock .
Is that going to damage our competitiveness ?
That is an issue which needs to be faced up to honestly .
We need to ask if this will lead to less flexibility in the labour market at a time when our competitors outside Europe are displaying total flexibility .
We want flexibility married with social protection but we do not want to lose competitiveness .
That is an issue we must face up to as well .
We must also look at the effect of the proposal on small and medium-sized enterprises .
Knocking off three or four hours a week in a company employing two , three or four people is not necessarily going to create an extra job .
It may lead to more productivity within the enterprise or the change in cost being absorbed in terms of lower production .
In larger enterprises it is easier to see how reductions in working time - for example by changing a fourshift pattern to a five-shift pattern - may generate additional jobs .
But we need to look at the practicalities of what is proposed .
The overall thrust of the report , namely that we have to look imaginatively at the issue of working time , is very welcome .
In the fight against unemployment no solution , whatever the problems - and I have sketched out some of the potential difficulties - can simply be brushed aside .
We need to study fully what is involved and see what contribution , be it large or small , can be made by changes in this area .
Finally , our model of the working week has been formed on the Victorian tradition of the man going out to work and the woman staying home , minding the children , washing her husband 's socks and putting a meal on the table .
We have moved to a very different era of work where a majority of women in the Community are out at work , where there are many men and women with family responsibilities , be it young children , elderly parents or a disabled family member .
We need to look at different ways of working time that reflect the human needs of the individual .
If , through development of more family-friendly , human-friendly work settings , we can also generate extra work time which we can allocate to our unemployed , we will be doing two jobs and not simply one job .
In Ireland at the moment we are developing a set of proposals on work-sharing which I hope to be putting to the government in the next few weeks .
We do not see them as solving our unemployment problem but we see them as making a contribution that none of us can afford to overlook .
In conclusion , I welcome the Rocard report .
It stimulates a great deal of thought .
I do not think it will be simply a matter of straightforward implementation of the proposals .
There is a lot of work and a lot of study to be done and a lot of negative criticism out there to be overcome .
But if we have courage and imagination the Council , Commission and Parliament can together explore what contribution reductions in working time can make to solving Europe 's largest problem and a problem we have made central to the Irish presidency - the problem of unemployment .
Mr President , the fair distribution of work is an important objective for my group .
It is entirely unacceptable that in a society where work is held up as such an ideal , at least 18 million people - but more likely more than 30 million - are out of work against their will .
Of course , as the President-in-Office has already said , reducing working hours is not the only way to solve unemployment , and the creation of new jobs is at least as important .
But the information society on which so many people have pinned their hopes can at best be expected to create jobs in the long term , and will actually destroy many before then .
We all know that economic growth will not help all the unemployed , and the civil service and the fourth sector , which are both big employers , are cutting back as part of the efforts to meet the criteria for EMU .
In the short term , therefore , the reduction of working hours and a crackdown on overtime are important measures .
The number of hours of overtime worked in the Union as a whole is now the equivalent of 3 to 4 million jobs , so the solution proposed by Klaus Zwickel , the leader of the German metalworkers ' union , and others to pay for overtime with time off makes good sense .
People often worry about productivity with higher wage costs , but research in my country , where as you know , reduced working hours and part-time work are fairly common , shows that the effects of shorter working hours on productivity are much more positive than is frequently thought .
It indicates that people working shorter hours are often more productive , and what they produce is of better quality ; they manage their time better ; they are better at setting priorities and take a fresher approach to tasks ; they are more motivated and , last but not least , they take less time off sick .
All these factors naturally have a very positive effect on productivity and costs .
In the collective bargaining where decisions are taken on reducing working hours in my country , the workers agree to ' pay ' for shorter working hours with moderate wage claims and greater flexibility over a number of years .
It is unfortunate that some groups in the European Parliament are trying to equate shorter working hours with flexibility and / or the reorganization of working time .
This is being extremely unfair to the Rocard report .
Unlike those who dogmatically insist that flexibility and reorganization represent the only solutions , Mr Rocard is offering a combination of strategies which could encourage both workers and employers to adopt shorter working hours .
Those who set great store by market mechanisms in particular must find the proposal to differentiate social contributions attractive , together with the financial incentives for employers designed to promote job-creation .
These seem to me to be entirely in keeping with the market .
Those who oppose such ideas are simply afraid of what the outcome of this study might be .
This may protect your dogmas , but as politicians you are simply abdicating your responsibility to do everything in your power to combat unemployment .
Mr President , combatting unemployment is the top priority for the Union .
We must find new ways of tackling this major political and social challenge , but we have to ensure that our ideas are practicable .
Mr Rocard addresses himself in this own-initiative report to the reduction of working hours .
He notes with some surprise that this topic has hardly been discussed until now , and presumes that it is too daunting .
He is mistaken !
Many attempts to reduce working time and recruit new staff have proved impossible to put into practice .
The Volkswagen model of a four-day week is not universally valid , neither in the automobile industry nor in other sectors .
Work-sharing is a defensive strategy ; to defeat unemployment we need new , competitive jobs .
We need an overall political context which will promote growth and create the right climate for investment and innovation .
Only a competitive economy can provide scope for flexible changes in working time .
All of this is missing from the Rocard report .
Very few countries would be able to carry out the proposal that the funds saved on unemployment benefits should be redistributed by the authorities to compensate for loss of earnings .
If the consequence of this is dirigisme , it is quite irreconcilable with our view of industrial relations .
We believe that working hours should be determined by collective agreements , geared to a company 's needs and work processes , and negotiated by the two sides of industry .
Our doubts as to the accuracy of the tidy sum estimated by Mr Rocard at ECU 350 billion have not been allayed .
These funds are not a financial reserve which can be disposed of at will .
Instead , the task of the Member States must be to cut back on unnecessary expenditure , in order to curb national debt and achieve stability .
The idea that it is hard to increase productivity in the public sector is provocative and untrue .
As PPE Group members of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , we have managed to give the Rocard report a facelift .
Moreover , the rapporteur has accepted nearly all the amendments submitted by our group under the heading of ' the adaptation of working hours ' .
By doing so , he has departed from the initial idea of a Commission study looking solely at reduced working time .
The original version provided for a recommendation which already set out the conditions for cutting working hours : in other words , the analysis was to have been performed , but its outcome was a foregone conclusion for the rapporteur - that is how an expensive study can turn into a cheap farce .
The attitude of the Group of the European People 's Party is unequivocal : we are in favour of a sensible , flexible adaptation of working time .
We favour more voluntary part-time work , geared to company requirements and employment patterns .
We also favour a smooth transition to retirement and part-time work for older workers .
All of this must be included in the Commission study .
Mr President , before I start I should like to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , Minister Fitzgerald , to the House .
She is a lady who I have worked a lot with in the past on the National Economic and Social Forum and whose opinion I have great respect for and whose guidance I would take on many occasions .
Also at the outset I want to congratulate Mr Rocard on his tenacity and persistence in getting this report through despite , at times , virulent opposition from certain groups , with myself most virulent and opposed .
It was Thomas Moore who described the land of hope as Utopia .
That is what we are dealing with here today .
We are dealing with an ideal that we would all love to see : a shorter working week , more money , less taxation , more leisure time .
But the reality is something different .
The reality is that unless we are competitive , that unless we allow our businesses and enterprises to prosper , to grow and to compete on the world market we are ultimately doomed to fail ; not only in the sense of protecting existing jobs but also in ensuring that we try to find new forms of work for the long-term unemployed .
Even here in the debate today there has been a divergence of opinion as regards how many unemployed we actually have in Europe .
Mr Rocard said over 20 million .
Mr van Velzen - maybe the interpretation got it wrong so I apologize if that is the case - said 30 million .
The Minister and President-in-Office of the Council said 18 million .
There is a huge divergence of opinion just on that point alone .
If we are talking about implementing new forms of work and working time , we must surely know what we are trying to achieve and the basis that we are starting from .
In the report that has been presented there is no impact assessment , not even in respect of what the Commission describes as the engine for economic and employment generation in the Union : the SMEs .
Furthermore , it mistakenly assumes that international studies have said that a reduction in working hours will help to increase employment .
Yet when we look at the most recent OECD report , it says that a reduction in working time will not increase employment .
As well as that we are putting people on the scrap-heap early .
There is a new ageism forcing people to retire early so that wealth of knowledge and experience will be lost to us .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Rocard has succeeded in getting us all to work hard both in the Committee on Social Affairs and in our groups , and I can assure him and other honourable Members that the debate is still continuing , in my group at least .
I can also assure him that I shall be urging everyone to give the report a chance , but not because I think it is the answer to all our problems , far from it .
However , I firmly believe that we have a political responsibility to combat unemployment in Europe by every means possible .
The Rocard report contains an interesting idea that there should be tax and social security incentives based on the number of hours people wish to work , and this is what I think should be given a chance .
I am not entirely convinced that it is a solution .
Mr Rocard painted me as an opponent of his ideas in the Committee on Social Affairs , and I said on a number of occasions that I believed a reduction in working hours had many disadvantages as well .
In my country , which is the same as Mr van Velzen 's , there have also been cases where workers gave up some of their working hours and some of their pay , but no new jobs ever came out of it .
I myself have experienced this in the past , so I am not just talking hypothetically .
It also works much better in larger companies where it is easier to organize , whereas its advantages for smaller firms are much less obvious .
I was also the one in the Committee on Social Affairs who called for work to be organized differently in the context of reduced working hours .
As I see it , working hours should not just be reduced per week , but over the course of a year or even one 's whole working life , and we must be far more flexible in how we organize work in relation to the means of production , the premises and the weekly distribution of working patterns .
Mr Rocard was generous enough - and I was most impressed by this - to take our arguments in the Committee on Social Affairs on board and to accept a large number of our amendments .
There will , of course , be people who say he should withdraw his report , but I do not agree .
I think that Mr Rocard is someone who is prepared to listen to his colleagues and to give interesting ideas his consideration , and this is precisely what I would call on the Commission to do .
I would also like to thank the President-in-Office for giving this problem a great deal of thought and raising a number of points such as SMEs which need to be looked at more closely .
I shall be commending this report to my group , and while I cannot be entirely sure of success , I still think that many of my colleagues will vote to give the report a chance .
Mr President , the 6 + 6 model has been experimented with in Finnish industry , and it has yielded many benefits .
The operating times of machinery have been extended , and workers remain more alert , in addition to which it has become easier to combine employment with family life and leisure .
All this has also become apparent from the reduction in sick leave and absences from work .
Thanks to increased productivity , it was found possible to continue to pay the same wages to workers in these experiments , despite the reduction in working hours .
So this is quite possible , thanks to rises in productivity .
The majority of our Group , who are from Southern Europe , understandably consider that pay cuts cannot be accepted in any circumstances .
It is difficult to attain in public services all the benefits to which I have referred , which were achieved in the private sector .
Negotiations in many work-places in Finland have been difficult , and agreement has not been reached in all of them , as workers have opposed it .
I therefore myself consider it essential to earmark economic resources particularly for experiments in reducing working time and altering the allocation of work in the public sector , to enable any pay cuts to be compensated - ideally , 100 % .
Cuts in unemployment will permit significant savings in public expenditure .
Employment initiatives should also be promoted , not only by means of subsidies but also by revising the principles concerning the levying of social security contributions .
The model proposed in the report whereby social security contributions would be graduated according to the length of the working day is a good one .
Now practical examples are needed , and must be publicized .
The most important contribution made by this report is that it requires the Commission to collate the findings of the experiments carried out in the various countries and to encourage the Member States and the two sides of industry to negotiate the introduction of new experiments .
This is a very important initiative , and I should like to thank Mr Rocard for his good work .
Mr President , the Greens greatly welcome this initiative and the report 's view of working hours reductions as an important contribution to bringing down unemployment .
Perhaps it has even paved the way for a completely new approach to the deployment our common resources , i.e. public funds .
Perhaps they can be used to compensate for loss of earnings .
We would of course have preferred a report which had not been so watered down by the more conservative forces in the European Parliament ; we would rather have kept the more forthright formulations of situations and proposals that Mr Rocard started out with .
We should have no illusions that high unemployment also means wider divisions in society and that this in turn leads to greater conflicts and provides fertile ground for violence , racism and democratic breakdown .
It would therefore have demeaned us not to come up with something .
What we have before us is , so to speak , the best that could have come out of this situation .
The starting point of the Greens has always been that working hours reductions are beneficial for many different reasons .
Obviously because we must share jobs and bring down unemployment , but also because they lead to greater equality of opportunity , greater fairness , and an increased quality of life .
They also offer possibilities of building up functioning social networks which , in their turn , create security and freedom .
A range of other measures are of course also needed in order to create more jobs and a sustainable recycling society .
I am thinking here , for example , of the ' green ' taxation option and investment in new energy and transport systems .
These measures have not been given so much coverage , but they would also really create many , many hundreds of thousands of jobs .
An amendment has been tabled to the effect that the word ' adjustment ' of working hours should be introduced into the title .
It is a word that can be interpreted in many different ways and perhaps misunderstood .
I therefore think that ' adjustment ' or ' flexibility ' should not come to mean that social or labour law rules are invalidated .
On the other hand , the parties involved in the labour market , i.e. employees , employers and the state , must give and take in a common endeavour to ensure that a substantial reduction in working hours can be achieved .
Mr President , the Council and the Commission have really taken a terribly long time over this issue of a reduction in working hours .
There were supposed to be other priorities which prevented them from dealing with it .
There was the Maastricht 3 % rule , which meant an automatic block on social issues .
There were continual complaints from employers about the excessively high social contributions , and the reduction in our competitive capacity .
There was the growing phenomenon of industrial migration to the countries of Central Europe and South-East Asia .
There was also - let us be frank - an ideological stalemate between the progressively-minded and the conservative .
So this debate is a welcome opportunity , and not before time , to give imagination and creativity another chance .
Three years ago , we organized a conference on reducing working hours with our party in Flanders .
At that time , it was regarded as unrealistic and dismissed as impossible .
Now the debate has moved to the appropriate forum for such issues : the European Parliament .
Let us be clear about one thing : a reduction in working hours is not a miracle solution to unemployment .
A number of different approaches are needed , and reducing working hours is just one of them , but what we are trying to do above all is to introduce a new moral dimension .
A reduction in working hours cannot simply be applied across the board , but must be decided on through negotiations in each sector or even each firm , so that account can be taken of local conditions and the competitive position of the sector or firm in question .
There are a number of amendments to this report which talk about a reduction in working hours without loss of earnings .
This seems like a nice idea , but - let us be honest - it is rather unrealistic .
My group will therefore not be supporting these amendments .
In our view , the rapporteur is right to adopt a different approach in proposing that some of the ECU 350 billion currently paid out in unemployment benefits should be used to compensate for loss of earnings .
The Christian-Democratic group has tabled a series of amendments seeking to have the phrase ' reduction in working hours ' removed from the report and replaced , euphemistically , by ' adaptation of working hours ' .
This , as I see it , violates earlier agreements .
I would point out that in the Coates report produced by the ad hoc committee on employment , we agreed not to spend too much time on the issue of reducing working hours because the Rocard report was in the pipeline .
Now it is here .
It is a report which calls for a great deal of very necessary research , which we should start on as soon as possible .
We are standing at a turning-point in history , in my opinion .
Basically , this is a debate on the kind of quality of life and new social developments that we , as politicians , would like to see .
That is what this debate is really all about .
Mr President , unemployment is the key problem , as it says in Mr Rocard 's report .
I think we can all entirely agree on that , but the question is , who is going to do something about the unemployment problem ?
Is it the European Union , is it the Member States , or is it a case of both one and the other ?
This report is based on the assumption that it will be the latter .
Let me make it absolutely clear that , in my view , exchanges of ideas should always take place across national frontiers .
That also applies when we are talking about employment .
However , we do not wish a more binding form of cooperation to be established .
I have to dissociate myself from the idea of drawing up common EU proposals to eliminate unemployment .
My own feeling is that the report by Mr Rocard points to some good proposals for solving the problem , including a general reduction in working hours , but this must be something that the individual Member States decide for themselves , either through legislation or as a subject for agreement between the parties in the labour market .
In more general terms , I should like to stress that I think it is quite incredible that there is constantly talk in EU circles about combatting unemployment , when at the same time the EU is eagerly working towards the completion of the third stage of EMU .
The Member States are being asked to pursue a policy of convergence , which means , as we know , an even greater number of unemployed people .
Several experts , even strong advocates of EMU , have said that the completion of EMU will increase unemployment .
The Industry Council of the Labour Movement in Denmark predicts that if the timetable laid down in the Maastricht Treaty is adhered to , unemployment in the European Union will rise by about one million .
To my mind , there is no clear demarcation of the competence of the Member States and the Union in this area .
And I think it is a weakness that no such demarcation has been included in the report .
It is often said in this Chamber how important it is to maintain cultural diversity .
I should like to point out that it is one of the hallmarks of Danish culture that agreements on the conditions on the labour market are something for which the parties in the labour market are responsible .
And we wish that to continue to be the case .
Let us keep the cultural differences among the 15 countries .
We may even be able to solve the problem of unemployment individually .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I regret that Mr Rocard , who was Prime Minister of France for three years , did not exploit that time to eradicate the scourge of unemployment by means of the miraculous remedies which he is proposing today .
Instead , the ranks of the unemployed swelled from one to three million in France during François Mitterrand 's two seven-year periods in office .
But Mr Rocard has not moved on in ideological terms , and unfortunately has not departed from his Malthusian and pessimistic economic thinking .
The amount of work available in the European Union , and particularly in France , has not been frozen at its present level once and for all .
Let us protect our markets from fierce competition , let us reform our absurd system of taxation which penalizes work , effort and enterprise , let us abandon the illusions of Maastricht and its overvalued currencies , let us curb government spending , let us turn back the tide of immigration , let us bolster consumer spending ; then we shall create new jobs .
Economic logic is not purely arithmetical ; it is dynamic , responsive and alive , and will therefore not fit into the totally abstruse intellectual models set out in your explanatory statement .
What becomes of your theories when they are applied to SMEs , to small and medium-sized enterprises with a minimum of ten employees ?
For it to be worthwhile extending plant running time , and hence increasing production , a demand has to exist .
You say that average working hours are a variable linked to the level of employment .
Why is it then that unemployment is falling in the United States and is so low in Japan when , statistically , workers in those countries work longer hours than in Europe ?
A reduction in weekly , monthly or annual working time will not , therefore , automatically bring down unemployment .
Finally , and perhaps most importantly , you give no consideration to the human dimension .
The quality and quantity of human work cannot be confined to your statistical notion of working time .
White-collar staff , for whom there is no such thing as overtime , will work as much as before , even if they are supposed to work 32 hours .
The banning of overtime will deprive blue-collar workers of additional earnings , and they will not be able to make ends meet with their basic pay alone .
No , Mr Rocard , human beings are neither interchangeable nor identical , and they cannot be computer-modelled .
You are in fact turning a blind eye to the causes of unemployment : worldwide free trade , immigration and absurd systems of taxation .
You have tried out all the remedies of a quack doctor , all of them whistling for the wind , but there are actually over 25 million people out of work in Europe .
Your report is nothing but a political gimmick , to which only clueless politicians and conniving trade unionists will give any credence - two groups which are both incapable of squaring up to the economic , social , political , demographic and moral crisis which is afflicting Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , I shall not take up the comments made by the previous speaker , but I am very surprised by the scepticism within the ranks of the PPE Group .
After all , according to the Delors White Paper , reductions in working hours in the northern Member States led to the creation of 8 % more jobs , even accounting in the Netherlands for half of the 30 % rise in employment .
In Germany too , between 1983 and 1992 a third of newly-created jobs were attributable to reduced working time .
We must nevertheless be realistic about one thing : growth alone will have only a minimal impact on employment .
The Prognos Institute in Basle has predicted , for example , that Germany will have no more jobs in the year 2010 than in 1992 , primarily as a result of gains in productivity .
Although we shall see increased employment in the service and information sectors , there will be a decrease in the production sector and further job losses in agriculture .
Of course , as politicians we cannot just sit back and accept this .
Paid work not only provides economic security but is the principal route to individual self-fulfilment .
That is why I am so impressed by the blueprint outlined here by Mr Rocard - and it is a package of ideas , not just a reduction in working hours .
This report will be a major stimulus for debate both in the national parliaments and at European level .
For many years , employers were opposed to reduced working hours and in favour only of flexibility , which meant constant availability around the clock , variable working hours and temporary work .
All this has now changed .
Volkswagen in Germany is just one example ; our CDU colleague is mistaken in thinking that there are no others .
Even SMEs have taken to experimenting with modern , innovative schemes regarding working time .
Mr Rocard 's proposals represent a significant component of a European policy on employment .
Mr President , everyone knows that my group still has one or two problems with the Rocard report , so I was extremely surprised to hear what Mr Vandemeulebroucke just said about us not keeping to our agreements .
We abstained in the Committee on Social Affairs , so it is only to be expected that we do not yet agree with the report .
Even Mr Vandemeulebroucke should realize that .
The PPE Group feels that the Commission should research this whole issue in detail , and that we should base our decisions on its findings .
This is why we have tabled fourteen amendments which , if included , would make the report considerably more acceptable to my group , I can assure you .

Reorganizing work is not the only way to solve the unemployment problem , but - and I agree with the Council presidency here - it may be one way of helping to get more people into work .
Mr Rocard must not forget that not all the new jobs created are filled by those registered as unemployed .
The White Paper indicates that three of every four new jobs are filled from other categories , such as women returning to work , young people and those changing jobs .
So Mr Rocard 's claim that the governments will be saving ECU 350 billion in unemployment benefits is only partly true .
It may even be that more spending is required .
Coming as I do from the Netherlands , I should like to say something positive about the reorganization of work .
In the early 1980s , employers and workers sat down with the government in the Netherlands and decided to experiment with the reorganization of work , which has functioned well in many cases .
This decision was only taken because of the poor economic situation at the time .
Since the Lubbers government of the 1980s , unemployment has been halved , indicating that a reduction in working hours can help towards solving the problem , provided that the overall cost to businesses does not increase .
A reduction in working hours which does entail increased costs results in less employment , and this is something that people fail to realize .
But if the costs are kept down , competitiveness will not be affected and may even improve .
That is why the reorganization of work is worth looking at , without necessarily taking any final decisions on the subject .
Mr President , today 's report on the reduction of working time shows Parliament 's ability to make a significant contribution to solving the problems of the day .
I should therefore like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work , his tenacity and his enthusiasm in defending his proposals on all occasions .
His basic premise is a good one , and his proposed approaches are interesting .
I would nevertheless add a rider to the solutions which he offers .
First of all , Europe with all its diversity has an equal need for a reduction and a flexible reorganization of working time , in order to cater for sectoral needs and business circumstances , taking particular account of the specific features of SMEs .
In this context , the amendments tabled by the PPE Group and ourselves would make the proposed solutions far more realistic and acceptable to all the countries and political movements represented in this House .
There is another crucial point , I believe .
This report , which provides a constructive basis for considering , at European level , the possibilities and consequences of reorganizing or indeed reducing working time , must not seek to prejudge the results - positive or not - of the studies and consultations for which it calls .
In this respect , the amendments tabled by the PPE Group making European action in this area contingent on the outcome of the studies commissioned seem to me to be very wise .
Similarly , it is unrealistic to propose as of now a cut in working hours without loss of earnings thanks to automatic compensation by the state .
It is to clarify this point that we suggest linking compensation to the actual fall in the number of unemployed persons and , consequently , the cost to the community .
Mr President , two basic ideas run through the Rocard report : the first is that the number of jobs is a constant , affected only by productivity .
When there are not enough jobs for everyone , they must be rationed and shared .
Moreover penalty taxes must be imposed on those who want to work more .
The second idea is that work is drudgery , something that workers would rather avoid .
These basic ideas lead to conclusions that are completely at variance with the demands of the future .
The age distribution in a decade or so will be such that we risk serious generational conflicts .
It will become difficult for ever fewer gainfully employed people to care for an ever larger ageing population .
We therefore need to get rid of unemployment at the same time as improving productivity and raising pensionable ages .
Mr Rocard is advocating job rationing , when what is needed is an increase in the number of jobs .
Otherwise , in a few years ' time we shall be faced with a social trauma of immense proportions .
In ten years , Mr President , our debate today will stand out as hopelessly unrealistic .
Mr President , we think the Rocard report brings up the opposite criticism from the one the conservatives have raised .
The Rocard report reveals a contradiction between analysis and programmed information , and between information and political decisions .
There is no doubt that it is important not to put our trust in quantitative policies , growth , increasing gross domestic product , which have not in fact reduced unemployment , and that it is right , as the report suggests , to identify the central importance of distribution and reduction of hours .
But in reality this valuable analysis remains trapped in certain nineties illusions which have prevented the reduction of working hours being pursued .
One of these illusions lies in connecting the reduction of working hours to the policy of flexibility achieved by firms , usually unilateral and diluted to the point of blurring the reduction in hours .
Even more impracticable is the hypothesis of subordinating a reduction in working hours to a reduction in wages .
If that happens , there will be no reduction in hours .
In Europe and many countries there is now a real wage problem , frequently forcing workers to increase rather than reduce working hours , by working overtime .
When hours are linked to flexibility and there is no integrated policy , as has happened in many countries , there is an increase in effective average daily working hours , instead of a reduction . As if that were not enough , the rise in pensionable age is extending the working life , so in many European countries we are now seeing an increase in production and productivity , an increase in unemployment and an increase in the average hours of work .
There is a need for change , especially today with recession approaching , which leads us to draw the most rational and extreme conclusions from Mr Rocard 's analysis .
We need a proposal for a consistent reduction in hours concentrated over time , because only consistency in reduction and concentration over time can establish an employment policy .
If the European Community can set binding targets for reducing deficits and debt for Europe , as it does , then it should also be able to set binding targets for reducing working hours in quantity and over time , so that government action and the work of social forces are concentrated on that objective .
Otherwise the analysis may be valid but the political conclusions will not be .
Mr President , reductions in working time are part of our economic history .
Mr Rocard 's report at least has the merit of focusing attention on a real social problem at long last , and I thank him for that .
This is of course a controversial subject , and opponents of shorter working hours have no difficulty in stating that in the United States and the United Kingdom , unemployment is falling steadily and there has never been so much work .
But what kind of work ?
Much of it is part-time and badly paid ; working time is divided between rich and poor , and casualization is proceeding apace .
Nor do I believe that a reduction in working time is the only way of combatting unemployment .
It is one way among others , and is part of an overall strategy incorporating parameters such as growth , a revival of consumer spending and even the monetary situation , because - with both the franc and mark overvalued - unemployment still has a bright future ahead of it .
Rather than being a means of managing a scarce supply of work , a reduction in working hours must result from a change in our relationship with work , which is now losing the pride of place that it enjoyed some years ago .
More than ever before , at the dawn of the twenty-first century , the issues of education , life-long learning , cultural and professional activity and retirement all go hand in hand , and should lead to greater freedom for individuals throughout their lives .
I believe first and foremost in reducing working time on an individual rather than a global basis .
Highly technical , across-the-board measures might not succeed .
Individual reductions , in my view , mean mapping out the aspirations of each employee , beginning with annualized hours and accompanied , naturally , by a not insignificant reduction in working time , with new recruitment as an important spin-off .
Such matters should , in my opinion , ideally be negotiated at company level .
I naturally welcome any reduction on a sectoral basis , but I would point out that various difficulties arise at this level .
Companies , on the other hand , are already starting to produce some interesting results : there are a number of examples , notably at Volkswagen , Philips and elsewhere .
Every effort should therefore be made to ensure that technological innovation no longer causes jobs to be lost , but serves to create new ones .
And it is not right to say that earnings should be eroded as working time is reduced , because the consequence would be to restrain consumer spending further still and reinforce insecurity .
Michel Rocard mentioned the sum of ECU 350 billion paid out in unemployment benefits .
Let us face it : it is time to put these funds to intelligent use , for example by maintaining earnings at their original level when working hours are reduced , and eliminating all the social costs bearing down on low wages .
Finally , one concept by which I set great store is the interplay between training , research and the reduction of working time .
One approach worth following would in fact be to link technological innovation , with the aid of research , to the reduction of working hours .
Whatever happens , nothing will be possible without the trade unions , whose role - particularly through the European Trade Union Confederation - will be crucial .
Mr President , Michel Rocard thought he had invented a machine to reduce unemployment , but he has discovered a time machine , turning the clock back not only to Léon Blum and his famous 40-hour week , but to the debates of Socrates and the sophists 2500 years ago .
There is unemployment ; there is confusion .
Michel Rocard has plenty of the latter .
The problem is an economic and political one ; the problem is also philosophical because work is creation , it is human .
Look at Michelangelo , whose hand created the Sistine Chapel .
The scientific attitude to such a problem is to seek its causes .
The causes are obvious .
Unemployment exists for many reasons , without a doubt , but one of them is glaringly self-evident : unemployment exists because there are not enough jobs , and there are not enough jobs because , when enough did exist , they were destroyed .
None are created when people want them , and when they are needed they are already taken .
We , for our part , attribute the shortage of jobs primarily to immigration .
You , on the other hand , blame excessive working hours , and you say : all we have to do is cut working time , all we need are new measures .
You say the great law of history is reducing working hours : 3200 hours at the end of the nineteenth century ; 1700 hours today , after the laws of 1900 , 1902 , 1904 and 1906 - and , your friends even add , without affecting GDP .
If we worked 3200 hours today , there would be not 22 million but 11 million jobs .
The reduction in working time has therefore created 11 million jobs .
Ultimately , your slogan is a simple one : working less means work for all .
This is in fact the title of Guy Asnar 's book .
The methods you propose are gradual retirement and reducing the length of the working week - the four-Thursday week , as Professor Godet calls it in ' Le grand mensonge ' - phasing out overtime and replacing it with leisure time - which is happening in the police force but is not solving any problems - sabbaticals , short breaks in the working day and a reorganization of work within our life cycle .
It is fine by me if you wish to re-examine Modigliani 's life cycle analysis .
But do not forget the role of taxation in our life cycle : it takes 17 years of a person 's working life to pay all the compulsory deductions !
Overhaul taxation , and you will reduce working time .
Of course there are problems in following your logic . Hours were reduced in 1982 and nothing was gained .
What are we doing now ?
Will wages remain the same ?
You say yes , there are ECU 350 billion available .
And what do we do about moonlighting , because the more the official hours come down , the more unofficial hours will go up ?
What are we doing to natural cost structures ?
You are triggering a downward spiral .
In reality , Mr Rocard , your method is a well-known one .
It is that of the sophists .
Let me show you why .
Since jobs are created when working time is reduced , then ultimately , for zero working hours , there is an infinite number of jobs .
The number of jobs is infinite , as long as you are operating within a closed economy .
In an open economy , however , vacant posts are immediately occupied .
Your conclusions , Mr Rocard , are those of Malthusian protestantism .
You are like Michel Foucault : you believe that history is static , you believe in structuralism , with your model of the underdog living in poverty .
The fact is that you are neither a socialist nor a liberal - you are a pessimistic internationalist .
You believe in rationing and in quiet poverty . We , for our part , are optimistic nationalists .
We shall adjourn the debate at this point because of Question Time .
It will be continued at 9 p.m. this evening .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-0838 / 96 )
Question No 30 by Ben Fayot ( H-0577 / 96 )
Subject : The European Parliament 's right of initiative
Article 138b of the EC Treaty empowers the European Parliament , acting by a majority of its Members , to request the Commission to submit any appropriate proposal on matters on which it considers that a Community act is required for the purpose of implementing that Treaty .
Before the adoption of the Joint Declaration on the 1996 legislative programme , the European Parliament had adopted two own-initiative reports on the basis of Article 138b ( Rothley report ( A4-0201 / 95 ) ) , adopted on 26 October 1995 , OJ C 308 / 95 , and Alber report ( A3-0232 / 94 ) , adopted on 20 April 1994 ( OJ C 128 / 94 ) .
In its resolution on the 1996 legislative programme , the European Parliament had called on the Commission to submit legislative proposals on the above two initiatives .
The same request was also contained in the European Parliament 's draft for a joint declaration on the legislative programme .
Although the Commission has also undertaken , in the code of conduct of 15 March 1995 , to take account of initiatives by Parliament pursuant to Article 138b , it has still not submitted any proposals in respect of those items .
How does the Commission intend to comply with the - limited - right of initiative conceded to the European Parliament since Maastricht ?
Will the Commission submit proposals in response to the abovementioned initiatives , and if so when ?
Mr President , to deal firstly with the resolution contained in the Rothley report , Document A4-0201 / 95 , it is quite clear to us that major difficulties arise when accident victims have to seek compensation for their injuries from insurance companies in other Member States .
The insurance companies are also aware of this , and have taken a number of initiatives .
We engaged in a wide-ranging consultation exercise with all the parties concerned , including Mr Rothley , with a view to deciding how best to proceed .
We would have preferred to see an agreement worked out by those involved .
That proved impossible .
Therefore , we are considering proposing a set of rules whereby , firstly , every European insurance company will have to appoint an agent for claims settlement in each Member State ; secondly , it will be up to the Member States to impose sanctions on insurance companies that do not appoint an agent ; and , thirdly , information offices will be set up in the Member States to give claimants the name of the agent in their home country .
As regards the Alber report , we have already briefed the House in our half-yearly report .
We have commissioned a number of studies of the liability rules in the Member States and the workings of the different systems of liability .
These studies are likely to be completed by the end of the year , and we shall issue an early communication on the basis of their findings , so that we can then decide , with Parliament , on a sensible way of resolving this matter as well .
Mr President , I am of course grateful to the Commissioner for his extremely precise reply concerning the Rothley and Alber reports .
My reason for putting this question was that we could not see anything in the pipeline .
I should like to know how - in principle - the Commission intends to address the right of initiative conferred on the European Parliament by Article 138b of the Maastricht Treaty .
As you know , Commissioner , this right of initiative is very limited . It is also strictly regulated by our Rules of Procedure , and some very specific conditions have to be met .
I should like to know whether the Commission has a positive or a restrictive attitude towards initiatives from the European Parliament .
The Commission welcomed this provision .
We also supported Parliament in having such a provision included in the Maastricht Treaty .
Of course we take Parliament 's right of initiative seriously , first and foremost because the Commission is the body at which it is directed .
It would indeed be quite uncooperative on the part of the Commission if we were to impede the House in exercising such a right , and that is why I gave you the information which I did .
Understandably , the right of initiative is sometimes used in relation to very complex and difficult issues - if they were not so complex they might already have been addressed .
For that reason , the process is sometimes quite lengthy , but there is no question about the importance that we attach to Parliament 's right of initiative : we know how valuable it is .
I must say I am very pleased with the reply given by the Commissioner on this occasion .
I wish to point out to the Commission that Article 138b is a right on which I hope we can expect positive cooperation from the Commission .
We , of course , are the elected body and , sadly , you are not , although you received our endorsement when we agreed to the appointment of this present Commission .
I hope that you will take our ideas very seriously , because they are ideas that you can use and we can use with you and they will have a constructive result .
For example , the medical card , which we debated in this House earlier this year .
I have made my own enquiries about that but , again , I do not know what the timetable is .
Are you able to help us ? If you are able to assist with the evolution of a European medical card , then that would be something which we and the Commission together could put forward to a wider European public as being of practical use - that is the point .
Can you give us a timetable on the medical card ?
I should like to begin by dealing with the general point which you have raised again .
Every year , we discuss with Parliament the legislative programme that we intend to set ourselves for the year , and consider both the Commission 's proposals and the wishes of the House .
In the context of those discussions , a number of initiatives are taken up which are handled much less formally than they really ought to be .
To take an example from the discussion in recent weeks : the House regards pornography on the Internet as a pressing problem - as indeed it is - and the Commission has already said that it takes the same view and intends to consider appropriate measures to restrict the scope for pornography , if not actually prevent it .
At the moment , although it falls within my remit , I cannot tell you how far we have progressed with the medical card .
It is one of our pilot projects .
We have a pilot project looking at uses of information technology in health care , and we are working on that .
I would ask you to bear with me , but at the moment I really cannot tell you exactly when the groundwork for this card will be completed .
The problem is not just a technical one , but concerns above all the question of how to keep protected personal data confidential .
I am sure you will agree that if such cards are to list not only an individual 's medical history , but also their life history and personal circumstances , care will have to be taken that these details do not find their way into unauthorized hands .
This is one of the problems , and while there are certainly ways to resolve it technically , that will take time .
We will be glad to write to you and give you an update on the situation .
Mr President , this question is unrelated to the dreadful accident that occurred recently in Spain , but that accident was another clear indication of the need for rules in this area , a need which has been addressed until now almost exclusively by the national authorities responsible , or through agreements between organizations of camping and caravan site operators .
There is currently no legislation at European level concerning health and safety on camping and caravan sites .
Where matters are covered by general legislation - for example , every Member State has rules against misleading advertising - it is clear that such laws also apply to camping and caravan sites .
Health and safety on camping and caravan sites , like health and safety in holiday complexes , hotels , discos , amusement parks and so on , represents a general set of issues connected with safety in the provision of services .
These issues are becoming increasingly important in the context of our consumer protection policy .
Indeed , as long ago as 1990 , we put forward a proposal on liability for defective services , but it was not approved by Parliament .
We therefore withdrew the proposal at that stage .
However , we are considering submitting a new proposal to deal with this matter .
Thank you very much for your reply , Commissioner .
As you will have anticipated , my question did not stem from the accident that you referred to .
But of course it lends further urgency to the topic we are addressing here .
Millions and millions of people across Europe now depend on caravanning for their holiday .
All of us with families know that one can travel many miles , arrive in a caravan site late at night , maybe with fractious children , and certainly not have the energy to go and check out whether the camp-site is in fact safe .
We have seen the tragic results that have ensued .
So I do think this is a growing need .
This is an area of enormous development and I am interested to hear that this has in fact been through Parliament before and was then withdrawn .
I do hope that , since the matter is now so much more urgent , there could be a possibility of the Commission and Parliament reintroducing it as an issue that ought to be addressed urgently .
We have , as you so rightly said , the three areas .
But those three areas have to be linked , and the only way they can be linked is in an identifiable procedure .
Yes , you may well be right .
As far as the accident in Spain is concerned , we do not have enough information as to whether it was caused by a lack of rules or by failure to observe existing rules and carry out checks .
Unfortunately , the fact is that rules alone are no guarantee of success : only by monitoring how they are observed and implementing them can we ensure , as far as possible , that disasters like this are prevented .
I can only support what you said concerning the urgency of the matter .
Unfortunately , it is often a problem in politics that attempts at regulation are met with reluctance until an incident occurs .
In your own country in particular , there is little support for attempts at regulation before there has been an incident .
Something always has to happen first , and then everyone comes and says that the situation is particularly urgent .
I am thinking , for example , of seat belts in buses .
If I had introduced rules on safety in buses at the time when I was responsible for the internal market , there is no doubt that I would have been heavily criticized in quite a few Member States , including your own .
Then , as soon as something happens , everyone asks why the Commission did not introduce these rules long ago .
So this is also something that we have to bear in mind , but on the point at issue there is absolutely no dispute between us .
We are treating this as an urgent matter .
Does the Commissioner not agree that the problem raised by Mrs Billingham clearly illustrates that tourism ought to have a competence within the European Union - as many of us have argued - in the revision of the IGC , so that in the case of the free movement of people , as is exemplified by this problem , we can have common rules which actually ensure the safety of tourists ?
In my view , such rules can already be introduced under existing legislation .
We do have a clear competence for the internal market , and services are provided in the internal market .
If services are provided badly and damage occurs as a result , that situation should be dealt with by the Union under the legal provisions which already exist .
I am thinking , for example , of our regulation on liability in the case of defective products .
We have our own regulation concerning liability if a producer manufactures a defective product , and indeed under the terms of that regulation , any producer who sells a defective product is held liable .
That rule was introduced in the context of our general competence in the internal market .
There is no reason why it should not also apply to services .
That is not to say that I am against including tourism in the list of Union competences , but it is not necessary to do so in order to deal with the cases in question .
We can already introduce legislation on these matters now .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 32 and 33 lapse .
Question No 34 by Karin Riis-Jørgensen ( H-0700 / 96 )
Subject : OECD agreement on shipbuilding
A secret Council declaration was adopted on 19 December 1995 in connection with Council Regulation ( EC ) 3094 / 95 implementing the OECD agreement on aid to shipbuilding .
This declaration seems to be in clear breach of the OECD agreement 's ban on aid to the shipbuilding industry and of the Union 's policy in the shipbuilding sector , cf. the ' seventh shipyard directive ' .
Will the Commission provide an interpretation of the secret Council declaration and confirm that , once the OECD agreement is ratified , it will no longer be possible to grant state aid to the shipbuilding industry in the Union ?
We have a strong interest in seeing the OECD agreement ratified : it would let us put our own shipbuilding policy on a firmer footing .
Under the agreement , subsidies would not be allowed .
But the declaration to which the question refers does not conflict with the OECD agreement .
The cases that are the subject of the declaration have to be considered by the Commission , which delivers its opinion and publishes it in the Official Journal .
As provided for in the OECD agreement , such decisions can be raised in the Parties Group if there is any doubt as to whether they are compatible with the agreement .
This means , of course , that everything we do can be checked by our partners , and any problems can be raised .
We continue to hope that the agreement will be ratified .
You know that it is not up to us , nor to Japan or Korea - basically it is up to our American partners , who have been unable to reach agreement in Congress on the text that was negotiated , and who will certainly not address the issue again before the presidential elections .
We hope , therefore , that it will become clear after the elections whether the USA is prepared to ratify the OECD agreement .
Thank you very much for that answer , Commissioner .
Unfortunately , I did not get a reply to the last point in my question , where I ask the Commission to confirm that , once the OECD agreement is ratified , it will no longer be possible to grant state aid to the shipbuilding industry in the Union .
That is the first thing which I should once again like to have answered .
Secondly , I should like to hear what the Commission plans to do to ensure that the United States signs the agreement .
I appreciate that we cannot force President Clinton to sign it , but what strategy is being pursued on the European side to ensure that the United States signs and ratifies the OECD agreement ?
And finally , as I understood the Commissioner 's reply , the declaration by the Commission does not actually contain a very great deal .
Why was it so secret ?
Why was it not available to the public ?
Why was a secret declaration attached to the Council 's minutes when - as I understand what Mr Bangemann said - it does not really contain anything ?
Protocols have to be particularly secret when there is nothing in them , because it is a way of enhancing their importance .
That should come as no surprise to you .
But in this case , there actually is some substance there .
It is wrong to see this as a meaningless declaration . In fact , it indicates that other forms of aid continue to be possible outside the OECD agreement : aid for research and development , for example , and regional aid .
For instance , if we consider that it makes sense to establish a shipyard as part of a regional programme , then of course that will still be possible .
The OECD agreement does not rule out that type of aid .
However , all cases of this kind of aid will have to be notified if the aid is granted by a national or regional government .
The Commission will consider each case and publish its conclusions in the Official Journal .
And this may result in one of our partners deciding , in such a case , that the decision is at odds with the OECD agreement .
We shall then discuss the case with the partner in question .
This is essentially obvious - but it is not meaningless .
Since you have now made the matter public , we can discuss it publicly .
It may be , however , that you have made a mistake in making it public - that is also a possibility .
When I saw Mrs Riis-Jørgensen 's question , I was deeply shocked .
I was really anxious that something clandestine had been going on , with secret agreements , scandals , and the like .
Now , the fact is that we in Denmark have been mentioned by a report from a firm which Mrs Riis-Jørgensen knows particularly well , and this report also proved to be without foundation .
Mr Bangemann confirmed that there is nothing secret involved here .
This is something you can just look up and read in the Official Journal .
I suspect that you may be confusing something here .
The declaration that was issued by the Commission does not appear in the Official Journal .
What would be recorded in the Official Journal would be if a country - Denmark for example - granted subsidies to its shipyards .
I know that this has never happened in Denmark and never will do .
But if it were to happen , we should of course have to look into it .
We would then publish the outcome of our investigations in the Official Journal .
That is the procedure .
I am becoming more and more confused as to what this declaration is actually about .
The other day , we were told by the Danish minister responsible that the declaration was not important ; now I gather from the Commissioner that it really is important , which is why the declaration was adopted and no doubt also why there is a wish to keep it secret .
Can we not have a clear answer as to why this declaration should be kept secret ?
Does it mean that it conflicts with the text , and is that why the public must not be allowed to know about it ?
Does the Commissioner 's statement today and the stance which is being taken here mean that he regards secret declarations as acceptable , and does the Commissioner think it is good practice for citizens and businesses to be excluded in this way from knowing quite simply what is in the texts that are being adopted ?
Let me try to explain things again - and I must confess that I may have contributed to the confusion here , because when one speaks ironically , the irony is conveyed in the tone of voice , and this may be lost in translation .
So I will explain again , step by step and without any irony .
A discussion took place in the Council about whether the OECD agreement required us to end all shipbuilding subsidies .
On behalf of the Commission , I explained that we interpreted the agreement to the effect that subsidies specifically for building ships were no longer allowed .
Let me give you an example : a ship is ordered from a shipyard , and the country concerned pays that yard 20 % in subsidies in order to reduce the price of the ship to the client by that amount .
Under the OECD agreement , subsidies of this kind are no longer allowed .
I trust that what I have said is clear so far .
Aid for research and development is of course different .
Indeed , we have a programme to modernize shipbuilding which we are implementing together with our G7 partners .
This includes looking at the use of information technology to rationalize the production process , so that suppliers in particular can slot into the production sequence at the right time .
Programmes of this kind are part-financed by us , under our research and development policy .
It is quite clear that what we are engaged in here is research and development .
Or to take another example , let us say that a shipyard wishes to reduce noise levels and is taking steps to do so .
It needs investment for that purpose , and the investment is subsidized .
This has nothing to do with shipbuilding , in fact it may well be an environmental protection measure .
These are the types of aid that are not covered by the OECD agreement .
However , we do keep a check on such aid , which means that anyone intending to grant this kind of subsidy has to report the fact by notifying the Commission .
The Commission investigates the aid and decides whether it is in breach of Article 92 or any other provision of the Treaty , and it is then either prohibited or - if it complies with the provisions of the Treaty - permitted .
The decision is then published in the Official Journal .
That is the procedure in its entirety .
The whole process is therefore important .
There are no secret protocols : all protocols are recorded and may be consulted at any time .
If you have a question for the Council , then put it to the Council , and the Council will give you information about the protocols .
The Commission has even less reason to keep such protocols secret , because what we record in protocols is our opinion .
You are now asking me what our opinion is , and I am telling you , here before the House .
We have nothing to conceal .
Have I made myself clear enough now ?
Question No 35 by Hugh McMahon ( H-0641 / 96 )
Subject : Registration of the pharmaceutical products Smoltine and Azamethipos
Can the Commission give an assurance that the registration of Smoltine and Azamethipos , which are extremely important for the Scottish salmon-farming industry , will be based on objective scientific criteria and will not be unduly delayed ?
As usual , Mr McMahon has drawn attention to a problem .
However , I must begin by saying that the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products in London has not received an application to authorize the marketing of the products that he refers to in his question .
In the case of these substances , applications are made for the Community to fix maximum residue limits , as provided for in Council Regulation 2377 / 90 .
It must be stressed that the fixing of a maximum residue limit is by no means an authorization for a substance to be placed on the market : rather , it is one of the preconditions for authorization .
It must first be established that the maximum quantities allowed in the form of residues are not being exceeded .
Only when that preliminary phase has been completed can a decision be taken on whether the medicinal product can be placed on the market .
Such authorization will only be given if the drug contained in the substance that has already been evaluated also fulfils the criteria of safety , quality and efficacity laid down in Directives 81 / 851 and 81 / 852 , and if no other provisions of Community legislation stand in the way .
The substances that Mr McMahon refers to are intended for use on fish .
In the case of Azamethipos , a maximum residue limit was fixed on 25 June this year .
As regards somato salm , the position is different because the Committee on Veterinary Medicinal Products has not delivered a positive opinion , and this substance must therefore be the subject of a Council regulation .
A proposal to that effect will be presented to the Commission shortly .
A similarity between somato salm and BST was the reason for the negative opinion delivered by the Committee on Veterinary Medicinal Products .
The Commission therefore asked the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products to supply additional information concerning the risk of illegal use of somato salm .
The Agency has since ruled out that possibility .
That is the present position .
In his last answer , the Commissioner said that the possibility of harmful use has now been excluded .
Because they cannot use Smoltine , which deals with transferring the fish from fresh water to salt water , they have to use hydrogen peroxide , which is very costly and has very serious effects on the life of the fish .
The second product , Azamethipos , deals with sea lice , which are causing considerable problems in the salmon industry , not just in Scotland but throughout the Union , stunting growth and causing problems with stocks .
Now that the problems seem to be solved and given the importance of these products for the Scottish salmon industry , can I have the Commissioner 's assurance that he will give quick authorization ?
The salmon industry in Scotland , Ireland and elsewhere within the Union is very anxious that these products be licensed as quickly as possible , knowing that trial runs have proved that there is no deleterious effect to fish or to human beings .
From my personal knowledge of this case , which I have followed from the beginning , I should like to say this : Parliament rightly values the fact that the Commission takes its investigatory duties seriously when dealing with medicinal products , whether they are intended for human use or for animals .
I believe that is important .
There is no doubt that , as a rule , Parliament would rightly criticize the Commission if we were to take an easygoing approach , so to speak .
That is why , when the question arose as to whether this drug should be authorized , I decided that we would first have to wait for the opinion of the scientific committees and the Agency .
I declined simply to authorize it , although a number of documents and attestations were submitted indicating that somato salm was completely harmless .
I hope that you agree with my decision .
The Scottish industry is an important one , and we do not wish to do anything unlawful .
Nor can we simply prohibit a drug if there is no reason for doing so , but we were very careful to observe the procedure , which was as follows : firstly the matter went to the scientific committee , which said no ; then it went to the Agency , and we requested more information there .
As far as the Agency was concerned , there was no reason to prohibit this drug , or whatever one wishes to call it .
But because of the scientific committee 's opposition , we could not simply authorize it .
That is how the procedure works , and that is why we have to refer the matter to the Council .
We shall do that , and the Council will decide .
That is the procedure .
We are not an elected body - as one of the previous speakers pointed out - but we are very meticulous in what we do , and I believe that such an approach is also in the interests of the Scottish salmon industry .
Furthermore , salmon are continually switching from salt water to fresh water , and from fresh water to salt water .
You are well aware that salmon spawn in fresh water and then move to salt water ; then there is a switch back to fresh water when the young salmon reach spawning age .
The transfer from salt to fresh water , or vice versa , is thus a normal part of the salmon 's life cycle .
But I have no objection to a drug that may facilitate the process , provided it is not harmful .
That , however , is now a decision for the Council .
Question No 36 by Lyndon Harrison ( H-0649 / 96 )
Subject : Policy on generic medicinal products
What measures is the Commission thinking of taking in order to develop and encourage the production and use of generic medicinal products ?
Is it considering submitting proposals to enable manufacturers of generic medicinal products to test and register such products before the expiry of their patents ?
We have always regarded both types of medicinal products as important , and that still forms part of our industrial policy for the pharmaceutical industry .
We need an industry that carries out research and develops new medicinal products , which is a costly business and becoming ever more costly , because only a small percentage of such products actually reach the market .
Of course , after the expiry of the patents on these new medicinal products , we also need the generic products ; this means that we need the industry which takes up the new discovery and then offers its own similar products , perhaps at a lower cost , which is important to the consumer because these medicines are normally cheaper .
However , we must remember - and I hope Mr Harrison remembers - that without the research industry , we would not have any generic industry .
If we have no new medicinal products , then we cannot have products being manufactured less expensively on the basis of such discoveries .
That is why we have to strike a balance , and I believe that , so far , we have managed to do that .
The Commissioner is absolutely right that we have to strike a balance , but I think he will be aware of the problem that there are firms who are choosing to move to America to carry out the pre-work before the expiry of the patents and thereby they steal a march on Europe because we do not have the ability to involve small businesses , SMEs in the pharmaceutical industry in particular , in the work before the expiry of patents .
I would say to the Commissioner that if we do not do something to help the production work during the expiry of the patents , what we will have is the expiry of the patients who might otherwise benefit from having these cheaper drugs so produced .
Yes , Mr Harrison , I am sure you know that we have already taken a very important step - a step at international level , for the benefit of American and Japanese companies too - by extending the duration of patent protection when the term of a patent is reduced by a long period of trials .
Let us take a practical example : someone has developed a drug , and naturally has to have it approved .
Obtaining approval necessitates a whole series of tests , which are very time-consuming , and it may turn out that half the term of the patent , or more , has elapsed by the time the drug goes on the market .
We have made a rule , and implemented it internationally , to the effect that the trial period is added on to the term of the patent , so that the overall period of protection is the exact term of the patent from the day when the drug is placed on the market .
This is a very important new measure which has considerably improved the position of the research industry .
To that extent , we have already found an adequate solution .
If firms are still thinking of moving to countries outside the Union , it is much more likely to be because of the possibilities which have now opened up for many of them , particularly small firms , in the field of biotechnology .
I do not need to labour this point : hopefully my years of hard-fought struggle with you - not you personally , but with Parliament - in an effort to produce sensible rules on this question too will soon bear fruit , because here - and I would hark back to the debate on Mr Rocard 's report - we really do have an industry that is creating new jobs and is competitive .
We are hounding that industry out of the Union , and obviously that makes no sense .
There will be no need for us to reduce working hours , because if we have no jobs , reducing working time is not going to help us .
The important thing is that we should have jobs in the first place .
That is why we need a clear set of rules .
We are in no doubt about the importance of this industry .
Since the last enlargement of the Union - with the accession of Finland and Sweden in particular , but also that of Austria - forest cover in the Union has doubled to more than 120 million hectares .
Cellulose output has more than trebled from 9 to 31 million tonnes annually , and the production of paper and card has risen by more than 50 % from 45 to 69 million tonnes per year .
In other words , we have here a really important industry .
We are also net exporters of paper , not only of the higher-value grades , but also of recycled paper such as newsprint .
But of course there is extensive internal and external trade in most forestry products .
As for strengthening competitiveness , that is one of the aims of EU industrial policy .
In July last year , we set up a department for the wood-processing and paper industry within DG III ; it is now fully operational and is becoming the most important point of contact for the industry .
Of course , the broader interests of the forestry industry also affect other areas of competence of the Commission : environmental policy , obviously , for which my colleague Mrs Bjerregaard is responsible , but also some aspects of research and development policy .
These competences overlap , but they are also complementary , and in fact the Commission has never had any difficulty in coordinating the various services responsible . The Commissioners also work well together in this area .
Mr President , there are many different aspects to this forestry policy .
One of these is certification .
Now voluntary nature conservation organizations have started to sell such certificates to the forestry industry .
This possibility is alarming , partly because there is no democratic control whatsoever over this system .
I would like to know whether the Commission - and particularly its member with special responsibility for industry - can conceive of the possibility that the EU might , by means of a decision , develop a forest certificate which would be fair and just and would take account of the different conditions which exist in different countries .
We know that this is a problem , and that is why the new department which I referred to earlier has become actively involved in the discussions on the problems of certification .
Naturally , we are in contact with the relevant groups in the industry , but we have also involved other interest groups in the debate .
Moreover , we organized the first , and so far the only meeting of all these groups at EU level - the discussion forum on the ECOcertification of forests and forest products . So we have been active in this area .
The Commission is currently considering a discussion paper which contains various options for resolving the problem of certification .
We also hope that we shall be able to play an active part in the preparations for the intergovernmental panel on forests , particularly as regards the problems of trade and the environment , and I hope we shall achieve a sensible solution in that context .
Question No 38 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0678 / 96 )
Subject : Computerized numbering of telecommunications
What are the Commission 's proposals for adopting an opinion on computerized numbering , and its possible effect on the routing of telephone calls , in the telecommunications industry ?
Mr President , this is of course a problem that continues to concern us , because it is very important that the numbering should be implemented sensibly .
So far , we have not introduced pan-European numbers , and have only been able to agree , in two directives , on a common emergency number - 112 - and a common international access code , 00 .
The Commission intends to publish a green paper on numbering before the end of this year .
We have to look at how numbering is being implemented in the European telecommunications sector , above all with a view to deregulation in 1998 .
This will mean more participants in the market , with a wider range of services and more customers .
Customers will be changing from one operator to another , and naturally they will have an interest in being able to take their numbers with them .
The green paper on numbering will tackle this question , as well as the harmonization of national numbering plans , the allocation of free numbers for telephone services , the question of choice of carrier , and the establishment of a long-term numbering plan for Europe .
Customer addressing in a deregulated telecommunications environment is difficult , as you can imagine .
Mr Camisón Asensio 's question is in fact a very relevant one .
We have to create the conditions for users to be able to retain their old numbers when they switch operators .
That is our intention .
We must guarantee them freedom of choice in terms of quality , service and prices , and we intend to do so by this means .
Thank you for the information you have just given us , Commissioner , and I was pleased to hear the answer that I was hoping for when I tabled this question - when , that is , the Commission intends to present the green paper on this issue , which you have announced for the end of this year .
This is a matter which affects all the countries of the Union , and which is important because it has implications for the competitiveness of every Member State .
It must be dealt with , moreover , in a manner which is compatible throughout the Member States .
This is an extremely difficult task , therefore , and I welcome the fact that work has begun on it already .
I can give you the exact timetable again , as we see it .
By 1 January 1998 , the date of deregulation , we aim to have achieved six objectives : firstly , creating the option of carrier choice ; secondly , number portability for local lines ; thirdly , promoting national harmonization , in other words we are seeking to ensure the convergence of national numbering plans ; fourthly , the creation of a European telephony numbering space and common access ; fifth , establishing a common framework for number regulation and management ; this will then ensure that divergent national rules are not established .
The next step will be carrier pre-selection by 1 January 2000 .
Naturally , this will be much simpler for the user .
We envisage the extension of number portability for users of mobile and personal communication networks as well as for users of generic services and then from the year 2000 the implementation of a long-term numbering plan involving the creation of the European country code with the administration and management of the code transferred to the European level .
( DE ) We hope that we shall succeed .
I know that we have the support of the House .
Sometimes the Member States tend to drag their feet , but that , at any rate , is our timetable .
Question No 39 by David Bowe ( H-0682 / 96 )
Subject : Extraction solvents
The annex to Directive 88 / 344 / EEC on extraction solvents used in the production of foodstuffs and food ingredients , ( revised 92 / 115 / EEC and 94 / 52 / EEC ) does not list the food extraction solvent 1.1.1.2-tetrafluoroethane.
Although the UK Scientific Committee for Food has declared it acceptable for use , the 1.1.1.2 tetrafluoroethane extraction process , or its products , cannot be marketed because it is not listed in the above directive .
Since the mechanism to review the Solvents Directive is so slow and bureaucratic , companies which develop such innovative products face financial ruin .
Will the Commission ensure that there will be an urgent review of the Solvents Directive , a part of which would be the inclusion of an additional article to give Member States the opportunity to allow the marketing and use of new products on a temporary basis , subject to the approval of the Commission ?
In the Commission 's opinion , considerable delays can occur in the application of Directive 88 / 344 for the approval of new solvents .
And that is Mr Bowe 's fear too .
The main reason for the delays is that amendments to the directive can only be made through the full codecision procedure , with two readings in the House and the adoption of a common position before the second reading .
In other words , Parliament 's understandable wish to process these amendments through the normal legislative procedure , and particularly the codecision procedure , creates delays .
We have always said so .
One cannot have it both ways .
If you wish to have decisions taken quickly , there must a different choice of procedure , and that in no way excludes a role for Parliament , as we have repeatedly pointed out .
If , as in this case , you insist on the codecision procedure , it will take longer .
However , we have submitted an amendment to the solvents directive , allowing tetrafluoroethane to be used in foodstuffs .
This proposal , published this year , has already been forwarded to Parliament for an opinion at first reading .
The Commission hopes that the issue can be considered quickly , so as to minimize the financial losses suffered by food producers as a consequence of the prohibition of this solvent .
We agree with Mr Bowe that the solvents directive must be reviewed in order to avoid such delays , but this will mean a change of attitude on your part .
We cannot resolve the matter without you .
If the House insists on the codecision procedure , I cannot promise you that decisions will be taken quickly .
Other directives , such as the one on food additives , set out procedures that the Member States can use for granting provisional approvals .
However , we would prefer that when it is a matter of adjusting the rules to keep pace with technical progress - and that is clearly what is happening here - such cases should be handed over to the Commission , with Parliament , if it so wished , retaining some form of involvement , or a blocking right where it believed that it had to block a Commission decision .
That would probably be the optimum solution , but it would require the good will of all concerned .
I should like to thank Mr Bangemann for what he said and in particular I would like to thank him on behalf of the small and medium-sized enterprises in my constituency which will look very favourably upon this particular proposal for change .
You will have my assistance in ensuring that this passes through Parliament as quickly as possible .
In a personal letter he has written to me he mentions the fact that this has been a slow process of European legislation not being operated at the right speed .
In fact , what we need is not deregulation but correct and efficient regulation .
I can only endorse your thinking .
I hope it will spread around here .
Question No 40 by Marjatta Stenius-Kaukonen ( H-0714 / 96 )
Subject : Endotoxin content of breast-milk substitutes
According to information published in the last few days , breast-milk substitutes have been found to contain large quantities of endotoxins .
An international research group has stated that there are a number of brands of breast-milk substitutes - including Nestlé 's products - on the European market with toxin contents of up to 700 nanograms per millilitre .
This could seriously endanger the health of small children , as even a thousandth of a nanogram can cause symptoms , such as influenza , in adults if it enters the bloodstream .
A maximum level for the bacteria content of breast-milk substitutes should therefore be set as urgently as possible .
Is the Commission aware of the findings of this research , and what measures will it take to protect consumers ?
Mr President , I think that we have now gone right through the food chain : this time it is infant food and , of course , that is a very important element of food policy .
We are aware of this matter of endotoxins , and of press reports of the study referred to in the question .
According to the information available to the Commission , the study did not appear in scientific journals , nor was it submitted to other scientists for checking .
Many foodstuffs , including infant formula , contain endotoxins .
These are part of bacteria cells which are naturally present in food .
They are large molecules which , when they have been consumed , do not normally pass through the wall of the intestine into the bloodstream , and therefore scientists do not consider it dangerous for adults or infants to consume milk or milk products that contain endotoxins .
Endotoxins can only cause illnesses if they enter the bloodstream , but obviously they do not do so from food .
Current scientific opinion is that there is no need to fix limit values for endotoxins in infant formula , or microbiological limit values to keep the level of endotoxins down , but we shall continue to follow developments on this issue , and if new scientific findings change the situation , we will take appropriate action .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Bangemann for his reply .
I looked into this issue myself after having tabled the question , and obtained similar answers to the one Mr Bangemann has given here .
However , it has been claimed in the Finnish press that once its packaging has been opened , breast-milk substitute should not be kept for long .
Powdered products should always be mixed with good-quality water and used without delay .
It is therefore important that these breast-milk substitutes should be monitored , as in general should the question of what milk is drunk .
It has also been claimed that these endotoxins were enabled to multiply because poor raw materials were used , hygiene was inadequate and the product was kept for a long time : all indicators of poor quality .
Is there now any need , in general , to check the quality of milk and breast-milk substitutes better than at present , and has the Commission considered any action in this respect ?
Of course , if someone is careless with foods of this kind - if they are left open for a long time and standing around unrefrigerated , for example - that is the sort of carelessness which is virtually beyond the reach of legislation .
What might perhaps be considered - and I myself do not know whether this already happens - would be for infant formula to be required to carry a warning , stating that it must be handled carefully , must not be left standing around open , and so on .
We should be glad to check whether there is already such a provision in the Member States , or in our own regulations and directives .
If there is not , then introducing it is probably the only step that we can take .
Legislation is , of course , powerless to prevent people from handling these foods carelessly , in spite of all the instructions .
Question No 41 by Maj Theorin ( H-0628 / 96 )
Subject : EMU
The Trade Union Confederation in Sweden has raised the question whether the democratic basis of monetary policy decisions will be eliminated in future .
Other major players in the debate in Sweden have asked whether further steps must inevitably be taken towards a common financial policy following the introduction of a common monetary policy .
Does the Commission consider that the democratic basis of monetary policy decisions will be lost when the power of decision-making is transferred from the Member States ' elected representatives to European Central Bank officials ?
Does the Commission consider that the corollary of introducing a common monetary policy is that further steps must be taken towards a common financial policy and a common fiscal policy ?
Mr President , just like the honourable Member , the Commission sets great store by respect for democratic principles .
I would point out , in this context , that the Treaty on European Union was ratified in accordance with the national procedures of every Member State , in other words democratically .
As regards the content of the Treaty , Article 109a stipulates that the President , the Vice-President and the other members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank are to be appointed by common accord of the governments of the Member States at the level of Heads of State or Government , after consultation of the European Parliament .
This appointment procedure therefore ensures complete transparency and democracy .
Moreover , the protocol on the statute of the European System of Central Banks contains provisions for supervision of the Bank and its operations .
Hence the European Central Bank is obliged to present an annual report to Parliament , the Council and the Commission , as well as the European Council .
The President of the European Central Bank and the other members of the Executive Board may , at the request of this House , be questioned by the committees responsible .
The smooth operation of the economic and monetary union will be based on two decision-making centres : one monetary , the other economic .
The monetary focus will be the future European Central Bank , whose role is to conduct monetary policy in complete independence .
This will guarantee the credibility of the European currency ; it will also underpin the fight against inflation , which has a devastating impact on our economies , and especially on the most disadvantaged sections of the population .
The Council of Ministers , composed of members of governments and therefore democratically constituted , will form the economic focus .
It will have a major economic role , since it is to coordinate economic policy .
It will lay down exchange-rate policy - under Article 109 of the Treaty - and will be competent in the areas of employment and economic cooperation .
Economic and monetary union is therefore a well-balanced and democratic initiative , in which each institution will have a well-defined and valuable role to play .
That is also the prerequisite for both its smooth functioning and its acceptance by our citizens .
Thank you for the answer .
In Sweden , an overwhelming majority takes a negative view of EMU .
Certainly , that is for different reasons .
Two of the Government 's foremost representatives , the Prime Minister and the Finance Minister , think that EMU and a common monetary policy are not possible without a common financial policy , i.e. a common policy on taxation and expenditure .
The American economist , Martin Feldstein , writes in the Economist that the economic arguments in favour of EMU are so dubious and the risks so palpable that the project would never have been pursued if there had not been strong subsidiary reasons of a political nature .
The two arguments he cites are neo-liberalism and federalism .
In my view , democracy will not increase by taking away from national parliaments and governments the right to take decisions on financial and monetary policy .
Scrutiny , Commissioner , is not the same thing as democracy and policy decided by democratically elected representatives .
Monetary union and its corollary , a common financial policy , are the federalists ' dream , but a nightmare for democracy .
I think we need to distinguish between two things : on the one hand , the effects of economic and monetary union , which will be beneficial for the economy in general and for our citizens .
Indeed , it is a good thing to reduce deficits , above all in terms of employment .
Introducing the single currency , in other words eliminating monetary fluctuations , is also a good thing in terms of growth and employment .
On the other hand , there is the question of explaining matters to our citizens , convincing them that EMU is both necessary and a good thing .
In this respect , I believe that the campaign mounted jointly by the Commission and the European Parliament is an excellent model , and all the Members of Parliament and of the Commission should feel themselves involved .
Progress towards full monetary union calls for the irrevocable linking of Member State currencies to the single currency .
I do not know what happens in the rest of the European Union but the principle that the British Parliament operates on is that no Parliament can bind its successors .
Surely asking for an irrevocable linking of a currency , which means for ever , is asking too much .
Or is there some way in the future whereby a Member State which thinks the system is not working could pull out ?
You are raising a theological question here .
Under the European system , one can enter at any time , but one can never leave , and in this respect the Maastricht Treaty is no different from the Treaty of Rome or the other European treaties .
Having said that , I believe that the advantages are sufficiently great and sufficiently positive for the population to appreciate the benefits of this Union .
I would add this , which seems a very important point to me : now that capital movements have been completely liberalized , monetary sovereignty will not be diminished by economic and monetary union .
EMU will enable our Member States , collectively , to regain the sovereignty over their monetary affairs which - I am afraid - they are losing further every day .
This is a crucial question which Mrs Theorin has raised .
I should like to ask Mr de Silguy where he can find any economic theorists who suggest that a country which has oil revenues should respond in the same way as one with an energy deficit if the price of oil is halved or doubled .
It is not honest to put forward a proposal for a monetary union which deals with exchange-rate and monetary issues without there also being parallel powers in relation to financial policy , incomes policy and the other forms of economic policy .
One may be in favour of a centrally determined economic policy , but then all the policy instruments must be in place .
One cannot be in favour of a separation of policy instruments such as that contained in the Maastricht Treaty .
By referring to oil , you are taking as your example the country - one of the two countries - which does indeed have the possibility of opting out , and it will be up to that country to decide whether or not it wishes to join in the economic and monetary union .
I note that oil revenue has declined considerably over the past 20 years or so , even in the case of that country , and that we are witnessing a growing convergence between the European economies .
I believe that in order to make monetary union work , it is important for budgetary policies to be well coordinated and for us all to be pursuing the same objectives .
Centralized management of economic and budgetary policy is out of the question .
To my mind , that would conflict with the spirit of the Treaty and with our traditions .
It will be a matter of ensuring , through the measures which are introduced - I am thinking in particular of the stability pact , on which the House is soon to receive a proposal from the Commission - that our economic and budgetary policies are conducted along similar lines , in other words that we decide on common objectives and ensure that the objectives pursued by all the Member States are complementary and coherent .
If that were not the case , moreover , the markets would ultimately penalize such divergent approaches .
That would then result in monetary upheavals and increases in interest rates and , eventually , in slower growth and increased unemployment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in this instance the Commission does not share the honourable Member 's analysis .
Unemployment does not date from the ratification of the Treaty on European Union ; it began to loom large in Europe at the time of the first oil crisis in 1973 .
I would add that exchange-rate fluctuations have also had an extremely adverse effect on employment in Europe , as we saw in 1992 and 1993 , and indeed in 1995 .
What are the causes of unemployment , to put it very simply ?
There are two , the first being the state of the economy .
Is it sufficiently well known that the monetary fluctuations of spring 1995 alone cost Europe 2 % in growth and 1.5 million jobs over the two years 1995 and 1996 ?
Only sustainable , non-inflationary growth in the medium term will help to create jobs .
But the causes are also largely structural , and I am thinking in particular of the over-rigidity of the labour market , which is preventing the Union from making the most of growth to create jobs .
In order to make substantial inroads into unemployment , the Commission is proposing an overall strategy , which I have already had an opportunity of presenting to the House .
Even though economic recovery , coinciding with the establishment of economic and monetary union , is now a precondition for job creation in Europe , it is vital that appropriate structural measures should be taken at the same time by the Member States .
Moreover , this is the thrust of the confidence pact proposed by Mr Santer .
The Commission is therefore shouldering in full its responsibilities in the field of employment , which , I would remind you , is the main priority of our economic policy , so much so that in its submission to the IGC the Commission asked that , in the Treaty , employment should be regarded by the Member States of the Union as a matter of common interest , on the same footing as economic policy and exchange-rate policy .
Yes , Commissioner , the two are linked .
The Maastricht Treaty has after all clearly shown that what is regarded as Europe 's biggest problem has not been solved .
If the intention had been to prioritize employment , the course then taken would not have been instead to prioritize low inflation and price stability and to leave employment outside the Maastricht Treaty .
That was not regulated .
Some 18-20 million people are unemployed .
In Sweden , for example , unemployment was 2 % when we applied to join the EU .
Today , five years on , it is 14 % .
It will not do , of course , to say that all this is due to adjustment problems in connection with EMU . The reverse should be happening .
Unemployment should be coming down .
My questions have not been answered .
What proposals does the Commissioner have to bring down unemployment ?
When will these proposals be put forward , and what constitutional and other political proposals will you be making so that those who are without work can feel reasonably assured that this is what is being prioritized and not budgetary principles ?
I can no longer call to mind all the figures , but it is interesting to examine the growth in public deficits and in unemployment .
I note that since 1975 , public deficits and the number of persons out of work have risen alongside one another in Europe .
Consequently , slashing public deficits will not solve the employment problem .
If public deficits created jobs , then given their level in Europe , we would have surplus employment .
On the contrary , I believe that only a rigorous budgetary policy and an overhaul of public finances can create better and adequate conditions for achieving stronger growth .
Let me tell you that if we brought down Europe 's public deficits by 1 % , we would release ECU 60 billion per year , which could be used to fund not debt and deficits , but productive investment .
The first precondition for job creation , therefore , is a return to healthy , stable , noninflationary growth , and this involves an overhaul of public finances .
Apart from that , the bulk of unemployment is structural in nature .
The Commission has on several occasions presented to this House , the Council of Ministers and the European Council its global strategies on employment .
I would point out here that , insofar as unemployment is largely of structural origin , structural measures are the only way to combat it .
There is no miracle cure , and this cannot be done overnight .
I would add that in almost all cases , national measures are what is required .
I am thinking in particular of labour market regulations , rules on working time and reductions in the burden of taxation and social costs weighing down on labour-intensive industries .
So there is primarily a need for national measures here .
In a number of areas , however , we can complete and complement at Community level the efforts required at national level , by strengthening the social dialogue and using the budgetary resources at our disposal .
So let us not reverse the roles in this area .
And let us also not seek to destroy the principle of subsidiarity ; let us hope that the governments and the Member States will shoulder their responsibilities alongside the social partners , to supplement what is being done by the Commission .
We have seen during the last week the response by labour , by workers , by trade unions in Germany to the proposed cuts in public services and cuts in public benefits as a consequence of the German Government 's determination to meet the Maastricht criteria for EMU .
Can I ask this question , and it is a sincere one : what flexibility do the Maastricht criteria allow and permit ?
For example , if a particular Member State 's government was determined to use its resources to create positive jobs , and that involved what could be considered a breach of the Maastricht criteria , would that kind of determination be regarded as unacceptable by the Commission and the Council itself ?
Mr President , for us , creating jobs is inevitably a good thing !
We should not debate the wrong issues .
Single currency or not , at present there is no other way for the Member States to reduce their public deficits .
You quite rightly mention the use of resources to create jobs : well , 50 % of domestic savings are currently being siphoned off to fund the deficits of the Member States and social security institutions .
These funds would be better used if they were earmarked for job creation , and that is precisely why public deficits must be reduced .
There is no other solution : if the Member States did not create jobs , the markets would punish them and , ultimately , interest rates in those countries would rise .
Consequently , growth would fall and it would become even more difficult to create jobs .
So it is not a matter of making the Treaty more flexible .
We shall neither add anything to the Treaty , nor delete anything from it .
We shall apply the Treaty as it stands .
And I am confident that a significant number of Member States will meet the conditions laid down in the Treaty by the end of next year .
Let us not set the entrance examination before the student is in the right class to sit it .
Let us not pre-empt that examination .
It would be counter-productive and inappropriate to do so , and the effect would be unsettling whilst the macro-economic priority for the Member States today - even if it is not sufficient to create jobs - is to overhaul their finances and not to live beyond their means .
Although from a legal point of view , economic and monetary union can function with just two Member States , the Commission considers - and it is a simple matter of common sense , to my mind - that without France , Germany and a significant number of other Member States , the benefits and advantages of EMU would obviously be diminished .
Having said that , there is no predetermined list .
Given the progress being made on convergence , the Commission is convinced - as I said a moment ago - that a significant number of countries will be ready to participate in EMU from the outset .
However , in line with the statement by the Heads of State and Government in Madrid last December , the decision to proceed with economic and monetary union will be taken as early as possible in 1998 by the European Council , on the basis of reports from the European Monetary Institute and the Commission , and after consultation of Parliament .
The evaluation process will therefore take place in late 1997 or early 1998 , on the basis of the results for 1997 .
The Commission can do many things , but it has not yet learnt how to gaze into a crystal ball , so I cannot predict next year 's results .
I would point out here that we should not tinker with the timetable ; that would be a futile exercise .
Discussion of this subject now can only hinder the process of convergence .
A relaxation of the efforts to achieve budgetary consolidation would be unwelcome , since the present situation still calls for the reduction in deficits to be continued , and in certain cases intensified , because - and I would stress the point , since it is crucial - this helps to boost the savings available for job-creating investment , and hence to bring down interest rates .
Thank you , Mr President , and thank you , Commissioner , for the answer .
The reason why I ask the question is that there is great hesitancy with regard to EMU all across Europe , and that worries me .
If only a few countries are involved when EMU is launched , I think that hesitancy will be prolonged in Europe .
On the other hand , if a large number of countries join and only a few stay outside , I think that public opinion in those countries which remain outside and in which hesitancy is perhaps considerable , including my country , Sweden , will eventually turn , and that those countries will participate in EMU , since the advantages and strength of EMU will be the greater the more countries participate in it .
As regards the relationship between employment and EMU , it is clear that an excessively harsh budgetary policy in a short-range perspective may have a negative effect on employment .
In the longer term , however , I see no conflict between the fight against inflation and the fight against unemployment .
As the author is not present , Question No 48 lapses .
Question No 49 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0624 / 96 )
Subject : Environmental rules in the new Member States
During their membership negotiations , Sweden , Finland and Austria secured the right to maintain certain more stringent environmental standards for a period of four years .
During that transitional period , the EU is to review its rules with the aim of tightening them up .
A DG XI document dated 10 April 1996 reveals that the Commission considers it impossible for the EU to raise its environmental standards to match those which apply in the new Member States and that it is also not clear whether the provisions of Article 100a ( 4 ) regarding the possibility of continuing to apply special rules are applicable in this case .

Can the Commission confirm that it does not consider it possible to tighten up EU rules so as to match the standards which apply in the new Member States ?
Does it consider that Article 100a ( 4 ) is applicable to the transitional arrangements if the EU does not raise its standards during the four-year period ?
As I have already said on previous occasions , it is very high on the Commission 's political agenda to complete the review before the end of the four-year transitional period , with results which are satisfactory for the new Member States .
As regards the Commission document of 10 April 1996 which is referred to in the question , this document does not correspond to the Commission 's official stance .
As I understand it , the document was an internal discussion paper intended for use by our services .
It sets out a range of alternative scenarios if the review process is not completed by the end of 1998 .
As for my own views on this matter , I would refer to my speech to Parliament on 3 July 1996 , in which I made it clear that my position has always been and continues to be that in my sector , in other words the environment , none of the new Member States should be obliged to reduce their health and environmental standards after the expiry of the transitional period .
I was somewhat surprised at the press coverage following the debate of 3 July , but that is nonetheless my position .
I can confirm that the technical side of reviewing many of the provisions involved is making good progress , and that it will probably be possible to complete the review in the course of the transitional period .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her answer and , especially , for the clarification that this document does not represent the Commission 's position .
But this document is very interesting , so I will ask two supplementary questions about it .
The document refers to another document from the Legal Service of 13 December 1995 , which states that there are problems in applying the so-called environmental guarantee to the new Member States .
I wonder whether this document is or can be made public , and what kind of problems are there in relation to Article 100a ( 4 ) , the so-called environmental guarantee ?
The document also concludes that it would be difficult to get a majority in the Council if the standards which are the highest in Europe were put forward .
I should like to hear the Commission 's views on the matter .
Clearly , the whole procedure means that it will also be a question of reaching a political agreement among a majority of the Member States , and of course I cannot provide any kind of guarantee in that respect .
There may be Member States which have a different view from mine and that of the Commission , so problems may arise along the way .
I would assume that the Member States are fully aware of how the internal procedures operate .
What I can promise is that we in the Commission will ensure that things are ready so that it is possible to have the political discussions , and my own position is that we should achieve the highest possible limits , so that the countries do not have to reduce their standards .
That is what we are aiming at .
Question No 50 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-0625 / 96 )
Subject : Environmental clean-up operations on the Kola Peninsula
The environmental situation on the Kola Peninsula may be described as disastrous , with radiation levels , for instance , 500 times higher than normal European levels .
The problems this is causing also affect the Member States of the EU .
Is the Commission investigating the possibilities for the EU to assist with environmental measures on the Kola Peninsula ?
Are any specific measures planned ?
The Commission has no information to support the claim that radiation levels on the Kola Peninsula in the north-west of Russia are 500 times higher than normal European levels .
Large quantities of radioactive waste are being accumulated in the region .
The Commission has recently completed a study which included the collection of data with a view to compiling a register of radioactive waste .
The report on this is about to be published .
In addition , the Commission is currently carrying out a study to assess the radiological effects of the dumping of nuclear reactors in Arctic waters .
At present , all radioactive waste on the peninsula is kept in medium-term storage facilities either on land or on board ships .
Most of these facilities are unsuitable for long-term storage and incompatible with modern safety requirements .
Because of the economic crisis in Russia , the producers of the waste have not been able to build new radioactive waste management facilities .
In 1995 , it was agreed that TACIS should support a number of projects in this region connected with the disposal of radioactive waste .
A sum of ECU 5 million was earmarked for this work .
Moreover , a further ECU 1 m was allocated in the 1996 budget for work on removing spent nuclear fuel from the storage vessel ' Lepse ' which is berthed in the harbour in Murmansk .
I have dealt with questions on other occasions here in Parliament , and I would simply emphasize once again that we take the problems which have arisen as regards the Kola Peninsula very seriously .
Thank you for the answer , Commissioner .
The situation on the Kola Peninsula is catastrophic .
Waste storage facilities are leaking , and radiation levels are high .
According to a document from the Commission , they are 500 times higher than normal in Europe .
No other country in the world has so many nuclear power reactors in such a small area , and a couple of these are among the ten most dangerous in the world .
According to the Bellona Foundation , 16 nuclear reactors have been dumped in the Kara Sea .
Vessels are rusting apart , and their radioactive cargoes are sinking .
Something must be done .
It is not just the future of the Kola Peninsula that is at stake , but the future of Europe as a whole .
We are all threatened .
In 1995 , Norway produced a booklet targeted at the inhabitants .
What is the EU doing ?
What resources shall we be devoting to this major problem in the future , and is the EU cooperating with other operators ?
I share the questioner 's concern at these problems , and that is why the Commission is actively tackling the matter .
Let me make one or two further comments as regards the TACIS projects .
The largest project involves the disposal of radioactive waste and will be completed with the building of a depository and a safety assessment of this facility and the location chosen .
This entails expenditure of ECU 3 million .
Other projects cover medium-term storage of radioactive waste , with an assessment of the existing facilities and preparation for the building of new ones ; this will involve ECU 500 000 .
In addition , there are plans for an assessment of the management and storage of spent fuel in the region , including transport facilities , the development of a radioactive waste management policy for the region , and work of a more general kind to train staff in the management of radioactive waste .
Finally , there is also the ' Lepse ' project to which I referred before .
The Commission is therefore active in this sector , and is naturally also seeking to cooperate with other interested parties in the area .
Question No 51 by John Iversen ( H-0626 / 96 )
Subject : Eco-label
Does the Commission intend to instruct the environmental organizations to draw up the criteria for the eco-label and thereby restore public confidence in the label ?
The Commission is currently changing the arrangements for eco-labelling .
One of the options being considered is the partial privatization of the eco-label by commissioning a European eco-labelling organization to draw up criteria in cooperation with the relevant authorities and other parties concerned .
In its programme of work for 1996 , the Commission announced a proposal to amend Regulation No 880 / 92 on a Community scheme for eco-labelling .
The main reason for the change - as I am sure Mr Iversen knows - is the need to improve the arrangements and make them more effective , on the basis of the experience gained so far .
Under the terms of the current regulation , the Commission itself determines the criteria for the eco-label , with the aid of what seems to me a very complicated procedure .
The Commission is therefore in the process of looking at ways of transferring this task to an appropriate independent body under an amended regulation .
We are still reflecting on the form and composition of such a body .
We believe that independence and impartiality in determining the criteria are crucially important for the credibility and success of the eco-label , and therefore its effectiveness in practice .
Regardless of what solution we finally propose , the Commission will ensure that the proposal makes provision for appropriate involvement of the environmental organizations in the work on drawing up the criteria for the eco-label .
And apart from the amendment of the regulation , the Commission is already ensuring that the environmental organizations are consulted when determining the criteria under the present scheme .
Thank you for that very good answer .
I think it was intriguing to hear that the Commission still has some vision as regards the eco-label .
I am also very pleased with the way in which this is to be done .
I have only one question , which goes a little further .
I am slightly concerned about the development of the eco-label .
I have heard that the Danish Government - and it may be that other governments will do the same - now wishes to endorse a different eco-label .
I really cannot have anything against this , but on the other hand I do not think that the consumer will be better off if there are several different kinds of eco-label .
So I should like to hear your comments on the fact that the Danish view is clearly that you can have the swan as an eco-label and at the same time the EU eco-label too .
Do you think that this is possible ?
Surely the consumer will be the loser in this game with several different kinds of eco-label ?
There are already several eco-labels that exist today .
One of the better known is a label which operates extremely well in Germany in particular , and then there is the Scandinavian eco-label with a swan which has been mentioned .
My impression has been that if we have not become more recognized at European level , it is because our procedures have been so slow .
It has simply taken too long for any proposals to go through .
In a way , that is also why we are still using the present eco-label , and we have tried to make the process we have now so effective that we really can put an approval through , while at the same time trying to improve the system .
It is my hope that when we have these improved arrangements , it will also mean that there is clearer guidance for consumers .
Until then , we are bound to say that it is better for consumers to have some form of guidance than none at all .
As the author is not present , Question No 52 lapses .
Question No 53 by Eva Kjer Hansen ( H-0656 / 96 )
Subject : Confidential declaration annexed to the Directive on the disposal of PCBs and PCTs
Can the Commissioner confirm that it was the Commission which insisted on not making public the declaration on the interpretation of the Directive and that the declaration conflicts with the text of the Directive itself ?
Does the Commissioner believe that secrecy for such declarations can be reconciled with the 1995 Code of Conduct on openness , and is within democratic principles in general ?
Does the Commissioner not agree that this secret declaration will lead to unreasonable discrimination among EU citizens , as the interpretation of the legislation will vary from one Member State to the other ?
The Commission has already had the opportunity of explaining its position on the question of declarations attached to the Council 's minutes in an exchange of letters with the President of the European Parliament , Mr Hänsch , and in its answer to the oral question tabled last year in Parliament by Mr Krarup , Mr Cot and Mr Casini .
I shall therefore briefly restate the Commission 's position as it was set out in that context .
The Commission fully supports greater openness and transparency in the legislative process , and therefore welcomed the code of conduct adopted by the Council in October 1995 .
The code of conduct means that declarations attached to the minutes are published almost automatically .
In the specific case of the directive on PCBs and PCTs , it emerged from the discussions in connection with the final adoption of the directive by the Council that a declaration which had been drawn up at the start of the negotiations - in January 1995 , before the Council adopted the code of conduct later that year and thus during the previous Commission - was unsatisfactory from the point of view of legal certainty .
In other words , there was a risk that the legal situation would be unclear .
The text of this declaration was consequently reworded .
It naturally has to be ensured that the obligations under the directive on PCBs and PCTs are interpreted in a uniform way by the Member States .
The declaration is now being published with the directive , which is expected to be finally adopted within a few days .
Personally , I find this solution satisfactory , especially since publication is now taking place .
The Commission will continue to respect all its commitments to the European Parliament and keep it fully informed , as laid down in the Treaty and in the code of conduct between the Commission of which I am a member and Parliament .
First of all , I should like to say that I am grateful for that answer , and then I would stress that I am amazed that the Commissioner can now say that she personally is pleased that this is being published .
Is it not correct that it was the Commissioner herself and the Commission in general who insisted that this declaration should be kept secret ?
The only reason it is being published is because Denmark blocked a continuation of the secrecy over the declaration .
I should like to ask what the Commission 's position is , generally speaking .
Can the Commissioner give a guarantee that we shall not see any more secret declarations in the sector for which she is responsible ?
Does the Commissioner believe that , whatever position she might state now , it would be backed by the Commission as a whole ?
Can the Commissioner give Parliament a guarantee here that we shall not see any more secret declarations from the Commission ?
I find it sad that I cannot even get an answer to questions that are put in writing , but I should be glad to have a clear statement here from the Commissioner by way of a follow-up .
I honestly think that the questioner was given a very clear answer the first time .
This was a case where there was a lack of legal consistency between the secret declaration and the proposal itself , and so the Commission felt the matter should be taken up again .
That is what was done .
This is an amendment of the directive and it is being published , so I do not recognize the interpretation that this is only happening in the light of a response from one particular Member State .
Moreover , I would entirely stand by what I said in my first answer , namely that we in the Commission naturally wish to adhere to the terms of the code of conduct which we have agreed with Parliament .
Question No 54 by Alex Smith ( H-0658 / 96 )
Subject : Hazards of depleted uranium
On 19 September 1994 , the Commissioner Mr Paleokrassas wrote to me asserting that in the Commission 's opinion the health and environmental hazards posed by depleted uranium were minimal .
More recently , the British newspaper reported on 21 July this year that the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority , in a report written in 1993 , confirms that there are toxic hazards of depleted uranium and that ' the problem will not go away ' .
Will the Commission obtain a copy of this report - entitled ' Kuwait depleted uranium contamination ' - and reassess its views on the dangers of depleted uranium ?
The Commission is not in possession of the documents concerning the consequences of the use of depleted uranium in the Gulf War which are quoted in the ' Sunday Times ' article referred to in the question .
I know there has been extensive correspondence between the Commission and the honourable Member on this subject .
At present , the Commission has no basis for changing the views it has already expressed in that correspondence .
Commissioner , will you endeavour to get a copy of this report and assess its implications ?
It seems as if the British Government does not take it seriously and subsidiarity has not worked in this case .
Would the Commission be prepared to take a more active role ?
Let me add to the more general information on the risks to health and the environment connected with the use of ammunition containing depleted uranium by saying that when it comes to the question of risks in terms of radiological toxicity , this must be distinguished from the chemical toxicity of the material , which is comparable to that of lead , though it may be much greater .
It is different when the material is used in ammunition .
Here , the main risk is associated with the particles which are produced by heat and friction at the moment of impact of a missile .
Such particles will , for the most part , be insoluble .
The risk attached to exposure to these particles is therefore determined more by the low radiological toxicity of depleted uranium than by its chemical toxicity .
One of the possible ways of exposure is by inhaling particles into the lungs , but the resuspension process is very ineffective , and once the particles have settled after an impact , the view is that the risk of inhalation will be much reduced , compared with that in the initial phase .
I shall not go into further detail on this question , but simply say that we shall of course continue to monitor the issue .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions not taken for lack of time will be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Reduction in working hours ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0207 / 96 ) by Mr Rocard on a reduction in working hours .
Madam President , let me begin by thanking Michel Rocard for his excellent report , even though he is not here for the moment .
Mass unemployment is Europe 's biggest problem today .
It is an economic cost in terms of passive labour market support and it is a social cost in terms of increased exclusion and the spread of drug abuse and crime .
In the long term , it is probably a cost to democracy , since those who exist outside the labour market lose their faith in the democratic system .
Action on unemployment is needed at every level : at local , regional , national and European level .
No single measure is sufficient on its own ; a whole battery of measures is needed .
Above all , we need an economic policy in which the fight against unemployment is given at least equal priority with the fight against inflation .
We need growth , and we need increased demand .
In addition , we need a massive effort of training in order to raise the level of skills across the board in Europe 's workforce .
But we also need a reduction in working hours in order to create jobs for those who are without work today .
There is no single measure that will solve this problem , it needs a combination of measures .
In my home country , Sweden , economists , employers and trade unionists are , with few exceptions , vehemently opposed to a reduction in working hours , but I no longer share their view .
I have been influenced by Michel Rocard and his work in this report . I think that a reduction in working hours , together with other measures , will make a worthwhile contribution to the fight against unemployment .
We need more exchanges of experience across national frontiers to find out which of the various models have been most successful in experiments that have been conducted and are still ongoing .
Also needed is an analysis to determine what incentives are required to bring about reductions in working hours .
Michel Rocard has drawn attention to an approach on incentives that may be successful .
It is an important contribution , but it is also important for other contributions to be made .
Apart from the fact that working hours reductions can help to create more jobs , they can of course also improve the quality of life for the individual - for the unemployed person who can get a job , but also for one who already has a job but gains more time for the family and for leisure activities , voluntary service and political work .
These are the ways in which a reduction in working hours can serve us : by increasing our quality of life , but also by creating more jobs .
Madam President , I have to recognize one virtue on Mr Rocard 's part , which is that , faced with all the statements of good intentions as regards the social disaster of unemployment in the European Union , he has at least managed to submit to Parliament a detailed and specific report which has given rise to a long and intense debate .
This is therefore an impressive personal achievement on the part of Mr Rocard .
I also acknowledge the fact that he has made great efforts to unify positions , since , faced with the tragedy of unemployment , we must not and cannot adopt inflexible stances .
This is an issue which , in one way or another , affects us all .
Nevertheless , the rapporteur 's proposals for a reduction in working hours suffer from a number of shortcomings which must be taken into account .
Firstly , it is not proven that reducing working hours creates jobs .
The report contains an inconsistency , since on the one hand , the rapporteur calls for studies and analysis of the experiments carried out in this field , whilst on the other , he proposes that the measures be implemented almost immediately .
We are in favour of a longer process of reflection , study and analysis .


I would also remind Mr Rocard that his comrade Felipe González , for example - who , after 13 years of socialist administration , left Spain with the highest unemployment rate in Europe - proposed precisely the same measure during the last electoral campaign . However , the two sides of industry declined to pick up the gauntlet .
Furthermore , it will be difficult to use public money to compensate for the reduction in wages which a reduction in working hours will bring , as Mr Rocard proposes , since this would mean exchanging one mechanism for redistributing income for another .
And ultimately , such a measure would still be financed by the taxpayer .
If the public authorities were to promote the mechanism described in the report , this would lead to trade union and social demands for its introduction across all sectors and businesses .
If I were to see that my neighbour 's working hours were reduced whilst his wages remained the same thanks to public money , I would immediately demand the same treatment for myself .
And finally , measures to adjust or reduce working hours or make them more flexible cannot be imposed : they must be discussed and , where appropriate , decided on - and the rapporteur also recognizes this - by the two sides of industry and in the workplace .
A valid instrument for this purpose already exists : the multiannual employment plans which , once they have been discussed by the sectors involved - principally management and labour - must form the vehicle for each Member State to implement the measures to adjust or reduce working hours , with a view to combatting unemployment .
Madam President , the proposal to use generalized reductions in working hours to try to combat the high levels of unemployment in European Union countries seems to arise from an attitude of surrender .
The proposal amounts to accepting that it is impossible to widen the employment base .
The only positive and credible response to unemployment is to create new job opportunities through new entrepreneurial initiatives .
From this viewpoint there is a need to develop greater flexibility in the labour market .
The thesis that a generalized reduction in working hours would automatically bring about an increase in jobs simply cannot be accepted , because it has not been proved .
Countries like the United States and Japan , which have not reduced working hours but actually kept them longer than in Europe , have recorded job increases .
What is needed is encouragement and incentives to the competitiveness of firms , particularly SMEs and micro-businesses .
A reduction in working time would involve a serious loss of competitiveness .
Dreaming up regulations which put constraints on firms ' organizational options and production needs would compromise their very existence , not to mention the incentive to take a second job .
To combat unemployment it is necessary to reorganize working time by using various formulae such as the relationship between full-time and part-time , temporary work , part-time forms of entry designed for young people with little experience and part-time separation for older workers .
Reducing working time does not mean creating occupational opportunity , it means making existing labour more expensive .
Madam President , I cannot address myself to all the aspects of the report in one minute .
I shall therefore confine myself to paragraph 2 , which is the crux - and , if I may say so , the jewel - of Mr Rocard 's report , because this is the most innovative proposal that we have heard for some years .
It has the merit of cutting the Gordian knot between competitiveness and reductions in working hours by showing that such reductions can be compatible with businesses being competitive .
This is the key proposal , because it reopens the debate and is shown to be economically possible and socially appropriate .
It is in this spirit that I should like to offer the support of the Liberal Group for this intelligent and innovative approach , which could represent the kind of device that was sought by Archimedes to lift the heaviest of weights , namely , in today 's terms , the absence of full employment .
Madam President , one way of attacking unemployment is undoubtedly by reducing working time for those who are in work .
But that reduction and that aim only makes sense if it is to create more jobs for those who are out of work .
Rocard had that in mind , in other words , reducing working hours to create jobs .
I must compliment him on this initiative .
However , following all of the negotiations and compromises which have taken place , in our opinion he has lost direction and it would be justified to change the title and not just alter it slightly because he has lost direction and has now gone off in search of a new configuration of working time .
This new configuration of working time , via flexibility and precarious working , is aimed at making better use of equipment , increasing productivity and competitiveness without making any guarantee to create new jobs , on the contrary , and seeing lower wages for unemployed workers as a foregone conclusion , possibly to be compensated through complicated machinery .
On the way , the initial aim , the first priority , the only possible aim has been lost , namely that of attacking unemployment and creating new jobs .
We should like , perhaps naively , to have contributed to the recovery of the initial idea and to have stopped the initiative from getting off track .
We think that this might have been possible if we had clearly seen the principle of reducing working time with that aim , by adopting limits on the duration of working periods not just in week terms but also in terms of days , months or years .
By applying this principle and defining practical limits this might have been brought about in each Member State in accordance with the respective situations and industrial relations prevailing there .
I should emphasize that the report has drifted away from its subject - the reduction of working hours - and from its aim - fighting unemployment - because arrangements have been made to serve economic and entrepreneurial interests .
Madam President , neither Mr Rocard 's statement nor a good dinner has changed my mind .
The Rocard report starts out from the false premise that Europe exists in isolation and that the jobs available should be shared out amongst all working people .
That is a fallacy to which the Soviet planning bureaucracy adhered until economic neglect brought about the collapse of the Soviet empire .
Europe is not an economic ' island of the blest ' ; it is under enormous pressure from trade deals , association agreements and WTO criteria , and is lagging well behind in the international competitiveness stakes .
My own country , Austria , for example , fell back five places in one year from 1994 to 1995 , and is now no longer in eleventh but in sixteenth position .
With its 1722 working hours per year , the youngest pensioners and a foreign trade deficit of 100 billion , Austria is a typical example of how quickly competitiveness can be lost because of shorter working hours - amongst other things - and how quickly the unemployment figures can climb .
Surely the only thought behind the Rocard report can be : how do we create more jobs ?
But the proposed system of part-time work will stand a chance of succeeding only if there are adequate incentives to work part-time , if this is voluntary , and if an individual is able to return to full-time work .
These are enough reasons why only the creativeness and optimism of entrepreneurs , in conjunction with a system of incentives for performance-related work , can improve the prospects of competitiveness and , in turn , the prospect of creating new jobs .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the great merit of this report , in my view , is the fact that it is giving rise to debate at all levels : trade unions , businessmen , politicians , the media , experts and the like are all taking part , in one way or another , in the discussion of how we are to relate a reduction in working hours to the creation of jobs , without losing competitiveness and without provoking a significant erosion of incomes or acquired rights ; and how we are to transform the Member States ' passive or compensatory policies into active policies on employment .
This is not an easy subject .
If it were , then today 's debate would be superfluous .
It is not a question of giving our backing to an across-the-board reduction in working hours through binding legislation .
This report does not advocate the kind of minimal reductions whose effects are quickly absorbed by increased productivity and which have no impact on employment - reductions of the kind that are usual in collective bargaining .
Nor does it attempt to conceal the reality or the need for this debate in our societies .
It does not offer any miracle solutions - since there are no miracle solutions with regard to this issue .
Mr Rocard puts forward ideas , suggestions and proposals , always with respect for the concepts of voluntary action and agreement between the two sides of industry .
There is a great potential for job-creation in these proposals for a reduction in working hours .
The technical formulas for implementing the proposals will remain open to discussion .
Amongst other things , setting out these formulas is not the main objective of this report .
I myself have raised doubts and objections - which I have discussed with the rapporteur - regarding certain aspects of the text that we are debating today , and I believe that is normal .
Mr Rocard 's report was drawn up with both rigour and flexibility , and represents , in my view , a significant political contribution , on which I should like to congratulate the rapporteur .
This debate is not coming to an end today , but is only just beginning in this House .
The results of the experiments carried out elsewhere must be examined , and the response of the two sides of industry - and , above all , of a society which is frequently overwhelmed by the enormous problem of unemployment , which cannot be accepted with resignation - must be awaited .
And since it is the most serious problem currently facing us , we must use our imagination , amongst other things , to try to find possible formulas for job creation .
Now , with the traditional formulas exhausted , and in the knowledge that even growth is unable to absorb the available labour , a rational , serious and rigorous debate on a reduction in working hours may enable us to see how jobs can be created in the near future .
Madam President , the question raised by Mr Rocard 's report is an infinitely simple one : why should public money be used to fund unemployment , when it could be used to fund employment ?
This question is so simple that one wonders why , in the course of the past 25 years , no government in the European Union , not even that of Mr Rocard - as he discreetly acknowledged earlier on - has appeared able to provide a meaningful answer .
This diffidence is in fact understandable , because the simplicity of the question conceals a series of very complex issues .
I shall identify three of these , but there are many others .
Firstly , there is a question of principle .
Should we try to reduce working time , or should we attempt to bring down the cost of labour , particularly in the case of low-grade work ?
Mr Rocard prefers the first scenario .
We hope that the Commission will help us to make up our minds by clarifying both the advantages of reducing working hours and the potential drawbacks of allowing the best trained , most highly motivated and active part of the labour force to stop producing .
The second question relates to the method .
Should it be tit for tat : ' I will reduce your social contributions , but your business must recruit new staff ' , or should the method consist only of incentives in the form of lower social costs ?
Mr Rocard , who is more liberal than many Liberals , is opting for the incentive method ; that is courageous of him .
We welcome his initiative and , here too , we hope that the Commission will help us to assess its effects .
The third question is that of funding .
This whole scheme relies on a wave of recruitment which is meant to compensate for the reductions in social charges .
What if this recruitment failed to materialize , if companies chose to improve their competitiveness rather than create jobs ?
That is the question .
We may not all have the same answers as Michel Rocard to these questions , but we all agree with him that they should be put to the Commission .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the problem of unemployment is a crucial one . We cannot accept that the generalised reduction of working hours is the best , the only and the most appropriate response to reducing it and even less to resolving it .
In many countries , the experiences which have been carried out have not had satisfactory results and have let to far smaller reductions in unemployment than had been expected .
On the other hand , in countries like Portugal the average working hours are still a long way off the limits referred to in this report .
What we do see as vital is that the duration of working hours should be made more flexible so that companies can freely negotiate with their workers with the objective of looking after their common interests .
In the future , if not in the short term , there will be shorter working hours , as history shows .
But at present we have to be very careful since the costs resulting from applying measures to reduce working hours might not necessarily be sustainable for companies or for workers or even for the States themselves .
In any case , I would like to congratulate Mr Rocard on his indefatigable work and the readiness to accept to criticism which he has always shown on this subject , which is one of his hobby horses , I know .
Madam President , it should be recognized that this report contains a number of positive aspects .
Placing on the agenda the question of the distribution of work , at a time when unemployment is the most serious problem facing us , is to my mind a welcome initiative .
There are a number of aspects of the report - regarding the reduction of overtime , early retirement , and the call for the Commission to examine the experiments carried out in this field - with which we agree .
However , there are also a number of fundamental issues on which , regrettably , we are unable to agree .
One of these is the reduction in wages which would accompany a reduction in working hours .
In a country such as Spain , and in the countries of southern Europe in general , where minimum wages of PTA 60 000 are common - pitiful wages , that is - the reduction of wages is unthinkable .
But at the same time other variables , such as the significant increase in productivity , have not been taken into account .
Over the last ten years , productivity in Spain has risen by 25 % , but wages have risen by only 7 % .
Why not use the leeway provided by the increase in productivity to reduce working hours ?
And why not consider other economic solutions ?
In our view , there are aspects of Mr Rocard 's report which the countries of southern Europe - and specifically Spain - will be unable to accept .
Madam President , the rapporteur has presented a report whose starting-point is a very optimistic one .
The problem , Mr Rocard , is that no public or local authority in the European Union can create lasting jobs ; only businesses can do that . And as for the claim that a reduction in working hours creates more jobs , small and medium-sized enterprises , when rationalizing their operations , have proved unable to do so , and large firms are shifting some of their production to third countries .
That does not help us either .
What is not addressed by either the report or today 's debate , in my opinion , is the question of what to do about non-wage labour costs in Europe , which are a major element in the cost of labour .
As long as we have huge discrepancies in Europe - from Iceland , with 31.2 % of net pay to Austria with 102.4 % , and an EU average of 78 % - the question of job creation in some European regions will always remain problematic .
I think another aspect must be highlighted too : massive subsidies are needed for SMEs .
There are at least 18 million people out of work now .
If we encourage the establishment of a few hundred thousand or a few million SMEs , we shall make a major contribution to tackling the scourge of mass unemployment .
Madam President , Michel Rocard 's report on the distribution of work is an important document .
I sincerely share the hope that it will be acted upon both at EU level and in the Member States .
Conquering unemployment is our most important task .
Only if we succeed in it will the preconditions for European integration exist .
Unemployment causes huge problems to the individual in person .
In addition , the persistence of a hard core of unemployment and its continuing growth represent a threat to balanced social development .
I hope nonetheless that , when we consider the importance of sharing work , we will not forget that Europe 's industrial base must be bolstered .
Europe needs to succeed in the global competition for investment .
In order to do so , we need - inter alia - a consistently low interest rate , efficient transport and data communications , a skilled work-force , investment in research and product development and a sustainable energy policy .
Since Europe cannot compete with the rest of the world as regards the cost of labour , we should invest in knowhow .
I would therefore stress the importance of educational leave in the distribution of working time .
I have also observed that young families want flexible working hours while their children are young .
It is also justifiable to give employees who are approaching retirement the option of working part-time .
In addition , there are sectors where it is very convenient to adopt the 6 + 6 hour model .
Models for distributing work need to be considered seriously , to ensure that our societies are not divided into a section which is permanently excluded from employment and another section which feels exhausted by the burden of work .
It is also important that organizations representing the two sides of industry should be involved in this development work .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Rocard quite rightly describes mass unemployment as a threat to the social cohesion of every Member State and the Union as a whole .
I agree with him when he says that there is no miracle cure .
Generally speaking , however , his suggestions concentrate too much on substantial cuts in working hours .
Reducing working hours is not in itself a strategy for growth .
But there are practical examples which show that it has prevented dismissals and distributed the available jobs among a greater number of workers .
Like others before me , I would refer to the working-time model adopted by Volkswagen , which was admittedly geared to that company 's own needs .
This prevented several thousand lay-offs .
I would also mention the Commission 's confidence pact , the key term in which is flexibility .
What this means is positive flexibility , and that is what the PPE Group is looking for in its amendments aimed at replacing the term ' reduction in working hours ' in certain sections of the report with ' adaptation of working hours ' .
After all , part-time work and other tailor-made patterns of work organization are relevant here as well .
In recent years , the ' breathing factory ' model has emerged , for example at Opel in Rüsselsheim , with its central band of working time allowing for longer or shorter working hours , depending on the flow of work .
We should not raise workers ' expectations too high , for example with rigid - but mistaken - mathematical formulae such as : 10 % less working time equals 10 % more jobs .
Nor would it be tolerable in the case of many small businesses if uniform , across-the-board reductions in working time were steamrollered through from Dresden to Porto .
My comments are spelt out in a number of amendments tabled by my group .
But these do not bring us into conflict with Mr Rocard 's ideas on social policy , as I have come to understand them over the past two years .
Rather , I am extremely grateful to him for his thought-provoking work .
After all , the problem of unemployment in Europe can only be solved if we all pull together .
I would therefore ask for the PPE Group 's amendments to be adopted .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , employment represents one of the principal current and future problems of many of the countries in the European Union .
So it is a categorical imperative for our Parliament to confront the issues and contribute to solving the unemployment emergency .
But to achieve that aim we must build a more favourable environment for greater competitiveness of European firms , particularly small and medium-sized firms , and hence the entire European economy in comparison with the other world economies .
This means increasing the wealth produced by the firms and consequently protecting employment effectively , guaranteeing the social security system and allowing social policy to be maintained in the Union countries . All these objectives run the risk of being lost if firms are not helped to grow in terms of competitiveness and efficiency .
Although Mr Rocard 's motion is carefully and capably drafted , it actually tends to reduce those possibilities for firms , because it transforms an important opportunity to make labour relations more flexible into a binding , obligatory , planned proposal , in other words , into a very oppressive direct and indirect burden on European firms .
That is why our group cannot vote for it .
Madam President , in this week 's European Voice , German Chancellor Helmut Kohl is quoted as ' urging Germans to work harder , finish their education earlier and retire later ' .
So Chancellor Kohl wants people to work harder and longer and Mr Rocard wants them to work for shorter periods and less .
I fear that neither exhortation will actually achieve as much of an impact as the decisions of workers themselves .
Although I appreciate that Mr Rocard 's report has an incentive structure in it , I fear that it is also not desirable .
I say this because of the damage which his incentive system would do to the national insurance systems of Member States .
I believe we are moving towards welfare systems which are based much more on a clear relationship between the contributions and the insurance principle and the eventual payment to citizens .
A system which arbitrarily reduces contributions on the first 32 hours of work and then increases them for later hours does not seem to me to be in accordance with that new principle of transparency which we are trying to secure .
My other concern about the Rocard report , which is indeed well argued and full of interesting suggestions , is the suggestion in Recital M which concerns productivity in public services .
It suggests a compensation system there , which has been referred to earlier , because ' it is not as easy to increase labour productivity there ... ' - in public services - ' ... as in the private sector ' .
I must say I am not sure that proposition is correct .
I think that many of us would feel that in the public services there is often more scope to increase productivity and the evidence suggests that through more competition and liberalization those improvements can be quite quickly achieved .
I am afraid , therefore , that the British Conservatives will not be able to support this report .
Madam President , unfortunately abolishing unemployment is not a simple matter of cutting working hours and paying everyone the same as they were earning before .
A reduction in working hours on those lines would raise production costs and lower competitiveness and employment .
Particularly serious difficulties would arise for smaller firms .
To transform the current system of unemployment support into subsidies for firms , so that they can pay compensation for lost earnings to those whose working hours have been reduced and , as well , pay wages to unemployed persons who it is hoped can then be added to the workforce , would give rise to an uncontrolled jungle of contributions and provide new jobs for bureaucrats and inspectors .
The proposal to investigate how and whether working hours reductions can bring down unemployment may appear , if not commendable , then at least harmless .
But the proposal suffers from the weakness that it gives politicians in all countries a further excuse to delay real measures to combat unemployment .
Besides , proper action will be made more difficult by the fact that many voters will be seduced into thinking that there are neat solutions , that less efforts are needed , not more .
Many in the European Parliament rightly speak of the hostages of unemployment .
But the real action bears no relation to all the talk .
Inserting a chapter on employment into the Treaty on European Union and calling for an investigation into shorter working hours are not things of any real substance .
What action is needed ?
In a Union created to achieve gains through the deregulation of international markets , it should be natural to deregulate domestic markets too ; the most important of these is the labour market .
High employment also requires an improvement in general education , a higher standard of training at elite level to promote leading-edge technologies in production , better working conditions for small firms and a reduced tax burden to encourage individual effort , which for many will mean longer working hours .
Madam President , I wish to begin by saying that I am very grateful that Parliament and , in particular , you , Mr Rocard , have devoted an own-initiative report to working time .
In fact , you have successfully given a very high profile to this important issue .
You have talked to me many times about it and , generally speaking , I heard a very big response to your initiative .
It is important to approach the issue from the angle that you have chosen , and you have put the accent on people .
There is so often a tendency to talk about flexibility , downsizing , efficiency and the like and to ignore the human element .
I firmly believe that the aim of economic policy should be to raise the quality of life of all of our people .
I believe I share this aim with the majority of Members of this House and particularly with you , Mr Rocard .
Another important feature of your approach is the accent which you put on cooperation and dialogue .
This is one of the tenets which we need to develop as we move towards the 21st century .
We need to move away from industrial relations that are built on conflict and bickering and towards solutions from which everyone can benefit .
In other words , we need to move from situations where there are winners and losers , or even no winners , to winwin situations , where everybody can and should be a winner .
Mr Rocard , the Commission is currently preparing a Green Paper on work organization , including working time , and it is fair to say that this Green Paper is being prepared as a response to your initiative .
Certainly , in preparing the Green Paper and indeed the Commission 's work programme for 1997 , we are going to try very much to keep in mind the requests for Commission action as set out in your motion for a resolution .
Many of the speakers today , and indeed the amendments tabled , have sought to contrast flexibility of working time on the one hand and reduction of working time on the other .
I am not going to take sides in the debate today .
What I would like to do is to set it in the wider context , as indeed we shall try to do as effectively as we can in the Green Paper that I have announced to you .
I am convinced more and more that one of the greatest challenges facing us is to adapt our thinking with regard to the world of work to the new world that we live in .
In fact , we in Europe have had few problems in making the necessary capital investment in new technologies .
That has not been a great difficulty .
Where we have very often failed hitherto has been in adapting the way in which work is organized to cope with those new technologies .
This is the theme that we have developed , in particular in the Green Paper , on living and working in the information society - people first .
I believe that this is where we need to start if we are going to achieve the win-win situation that I mentioned earlier .
To my mind the key to the issues facing us is productivity .
The matter was mentioned very eloquently by one of our contributors .
For the changes that are taking place in the organization of work will necessarily give rise to improvements in productivity .
We need to use these improvements in productivity in order to improve the quality of life for all of our people .
This was a point stressed by Mrs González Alvarez - I thank her for it .
I turn now to the issues directly relating to working time .
Since the White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment was adopted we have put a lot of effort into working time and arrangements for a considerable number of studies to be undertaken - you particularly asked for this , Mr Rocard .
Some of the studies have been completed and some are quite a distance yet from completion .
Research shows us that a policy of work redistribution will not necessarily be successful .
But it seems to show that working time reductions can have a beneficial effect on employment in certain circumstances , but only provided that a number of conditions are met .
The most important condition is that reductions in working hours must take place in the context of greater flexibility .
It is no use just cutting working hours while maintaining the same pattern of work organization .
So it is not a case of either-or , because you cannot have one without the other .
Another condition is that the redistribution of working time must be accompanied by an active training policy , otherwise skill shortages are sure to arise .
With regard to wages , the most successful reductions in working time in recent years have occurred when working time reductions have been incorporated into long-term bargaining packages .
Such long-term packages have the advantage of making it possible to use productivity increases to reduce working time over a period of several years while , at the same time , reducing the wage increases needed to offset the reduction in working time .
Finally , working time changes need to be seen in the context of equal opportunity policies if further segregation of the labour market is to be avoided .
In your report , Mr Rocard , you put forward a number of ways .
I cannot refer to them all for lack of time but I would like to refer to two of them .
The main solution put forward in your report was the question of using savings in unemployment benefit to compensate for reductions in pay resulting from reductions in working time .
The relationship between reductions in working time , productivity and wages is , however , a complex one which varies from sector to sector and , indeed , from country to country , as was already stated , as of course do the social security systems themselves .
We are going to have to study this in greater detail .
You want us to do this , and it has been asked for across the House .
I also wish to refer briefly to part-time work , because it has been mentioned by many speakers .
This is a subject which has been batted backwards and forwards like a shuttlecock for very many years and , as your report states , successful schemes are very rare and there have been a lot of problems .
But now I genuinely believe that we are well on the way to turning an adversarial situation into a win-win situation ; for as most of you know , following the Commission 's initiative , the social partners are currently seeking to negotiate an agreement at European level with a view to achieving the right balance between flexibility and security .
We should not underestimate the importance of this particular development .
I would , therefore , like to conclude by saying that the Commission is being asked to do things , and to mention five things that we are doing or that we will do .
Firstly , we are going to prepare the Green Paper I referred to on work organization , including working time .
We have just prepared the Green Paper on the information society , as I have said .
Secondly , working time is one of the elements that has been discussed in the context of the European pact .
Thirdly , we have taken an initiative which has led to negotiations between the social partners at European level on the whole question of flexibility and security of employment .
Fourthly , we are preparing a White Paper on the sectors and activities currently excluded from the working time directive .
It is very much in line with point 6 of your resolution .
Finally , we are going to continue to undertake the further studies that have been asked of us in these areas and we will pay very close attention to the points made in the resolution .
Mr Rocard , you have started something !
I know how personally involved in this you are ; you have spoken to me many times .
I am glad you have brought it to the floor of the House and we are going to return to this subject .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Ambient air pollution
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0267 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council ( C4-0330 / 96-94 / 0194 ( SYN ) ) with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision establishing a reciprocal exchange of information and data from networks and individual stations measuring ambient air pollution within the Member States ( rapporteur : Mrs Pollack ) .
Madam President , this directive is about establishing a reciprocal exchange of information and data from measuring stations for air pollution .
It is a tool by which it will be possible to assess progress towards improving air quality throughout Europe .
We all know how necessary it is to take steps to reduce air pollution .
Much of the present monitoring of air quality is still insufficient since some pollutants are not monitored everywhere and others are not monitored at all .
Furthermore , the data that Member States have to provide on the basis of the 1982 legislation is not always comparable across the European Union .
A greater exchange of information about air pollution will , of course , not clean up the air we breathe .
It is only when this information is made public that it can be used as a tool for pollution control and subsequently for bettering the lives of Europe 's citizens .
The proposal is to set up reciprocal data exchange covering 34 pollutants currently measured in the Member States .
This means that no new measurement stations are actually required and no new costs envisaged .
The problem with this fairly minimalist approach is that one of the aims of the directive is to extend the scope and improve the quality of data transmitted to the Commission .
So what we are asking for in Amendment No 5 is simply that when the initial round of data has been assessed , if what is being supplied by Member States is found to be inadequate , Parliament wants the Commission to be able to consider whether measuring pollutants listed in Annex I ( 2 ) ought to be made compulsory .
If we do not take this tiny step towards thinking about improving the system , how can we expect Member States to implement the Framework Directive on ambient air quality ?
As I said , this directive is actually a tool to move some way to achieving the goals laid down in that very important Framework Directive on which we have only recently had the second reading in this House .
I do not intend to take up a lot of time from the House this evening ; in fact , not all of my allotted speaking time because we have had our first reading and made our points then .
I simply want to say that the five amendments to the common position from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection are clear , reasonable , quite modest and self-explanatory .
They seek first of all to simplify the title because we are not in favour of the European Union extending its gobbledegook throughout the Union .
We want , very importantly , to allow public access to the data .
In order for that public access to the data to be actually useful to the public we also want it to be published in a clear and understandable form .
As we said in Amendment No 5 , we want to tighten up that review process so that when the review actually takes place , if we find that things are not as good as we would like them to be , we can consider the possibility of being able to move to a stricter basis in the future .
I commend the report to the Commission and the Council .
I hope that it will be possible for our amendments at second reading to be taken on board .
Madam President , the increasing prevalence of allergies and other diseases caused by impurities in the air shows that air pollution is a growing problem .
In order to bring about genuine improvements in air quality , we all need to know where we stand .
It should be possible to compare measurements taken in different countries , and this requires the development of common measuring procedures and the adoption of common principles for the selection of measuring sites .
The rapporteur , Anita Pollack , stresses quite rightly in her report that information about air pollution should be public .
This is essential , as the European public should be allowed to know about threats to their health .
If information is comparable between countries , the public will also be able to put pressure on the politicians and authorities responsible in their own country to improve air quality .
Traffic is the principal source of air pollution .
It causes 62 % of carbon monoxide emissions and 50 % of nitrogen dioxide emissions .
The problem is particularly serious in towns and other congested areas .
The EU should make progress on imposing more stringent quality requirements on fuels .
In a market economy it is effective to use the means afforded by that economy - i.e. to provide price incentives .
Better-quality fuel should be priced more cheaply .
In Finland , for example , good results have been achieved in this way .
Now however this approach may be under threat from the EU 's rules on taxation .
On no account would it be acceptable for methods of proven effectiveness , which are sensible from the citizen 's point of view - in this case , methods of improving air quality - to be debarred from use on the grounds that they do not accord with some framework .
In my opinion , we as Europeans have the right to demand better air quality in all respects .
Madam President , of the five amendments that Mrs Pollack is resubmitting , and which were not accepted by the Commission or the Council , we shall be supporting the first four .
I believe , Commissioner , that Mrs Pollack is right to say that the title she is proposing is much clearer than the one which you have retained .
You say that your title expresses the content of the decision better , but it is too long and complicated , and I believe that anything that we do to simplify the Union 's legislation is important .
Furthermore , you say that you do not support Mrs Pollack 's request for the information in question to be made available to the general public , since the Member States are already doing this .
Of course the Member States are doing that - there is a directive which obliges everyone to make this information available to the public .
As we said in committee , Mrs Pollack , we shall not be supporting Amendment No 5 , since we do not believe that it is realistic .
This decision is closely linked to the directive on air quality , and Annex 1 includes six pollutants which are currently measured in all the Member States , or nearly all of them .
Annex 1.2 , however , includes a further seven pollutants which are not measured - except for carbon monoxide , which is also measured in all the Member States .
And they are not measured because it is probably unnecessary .
I do not know whether , in all British cities , levels of nickel , arsenic , cadmium and mercury are measured separately , and I do not believe that you can have worked in this field , Mrs Pollack , because if you had , you would know how difficult - and in some cases pointless - it is to take measurements of these pollutants , since they do not exist in measurable quantities , but merely in traces .
You propose two things in Amendment No 5 : firstly , that the period of five years proposed by the Commission and the Council for the review of the decision - which in our opinion is correct - should be reduced to three .
In just three years , however , we shall not have enough information to be able to determine whether the decision is being effective or not .
We therefore believe that five years is preferable .
And , secondly , whereas the text of the common position states that it will be determined at that time whether or not the decision should be amended , you are proposing to oblige all the Member States to measure the 13 pollutants in question , and many others in certain areas .
It is not possible to generalize , since the problems of industrialized areas are not the same as those of urban areas which suffer from traffic pollution , where different pollutants will therefore have to be measured .
I would call on the Commissioner , once again , to take steps to ensure that there is better legislation , not more .
We are all deeply frustrated with regard to the environment , since there has been a great deal of legislation , but little compliance with it .
Perhaps this is because , in some instances , the legislation has been over-ambitious , as well as too vague and diffuse .
We are hoping that you will review and amend some of that legislation , and that there will be better legislation , not more of it .
Madam President , let me begin by thanking Mrs Pollack for a constructive and good report , which seeks to give people more influence over their own environment .
Ambient air pollution is a growing problem in cities and along motorways , but also for people , animals and plants throughout the Union .
Sweden has suffered from this quite a lot through acid rain , mainly from Britain and Central Europe .
The EU is taking an important step in setting up a reciprocal exchange of information on air pollution between the Member States .
Such a comprehensive picture of the extent of air pollution will facilitate common action for cleaner air .
For many Swedish citizens , the need for cooperation on the environment was and is a major argument for strengthening the EU 's power to act .
A common fund of data on air quality in the Union will provide a strong argument for firm action against acidification and eutrophication through air pollution .
But it is only when citizens have such information available that they can force the pace in work on the environment and get the politicians to take well founded decisions to reduce pollution .
It is thus hard to understand why the governments in the Council of Ministers and the Commission do not want to make the air pollution data collected available to the public .
After all , people must know how bad things are , how bad the environmental situation is , in order to put pressure on their politicians .
That is why information on environmental pollution must be made public .
This shows once again that it is here in the European Parliament that we fight for the voice of our citizens to be heard in European cooperation .
I hope that the Council will change its mind and accept Parliament 's proposal on this point .
Madam President , the proposed measurements are necessary in order to improve the lives of our citizens in the future , because they will provide an objective basis for taking effective steps against air pollution .
I have no hesitation in supporting the amendments to simplify the title and improve access to the information which is obtained .
In the conurbations of Upper Austria , incidentally , air pollution levels are measured constantly and the readings made available in public places and in the daily press .
What is more , it is right that a reciprocal exchange of data throughout the European Community should be initiated as soon as possible .
Nonetheless , we must take account of the misgivings of the Member States as regards the date of entry into force , since the proposal makes provision for completely new structures , which - in extreme cases - it will not be possible to set up in three years , but only in five .
It is of course our wish that the data should be made available as swiftly as possible , with the assistance of the governments , so we shall see to it that all aspects of the decision are implemented as quickly and efficiently as possible .
I am extremely grateful to Mrs Pollack for making these important points .
Madam President , I should firstly once again like to thank the Committee on the Environment and in particular its rapporteur , Mrs Pollack , for the work they have done on this important but also very technical matter .
I would repeat the point that this proposal and the directive on air quality which was dealt with here in May this year complement one another .
Together , these two proposals represent a substantial and comprehensive package for improving air quality in Europe .
At first reading , the Commission accepted ten of Parliament 's eleven amendments completely or in principle .
Five of these ten amendments were incorporated wholly or partially into the common position .
At this second reading , Parliament has tabled five amendments , of which the Commission can accept four either wholly or in principle , while one can only be accepted in part .
Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 are an appropriate supplement to the proposed requirements , and can be accepted with some changes of wording .
Amendment No 5 concerns three questions : the submission to Parliament of a report on the decision 's implementation , the time limit for this report , and the reviewing of the decision .
The section of this amendment concerning the submission of a report to Parliament is fully in line with current practice , and can be accepted by the Commission .
The proposal to reduce the period in which the Commission is to submit this report cannot be accepted , and several of the speakers referred to this point .
The three-year period being proposed means in fact that the effective period in which the exchange of information has taken place will be only two years .
We feel this is too short for there to be a reasonable basis on which to produce an assessment .
The last part of the amendment is designed to make the measurement of pollutants compulsory if inadequate data has been supplied by the Member States .
We cannot accept this , because it is not in line with the requirements of the decision , which only cover an exchange of the information which is available in the Member States .
The requirement to measure new substances will be included in the directives on air quality .
Finally , I should like to stress the results which have been achieved so far in terms of this proposal .
The common position established in the Council includes a number of important amendments from first reading .
Together with the amendments which the Commission has approved today , this represents a valuable and effective supplement to the policy on air quality which was introduced by the framework directive .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Shipment of waste
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0266 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council ( C4-0331 / 96-95 / 0107 ( SYN ) ) with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 259 / 93 on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within , into and out of the European Community ( rapporteur : Mr Virgin ) .
Madam President , let me briefly review the background to this issue .
Already in 1993 , the export of hazardous waste to countries outside the OECD for final disposal was prohibited under an EU Regulation .
This ban did not apply to the export of waste for recycling .
At the third conference between the parties to the Basle Convention , it was decided that the export of hazardous waste for recycling from OECD countries to non-OECD countries should be banned from 1 January 1998 .
The Commission therefore put forward a proposal for such a ban just over a year ago .
The proposal followed the recommendations of the Basle Convention .
The definition of hazardous waste according to the Commission proposal is contained in Annex III to the Regulation , the ' amber ' list , and in Annex IV , the ' red ' list .
In the Environment Committee we considered this insufficient , and found strong support for that in Parliament .
We therefore put forward proposals supplementing the Commission proposal which , amongst other things , contained the EU 's own list of hazardous waste under Council Decision 94 / 904 of 1994 .
The reason was quite simply that recycling of material from this list was impossible without risk to the environment .
After many vicissitudes last autumn , including referral back , we managed to reach a compromise with the Commission involving the creation of a new Annex IIa , based on the EU 's own list under Council Decision 94 / 904 .
In this connection , I want to thank the Commission for its constructive cooperation in enabling us to reach this compromise .
There is no doubt that our original proposal was not particularly precise , but the reason for that is that Parliament does not have the research resources needed to present a precise proposal .
The compromise means that our proposal can now be incorporated into a more operative proposal .
Parliament accepted the compromise on 16 January this year .
The reaction of the Council of Ministers to this was that , for the time being , it would only back the Commission 's original proposal .
In a note regarding the inclusion of waste covered by Council Decision 94 / 904 , however , the Council confirms the need to take up this matter in the continued discussion .
I must say that I interpret this statement to mean that the Council will accept our position , provided we achieve a large majority for it in Parliament .
In practical terms , this position makes for better environmental protection than the Commission 's original proposal .
If the matter meets with a favourable outcome this time , it will provide an excellent example of Parliament 's role on important issues , an example which clearly shows the nature of the roles taken by the different institutions and which could serve as an illustration of our procedures for the benefit of the Union 's citizens .
What this proposal is about in essence is responsibility for hazardous waste .
In a society geared to recycling , the concern to cut back on waste will be considerable .
If it nevertheless arises , methods must be developed to dispose of it in an environmentally sound manner .
Technical development must be geared to this objective .
Parliament 's position on the matter we are now debating is in line with this thinking .
I will end with a question to the Commission which relates to this matter : when shall we see a proposal for the ratification of the Basle Convention ?
It is a question that relates directly to the matter we are discussing , since it will provide , so to speak , a ' legal ground ' for the entire operation .
Madam President , problematic waste and its transport are a growing problem worldwide .
It all comes down to money .
Some wish to get rid of their waste cheaply , and others wish to obtain raw materials from it at low cost .
Developing countries cannot be blamed for looking for cheap raw materials .
The developed countries , on the other hand , have a duty to ensure that our waste does not cause problems in countries whose waste treatment procedures are insufficiently developed or where they do not bother about waste treatment at all .
It is laid down in the Basel Convention that waste for recycling must not be exported outside OECD countries .
As the rapporteur , Mr Virgin , has observed in his own amendments and as stated in Parliament 's earlier standpoint , the rules laid down by the EU concerning hazardous waste currently fall short of the requirements of the Basel Convention .
As a result , even waste which should be classified as hazardous could be exported to countries which do not know how , or do not wish , to sort it .
The EU and its Member States have a responsibility to ensure that no loopholes endanger the health of people in poor countries .
They must shoulder this responsibility .
In its common position the Council tries to take refuge behind technical problems .
It was good to hear the rapporteur express the view that , here too , the Council once again seems to be coming round to the views expressed in Parliament 's report .
It ought to be clear that waste which is classified within the EU as problematic should not be exported to nonOECD countries .
This requirement should be implemented as soon as possible .
In general , it is necessary to be cautious about transporting waste , and the principle should be adopted that waste ought to be processed and exploited as close as possible to its place of origin .
Unless this principle is adhered to between the Member States as well , a situation may arise in which certain countries evade their own recycling responsibilities by selling their waste elsewhere .
This would give rise to unnecessary transport operations and place an unnecessary burden on nature , thereby partially cancelling out the environmental benefits of recycling .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to stress the importance of including category II ( a ) , covering waste which appears on the list of hazardous waste but paradoxically is not declared hazardous under Annexes III and IV .
This distinction is logically incomprehensible in the context of a single , comprehensive regulation .
Furthermore , the categories of waste in question are not always entirely without danger , if we think for instance of the contaminated metal scrap referred to in the report , or arsenic from metal-hardening , or lubricants and coolants from mechanical engineering .
Consequently , it also seems important to me - contrary to the Council 's stance in the common position - that all hazardous substances should continue to be covered by the ban on exporting for recycling purposes , until such time as it can be guaranteed that the importing countries are equipped to carry out environmentally sound recycling .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the proposal to amend Regulation 259 / 93 on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within the Union has been presented by the Commission and provides for a ban on the import and export of hazardous waste , either for elimination or recycling .
This proposal is caught between the need to protect the environment , on the one hand , and to consider the weight of existing commercial interests , on the other .
In fact , some non-OECD countries do not want the trade in hazardous waste to be covered by so many restrictions that they cannot use some of the substances as raw materials and some Member States want to go on exporting their waste .
The compromise amendments agreed between Parliament and the Commission represent an important result . They propose a ban on the export of hazardous waste as from 1 January 1998 and call for adjustment of the definition of hazardous waste to concur with the Basle Convention .
This position , set out in Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , will be supported by my political group .
Madam President , this problem has been going on for more than ten years now .
I recall 1986 , when the European Commission aimed at ending the exports of hazardous toxic waste outside the OECD area .
This scandalous ' tourism ' in toxic waste is still being run by a kind of mafia and very often by the Mafia itself .
In Portugal , we have had cases of imports of scrap iron which is contaminated , toxic and hazardous and which has been exported to Portugal from Switzerland , in one case , and Germany , in another , and classified as ' nonhazardous scrap metal ' .
That is why I am here to support the excellent report by my colleague , Mr Virgin , because not only from a technical point of view this report is an attempt at ending this scandalous trade in toxic waste and looks at the problem from an ethical and moral point of view too .
First of all , because it sets a final date in accordance with our obligations under the Basel Convention .
Secondly , because it mends a loophole in our rule classifying in Appendix II toxic substances or hazardous substances which were not classified as such ; we need tomorrow 's vote to be an overwhelming one so that the Council of Ministers will not be able to introduce into this legislation ' subtleties ' which could lead to future complications and a continuation of this scandalous ' tourism ' of toxic waste .
Madam President , this is an old issue in which the Greens have played a pioneering role .
I remember a book by my Belgian predecessor here in the European Parliament , François Roelants du Vivier , who already drew attention to the trade in hazardous waste ten years ago . Amongst other things , he described how poor countries were lured into taking waste in return for meagre remuneration , which was said to be quite harmless but which was in fact very hazardous .
We are making slow progress , but we are making progress .
As I said earlier , Mr Virgin is taking a ' green ' stance on this issue , like a good environmental party man .
This is much to be welcomed .
We have no amendments to move and can support the proposal , which is a step forward .
But it will not solve the problem .
I was in Hungary , the Czech Republic and Slovakia the other day .
There is concern in the environmental movement there and in other quarters too , because the rules we are about to decide on will not apply when these countries become members of the OECD and , possibly , the EU ; entirely different conditions will apply then .
These countries are afraid they may become the dumping ground for waste from the richer EU Member States .
This clearly means that the proximity principle should apply in principle in the Union too .
It is a question that should be taken up as soon as possible , and I hope that Mr Virgin , and indeed his whole political group , will allow the environment to take precedence over free trade considerations in this case too .
Madam President , this is a very important report .
It is important in its substance , but also as an opinion-forming example of processes in international trade .
It is customary to congratulate the rapporteur using some empty phrase of courtesy , but I do not propose to do that .
I merely say he has done a good job - against the odds , one might well say , since the Council has not agreed to any of Parliament 's earlier amendments .
Parliament 's proposal is better than the Council 's , because it meets the international requirements of the Basle Convention .
This is a good way for the EU to force the pace on an important environmental issue and on environmental business .
On 1 January 1998 , a ban on the export of waste comes into force .
There are clear definitions and indications of what waste is meant .
The proposal is therefore clear and concrete , and it is important that Parliament now support it and force the Council to accept it .
I very much hope that this will be the case .
Madam President , the Commission would like to thank the Committee on the Environment and in particular its rapporteur , Mr Virgin , for the work done by the committee on this proposal .
I share the rapporteur 's view that this is an excellent example of Parliament taking an active role , and one of good collaboration .
I should briefly like to explain the purpose of the proposal .
It is to amend the 1993 regulation on shipments of waste , which is a very important means of protecting third countries from undesirable imports of hazardous waste from the industrialized nations .
The Commission 's aim with this proposal - as all the speakers have said - is to increase and improve the protection by extending the current ban on exports from the Community of waste intended for final disposal .
From 1 January 1998 , the ban on exports of hazardous waste will also include exports of waste for recycling and retrieval purposes to all countries which are not members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development .
As you know , this proposal will enable Community legislation to incorporate a decision on this matter taken under the Basle Convention , and followed by the adoption of an amendment to the Convention on the same lines .
At first reading , the European Parliament and the Commission agreed on four amendments to the original proposal .
The most important change concerned the extension of the scope of the proposal to include not only waste listed in Annexes III and IV of the regulation on shipments of waste , but also waste which is not covered by either of these annexes but appears on the Community 's hazardous waste list .
Waste of this kind will be listed in a new Annex IIa , to be drawn up by the Commission as soon as possible .
I can tell the House that the Commission 's services have begun the necessary preparatory work to enable a proposal to be forwarded to the technical adaptation committee as soon as the amendment to the regulation on shipments of hazardous waste has been adopted , including the provision for a new Annex IIa .
The Commission will naturally ensure that the European Parliament is informed at the same time as an official proposal is put before the committee .
I should like to say a few words on the amendments tabled by Parliament at second reading .
Although the Council did not include any of the amendments contained in the Commission 's amended proposal in its common position , the Commission noted during the discussions that there was a positive attitude in the Council towards considering these amendments after the second reading in Parliament , as the rapporteur and a number of other speakers have pointed out .
The Commission therefore very much welcomes the fact that the same amendments have been retabled , and counts on them being adopted .
Finally , I should once again like to thank the Committee on the Environment for its active and constructive approach to this matter .
As Mr Pimenta said , there is a long history behind it .
I am sure Parliament as a whole will be able to follow the recommendation from the committee , and I think we shall then have taken a very important step in the right direction in terms of environment policy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Protection of wild fauna and flora
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0262 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council ( C4-0285 / 96-00 / 0370 ( SYN ) ) with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by monitoring trade therein ( rapporteur : Mrs van Putten ) .
Madam President , everyone here is aware of the importance of this subject .
We are talking about regulating a trade worth billions , but we must be rational in our approach if we are to have any hope of tackling the black market in plants and animals , which , at an estimated USD 17 billion a year , is almost on the same scale as the illegal drugs and arms trades .
So we need to set about this rationally .
It is regrettable in itself that the natural environment is used for economic gain .
This is a personal view and something which I feel very strongly about .
It is sad to see plants and animals , and even children at the moment , being exploited for money .
But even plants and animals have the right to equal treatment , or at the very least to careful protection .
It reminds me of the Indian negotiating with President Washington about selling his land , who asked ' How can we sell the air ? '
The same is true of plants and animals .
This is just a personal statement which I felt I had to make on what is an extremely emotive subject .
However , the sad fact is that this trade exists , and it has taken the Council , thanks to the French presidency , five years to reach agreement on the subject .
The absence of European legislation under the single market led the CITES countries - when the parties to the Washington Convention met in the United States last year - to accuse the European Community of dragging its feet .
It is the European ecology movement - and I shall be returning to the exceptions within the movement shortly - which is now demanding clear legislation as quickly as possible .
The new regulation before us certainly represents progress compared with previous legislation .
Not everyone is happy with it , but then that never happens in politics .
The huge differences in national legislation and the impossibility of monitoring everything on the European market closely make some kind of common structure necessary , and this is what we now have .
Let me give you a few examples of where this progress has been made .
First of all , the legal basis has been changed to Article 130s , which Parliament has already approved , and this makes it entirely clear that the legislation is intended for the protection of flora and fauna .
Protection is the top priority .
Then there is Article 16 , which creates new scope for penalties , including specific provisions for those who use irresponsible methods for transporting flora and fauna .
Another example is that it is now made much clearer than before that the Member States must take steps to confiscate in the case of infringements , such as irresponsible transport methods or failure to produce the correct papers to accompany consignments .
I would point out to all the critics that even Annex B species can be confiscated .
Annex D is an entirely new proposal , and is one area where the European legislation goes further than the Convention .
It will have to be expanded in the future , and Parliament has already amended it , but it is progress .
And , last but not least , provision is made for rapid action to be taken and for greater flexibility to move species which suddenly come under threat , because of trade , for example , to a higher list - Annex B - so that trade in them is either totally prohibited or strictly controlled .
The definitions have been improved and the transport problems have been properly covered , but it is still not enough , in Parliament 's view .
Our German colleagues have been particularly critical , calling for even stricter provisions .
I respect their feelings and I can understand them , but they are particularly concerned about birds , and there are 30 000 species of them .
We also need to ensure that everyone is willing to cooperate .
There is no point in one country having much stricter regulations in a single market with open frontiers .
Sometimes you have to concede defeat , however painful it may be .
We are making progress , and although I understand the criticism , I think it would be a great pity if it meant we had to reject the whole regulation .
The thing I find most difficult to accept in all the criticism voiced by the House is that with 30 000 different species of birds to protect , the falconry lobby , of all things , has suddenly become so prominent .
However , leaving that aside , Parliament has also included amendments on transport where this leads to a depletion of numbers ; such cases are included in Annex D.
Finally , I do not intend to go into all of Parliament 's other proposals , but the compromise amendment is extremely important .
I hope that the Commissioner understands that this simply must be adopted , and that rejecting it would be completely unrealistic , which we cannot afford to be .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Washington Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species was concluded in 1973 and will soon be 25 years old .
A great many of the species that it was intended to protect have not survived that long .
They have been hunted ; they have been collected illegally and then transported in conditions where they suffocated , died of thirst or withered away - prestige objects which never made it to their destination .
In reality , the extinction and disappearance of species and the fact that we - let alone our descendants - will never see their return has robbed us all of mankind 's common heritage .
We currently make use of only a tiny number of plant species .
We have totally failed to recognize the opportunities that are destroyed when plants become extinct .
The loss of the animals , too , upsets the balance of nature .
A regulation is therefore urgently needed .
I should like to thank the rapporteur warmly for her commitment to bringing that regulation into existence .
I also hope that the Declaration on the Protection of Animals , which is already mentioned in the Final Act of the EU Treaty , will be extended at the present Intergovernmental Conference , in line with Parliament 's wishes , so that the protection of animals is properly included in the Treaty .
Much as I value the work that the rapporteur has done , there is one point on which I do not share her opinion .
I believe that documents should accompany the movement not only of plants and animals listed in Annex A , but also of those in Annex B.
We wish to see the Annex A list kept as short as possible , not extended to include other species because we failed to pay enough attention to them .
Given the emphasis which is placed on dismantling bureaucracy , I think that the option of a single accompanying document within the Union is feasible and should be considered .
Madam President , it must be remembered in the first instance that the purpose of the text on the implementation in the Community of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora , or CITES , with which Mrs van Putten 's report is concerned , is to replace a regulation dating from 1982 .
This is in fact an update , an improved version to take account of developments within CITES , which was drawn up in Washington in 1973 .
It should also be remembered that the prime objective of this proposal for a regulation is to protect wild flora and fauna from the negative effects of trade in them , and to ensure that the trade policy instruments set out by CITES are applied in a uniform way .
The current upsurge in the international smuggling of live specimens means in fact that the 1982 Council regulation on the implementation of the Convention is in urgent need of strengthening and improvement .
From this point of view , we can but deplore the repeated delays , ever since 1991 , caused in particular by problems concerning the appropriate legal basis for this regulation .
I would emphasize that the main improvements to the text relate to the tightening-up of customs checks , which will facilitate more effective action to clamp down on the growth in smuggling , the imposition of tougher penalties by the Member States where the regulation is contravened and , finally , the ensuring of decent transport conditions for live specimens which are to be traded .
I congratulate the rapporteur on her work to this end , and I fully support her response to the text of the common position .
I would point out , however , that Article 9 ( 1 ) , of the common position poses a real problem for those who engage in falconry .
This is a traditional and very old activity ; it is part of our heritage , and we must seek to preserve it .
The pursuit of falconry must not be surrounded by excessive red tape .
Falconers must of course be subject to the general rules concerning trade in the specimens which they use .
They must therefore be able to prove that their bird was purchased legally , as stipulated in the text , but it is unthinkable that they should require prior authorization every time their bird travels on Community territory , even if the falcon was bred in the wild .
Moreover , it must be borne in mind that there are very few falconers in the European Union , that even fewer use birds which were not bred in captivity , and that they do need to travel frequently .
Such journeys are not made for trading purposes , and so in any event they fall outside the scope of the regulation .
That is why it seems to me perfectly reasonable and without danger for the conservation of wild-bred birds of prey used in falconry to allow them to be transported without prior authorization in the Community , provided the birds are taken straight back to their authorized locations .
The common position we are now discussing demonstrates Europe 's wish to step up its protection of endangered species by controlling trade in them .
A surfeit of trade bans or restrictions on the movement of animals might , however , run counter to the maintaining of biodiversity .
That is why we are asking you to support two amendments above all : Amendment No 32 which , as Mrs Grossetête has said , allows a falconer to transport falcons from his residence to his hunting-ground , since this ancient form of hunting , falconry , has already been recognized under the wild birds directive .
Voting for this amendment means acknowledging the efforts of falconers , who are cooperating with scientists in research , as well as in the protection , conservation and even reintroduction of certain birds of prey , such as the peregrine falcon .
Secondly , Amendment No 30 calls for research to be allowed on animals in the case of diseases for which there is presently no cure , and where it can only be carried out on these animals .
As is well known , research in this area has led to considerable advances in the protection and health not only of human beings , but also of animals themselves .
That should not be forgotten .
Madam President , perhaps you could arrange things so that we do not always end up discussing environmental issues on Tuesday nights .
It would be nice to be able to talk about such important topics during the daytime for once , instead of tucking them away in the evening .
Less than a week ago , I read in a Dutch newspaper that the police in London had seized a large quantity of rhino horn , the largest haul ever found , it appears .

We all know that rhinos are extremely rare , so I cannot understand why there is only a two-year gaol sentence for such offences in the United Kingdom .
The rhino horn was worth around 10 million , which shows just how profitable the illegal trade in endangered species can be , and it is only allowed to continue because the controls and penalties are so inadequate .
This example was not unusual , unfortunately , and it shows just how far Europe 's application of CITES falls short of the mark .
Every day endangered species of animals and plants are traded illegally , both alive and dead , but they are not always discovered because of the shortage of manpower or the inadequacy of the controls .
We in Europe need to fulfil our CITES obligations and introduce stricter legislation which is both enforceable and verifiable , and this is why we support Mrs van Putten .
Over the last few decades , as we all know , many species of plants and animals have become extinct or extremely rare , and that is why this report is so important .
The need to maintain the planet 's biodiversity is a matter of life or death .
In this context , finally , it is extremely regrettable that a minor issue such as falconry should receive so much misplaced attention in such a vital debate .
This is Parliament 's opportunity to tighten up the terms of this regulation , and it is disgraceful that the discussion is being monopolized by all this pointless and spurious talk , especially as it stems from a misunderstanding .
That is why our group intends to vote against Amendment No 29 .
We are also very curious to know what the Commissioner makes of Amendment No 5 .
Madam President , in Brussels next week , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection will be discussing the review of the fifth action programme on the environment and sustainable development .
A number of the amendments which have been tabled condemn the disappearance of a large number of species - in some cases up to 30 % .
Mrs van Putten 's recommendation seeks to prevent the continuation of this trend , and we believe that it is a balanced and necessary text .
It is unacceptable , in our view , that as Mr Eisma just said , this recommendation should be called into question by an issue which , in the field of species conservation as a whole , is one of minor importance .
In our view , Mrs van Putten clearly expresses in her conclusion the fact that biodiversity and the conservation of species are part of our common heritage , and that it is our responsibility to protect this for future generations as far as possible .
We therefore supported her recommendation in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , and we shall also do so here in Parliament .
Madam President , unlike the rapporteur , Mrs van Putten , I do not believe that the proposal before us will bring any improvement .
On the contrary , I think that this could have been one of the last opportunities to put a stop to the international trade in wild plant and animal species which is plundering our planet - but the opportunity has now been lost .
And I think it is all the worse for the fact that the EU is one of the biggest importers and a real consumer market .
After more than four years of negotiations , the Council has adopted a text which departs to a significant extent from the principles of prevention and sustainability .
The only concern now is to plunder and destroy biological diversity .
Worst of all is the present official line that each species has to earn the financial resources needed for its own conservation . I ask you : what kind of mentality produces such an idea ?
Is a living thing entitled to survive only if it can earn money ?
Does this mean that owls , parakeets and hawks can only fly about freely now if they carry a cheque book tucked under their wing ?
I find such an idea outrageous !
It truly shames civilized people and civilized countries .
Five hundred mammal and bird species and more than 110 species of orchids can now be traded freely in Europe .
And the picture becomes blacker still when I remind you that the decisions we are taking now represent a substantial retreat from Parliament 's position in 1993 .
This is a step backwards .
That is why I have to propose - on behalf of my group - that we reject the common position .
It will make the situation worse .
It will be no help for us to regulate transport better .
A cage is not a living space .
Before the animals are put into transport , nine out of ten of them have died , and most of the rest perish in transit .
I fear , however , that the House will not be able to bring itself to take this step .
Trade is always the imperative for us now , not sustainability , nor responsibility for the generations that will come after us .
The prime concern is to make money .
That is why , with my colleagues Mrs Graenitz and Mr Pimenta , I have tabled four amendments , and I hope it is the least you can do to adopt them , because they will bring about some small improvement and be some reflection of our responsibility .
Otherwise , I have to say that we will do ourselves no good by approving this common position and adopting this report , because it really will make the situation worse .
We all know that every day , some species of plant or animal disappears for good .
The world is a network in which every element has an important function , and the more we damage this web , the more harm we do to part of ourselves .
We are all interconnected !
Madam President , my group feels that it is absolutely vital that the amended CITES regulation before us should come into force as soon as possible .
If we do not regulate the trade in endangered species of plants and animals , the European Union will simply be promoting the rapid decline in biodiversity .
We know that the trade worldwide is now worth some ECU 3 to 3.5 billion , an estimated one third of it being illegal .
A large proportion of the trade is European , which is all the more reason to eliminate the control and definition problems here in the Union as quickly as possible .
Five years of discussions are already more than enough , I think .
I should like to congratulate Mrs van Putten on the way in which she has handled this whole issue recently .
As she has rightly pointed out , speed is now essential , and every day gained means an endangered species saved , in a manner of speaking .
Transport is a major problem in the trade in plants and animals , and we have all seen the harrowing photographs of mounds of dead birds being unloaded at airports .
Between 10 % and 70 % of all the animals transported do not reach their destination alive .
Nevertheless , I agree with Mrs van Putten that this regulation is not the best place to lay down rules on transport , and I think it is enough that Article 16 ( f ) requires the Member States to impose penalties where animals have been transported under cruel conditions .
Further national provisions can also be introduced on this subject .
Of course , the success of this regulation depends entirely on strict controls and the training of customs officers , which will need considerable investment .
For some bird and plant species , it is almost impossible to tell whether the document accompanying the consignment is correct , but this is the only way to apply the regulation in practice .
We also support the rapporteur 's proposal to set up a special working party to deal with any implementation problems .
We thus intend to vote for most of the amendments contained in the report .
Madam President , there are some points where the text should be adjusted to make it easier to implement and clearer for those who apply the law .
The title , for example , should be changed in line with the former Amendment No 16 , in order to clarify the content .
The way to protect animals and plants is to supervise trade .
And the way to protect us , as the European Parliament , is to supervise trade .
As the European Parliament , we also have a duty to see that the ancient tradition of falconry , which has been handed down and maintained locally , can also continue in future , legally and with due regard for the species concerned , as proposed in Amendments Nos 42 to 47 .
It is falcons which have ensured the survival of many birds of prey .
It is unworkable and unreasonable to try to make every movement of a bird of prey from one place to another subject to prior authorization .
Falconers do not keep birds of prey for commercial purposes or as pets .
Keeping these birds in a humane way , appropriate for the species , involves letting them fly every day .
Moreover , making the birds of prey which are used mainly in falconry subject to the strict protection of the regulation would be tantamount to declaring war on falconry .
We would be calling into question the technical competence of the proposal and of Directive No 79 / 409 on birds .
That is why the text should be changed in line with Amendments Nos 60 and 61 .
Madam President , the measures provided for by CITES and the Washington Convention , aimed at establishing international control of trade in species of wild flora and fauna threatened by extinction and on related products , have been applied in the Community under regulation 3626 / 82 .
In February 1994 the Commission presented an amended version to update the 1991 legislation , also incorporating the change in the legal base from Article 100a of the Treaty to Article 100s , and thus from codecision between the European institutions to a procedure which only provides for consultation of the European Parliament .
But this regulation is of fundamental importance not only for the protection of species but above all for properly organized trade , including derived products which represent billions , because alongside the legal market a huge group of illegal operations exists , comparable to the illegal traffic in drugs and arms .
So there is a need to strengthen customs controls and especially to improve coordination between the Member States , and establish the possible sanctions to be applied . It is also necessary to consider the importance of maintaining traditions which allow the conservation of wild fauna and at the same time provide appropriate derogations permitting the transport of certain ornithological species , naturally not those at risk , within the area already defined in other Community legislation , as set out in our joint amendment with the European People 's Party in Amendment No 32 , mentioned by Mrs Grossetête .
Many political groups clearly support the amendments presented by our group and not adopted in the Committee on the Environment , so they are tabled again in this Chamber , in particular Amendments Nos 33 and 35 which we naturally support as the promoters .
Madam President , naturally we all know that the CITES Convention covers animals and plants threatened with extinction , but may I , as a biologist , express some doubts about this concept of protection of species threatened with extinction .
Actually the problem is no longer to save species threatened with extinction but to preserve the balanced environments which exist in nature , threatened not only by the disappearance of certain species whose numbers are greatly reduced , but also by the reduction of species present in large numbers in certain areas , a reduction which can gravely alter the equilibrium .
We need a more complex and comprehensive approach to the situation and from that point of view the convention itself is unfortunately at fault .
The common position that has been adopted limits opportunities to make positive progress in the future , because it again sets out an attitude we Greens cannot accept : the use of animals and plants as objects , things to be traded , not living beings to be protected for themselves .
This is also the attitude behind transport in cages , through the transport systems , which is at the root of a real massacre , real destruction of living organisms .
That is why we , as Greens , cannot but support the need for extensive amendment of the common position , and will vote for the important amendments proposed by the rapporteur , and in particular those proposed by the Green Group .
Madam President , just a very few words to refer to some aspects of interest in this debate .
Special and very correct attention must be paid to forests and other natural eco-systems of great interest for the European heritage , and also for the whole world , still existing in so many of our areas , some of which are larger than others , for example , in many of the islands which are a part of Community territory .
It has been demonstrated and highlighted for many years now that many of the vegetable and animal species which compose those ecosystems , apart from any other interest , are also genuine relics , the final representatives of a European continental flora and fauna which disappeared many centuries ago .
The special case of islands constituting the biogeographical region of Macaronesia deserves every technical and material support from the Community so that , in cooperation with the respective governments , the many vegetable and animal species which are endemic or exclusive to them and , especially , those which are at risk of or are becoming extinct should have very effective protection and should be helped to survive for the good of science and mankind .
Therefore , let us try and duly carry out that defence , and this should be done in part through the Council Regulation proposed to us , essentially aimed at controlling the trade in wild fauna and flora species ; but we should not overlook the fact that this marketing is very often fraudulent , even within the European area , and that smuggling of species of flora and fauna has actually got worse since the practice of free movement , which led to the dismantling of those customs services which used to exercise controls - not always efficiently , it is true - over the import and export of live plants and animals .
It is not enough to legislate or to issue appropriate regulatory standards on respecting or improving the protection of wildlife .
First of all , we must raise the awareness of Member States and their regions to the importance of the problem and make them take rapid and efficient measures ; then we must promote , motivate and support the creation of any mechanisms and organisations which can effectively put into practice the principles and measures which we recommend .
Madam President , I have just realized that I have forgotten something , since I was in such a hurry .
I had another question for the Commissioner , which I hope she will answer .
Is it true , as a report by the Committee on the Environment states , that special rules are being drafted for falconry , which a number of speakers have already rightly pointed out is merely a minor detail in a major debate which has been blown up out of all proportion ?
I should like to know whether these people are to have special rules to enable them to pursue their sport .
Madam President , I would begin by thanking the Committee on the Environment and not least its rapporteur , Mrs van Putten , who has done a tremendous amount of work on this proposal .
As several speakers have pointed out during the debate , we are dealing here with a proposal dating from 1991 .
It has been in the pipeline for a long while , and the old regulation has been operating in the meantime .
This has not been satisfactory , and we need a new regulation .
My impression is that all the speakers are agreed on that .
So far , so good .
But it also appears that some of the agreement ends at that point , so let me go straight to the heart of the problem , namely Parliament 's Amendment No 5 .
As I see it , Amendment No 5 is a compromise between different views in the House , and it was also clear from today 's debate that this did not include Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , who I almost thought was speaking about a different proposal from the one we have before us .
Amendment No 5 is in itself an excellent move , which brings the animal welfare aspect into the proposal we are considering .
I personally therefore have every sympathy for the idea .
However , judging by all the information I have received from colleagues in DG XI , who have been working on this issue for many years , adopting this amendment will mean that the proposal will fall in the Council , and then we shall in fact be back where we started .
We shall end up once again without a new regulation .
The reason why we have come so far , why we have a proposal to discuss and thus a compromise , is that the Council has laboriously reached a common position , which is an important step forward .
This is not least because of Parliament 's contribution at first reading in 1993 .
It played an important role in shaping the text of the common position .
Without going further into detail , I shall simply mention a few points to illustrate how important the new proposal for a regulation is .
Firstly , the existing regulation is limited to species covered by the CITES Convention .
The proposal to amend the regulation opens up the possibility of including non-CITES species in the annexes .
Secondly , the annexes to the existing regulation can only be amended by the Council .
In the new proposal , the Commission is enabled to amend Annexes B to D. And , thirdly , the scope of the Commission 's implementing regulation is dramatically extended , so that the Community can respond more quickly and far more effectively to changes in conservation needs .
These are just some examples - others were highlighted in the debate .
The list could naturally be much longer .
Finally , I think that Amendment No 7 , which the Commission can accept , is a good alternative to No 5 .
Amendment No 7 is an appropriate way of linking the problem of the mortality rate of birds during transport with the commercial and conservation aspects .
You will therefore appreciate that I have weighed up the various political options , and the outcome of my deliberations is that I would prefer to have a proposal adopted , even if it is perhaps not quite as good as one might wish with regard to the animal welfare aspect .
When I say that it is politically justifiable to leave this to one side here , it is because the problem of the transport of live exotic birds whose survival is not in the danger zone is covered by an existing directive , namely Council Directive 91 / 628 .
The question of the mortality rate during transport can therefore be dealt with through the application of that directive .
You will gather from my speech here today that I am concerned as to what will happen if we do not have a proposal adopted .
There really are a great many people who have been waiting a long time for this .
My position on the amendments is therefore as follows .
As I said , I cannot accept Amendment No 5 , but will include Amendment No 7 in the revised proposal for the Council .
I would repeat that , to my mind , Amendment No 7 represents a good solution to the problem to which Parliament has called attention .
I can also accept Amendments Nos 1 , 14 , 15 , 17 and 24 , and , with some rewording , Amendments Nos 10 , 13 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 and 30 .
Consequently , I cannot accept Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 16 , 23 , 25 , 26 to 29 , 31 , 32 , 33 and 34 .
At this late hour , I shall not go further into the reasons for this , but I am of course at Parliament 's disposal if you wish to have further explanations .
As regards the last question from Mrs van Putten on falconry , my understanding is that the drafting of special rules in this area is not being considered .
Before I end , and last but not least , I should once again like to express my respect for the great amount of committed work done on this question by the rapporteur , Mrs van Putten , and I very much hope that we shall succeed in having a proposal adopted .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Pesticides
The next item is the report ( A4-0251 / 96 ) by Mrs Breyer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 95 ) 0272 - C4-0284 / 95-95 / 0154 ( CNS ) ) amending :
Council Directive 76 / 895 / EEC of 23 November 1976 relating to the fixing of maximum levels of pesticide residues in and on fruit and vegetables ; -Council Directive 86 / 362 / EEC of 24 July 1986 on the fixing of maximum levels for pesticide residues in and on cereals ; -Council Directive 86 / 363 / EEC of 24 July 1986 on the fixing of maximum levels for pesticide residues in and on foodstuffs of animal origin ; -Council Directive 90 / 642 / EEC of 27 November 1990 on the fixing of maximum levels for pesticide residues in and on certain products of plant origin , including fruit and vegetables .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European legislation on fixing maximum levels for pesticide residues is to be updated .
The main aims of the proposal for a directive are to extend the scope of the directives being amended , so as to cover processed and dried agricultural products and include composite processed products , and to harmonize provisions on exports , exemptions and monitoring programmes .
The Commission is proposing that the relevant provisions should be based on Article 43 , which is known as the agriculture article .
This implies that pesticide residues are regarded as necessary and unavoidable in the production of foodstuffs .
The Commission 's main purpose is to increase agricultural production .
Environmental and health protection take second place .
Under Article 43 , the European Parliament 's only right is to be consulted .
Moreover , a committee appointed by the Commission is to fix the limit values on the basis of a purely toxicological approach .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has therefore submitted a report which gives a higher priority to environmental and health protection .
We know that there are more than 800 different pesticides , and many of these substances have carcinogenic or mutagenic effects and weaken the immune system .
That is why the protection of consumers and the environment must be taken into account when fixing pesticide limit values .
This can be done if the directive is based on Article 100a , as proposed by the Committee on the Environment .
The existing procedure for fixing pesticide limit values is based on animal experiments and the ADI value , and geared exclusively to adults weighing 70 kilos .
In other words , it fails to take account of the actual breakdown of the population and the particular dangers for the sick , children and the infirm .
No account whatever is taken of interactions between different pesticides .
The Committee on the Environment therefore proposes setting a standard maximum concentration of 0.01 mg of active substance per kilogram of food .
The limit value for drinking water is in fact a hundred times more stringent , but we are obliged to permit one hundred times more pesticide in solid foods , such as vegetables , because there is a detection threshold .
Nonetheless , in terms of environmental and health policy , what we are proposing would be a great improvement , because the current permissible level of pesticides in solid foods is up to 10 000 times higher than the level for drinking water .
We take the view that if we afford a high level of protection to drinking water , we should do the same for solid foods , particularly in view of the fact that more than 80 % of our water intake comes from solid foods , rather than liquids .
The Committee on the Environment also proposes a total limit value of 0.05 mg .
This is intended to reduce the dangers to health from the unknown interactive effects of different substances .
Only recently , an American study from New Orleans demonstrated that the interaction of a number of chlorinated pesticides was substantially more damaging to health than the isolated effects of the individual substances .
The proposals from the Committee on the Environment also represent a degree of deregulation and simplification of the procedure .
Instead of fixing a separate value for each foodstuff , whether rhubarb or cauliflower , we propose that there should be a single limit value for pesticides and a total limit value , as is the case with the drinking water directive .
This would simplify matters and make it clear that what we are trying to do here is to improve environmental protection .
Our concern is to reduce the volume of pesticides in order to protect the environment .
Back in 1991 , a cost-benefit analysis in the USA showed that 90 % of all pesticides were superfluous .
Pesticide reduction programmes in Sweden , Denmark and the Netherlands have demonstrated that there is another way .
In Sweden , over five years , these programmes have produced a 50 % reduction in the amount of pesticides used , and in Denmark , reductions of up to 30 % over seven years , depending on the substance .
This shows that the use of pesticides can be reduced without jeopardizing agricultural production .
The report proposes the use of integrated plant protection , to which the EU has already committed itself in the Rio summit 's Agenda 21 .
Finally , the report calls for a binding definition of good farming practice , based precisely on the commitments which the EU made in Rio .
It seems to me that the only way to overcome the problem of pesticide residues in food is to avoid using pesticides in farming .

Let me conclude by recalling something that Commissioner Fischler said , with which I agree : cynical as it might sound , the BSE crisis is the very thing which could accelerate the process of reflection on a change of course for agriculture in the EU .
I believe that we should be producing for the market , not trying to slip our production past the market .
That is why I would ask you to approve the report of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to refer to Mrs Breyer 's final remarks : it is easy to indulge in populism in this House by quoting figures which reflect only a part of the truth .
It is easy to say that pesticide pollution has been reduced by 50 % in Sweden and 30 % in Denmark , but the fact is that we have a totally different climate , as well as different crops and agricultural requirements , in other countries of the European Union .
And , above all , it should be remembered that in some countries of the European Union , an average of USD 300 is spent per hectare , while in others it is only USD 30 .
When we are all at the same level , therefore , it will be possible to say that we must all reduce the amount of plant health products used in our agriculture .
With regard to the draft directive , we broadly support the Commission 's proposals .
The Commission is attempting to resolve the genuine problems that have been identified in the application of the directives it is proposing to amend , with a view to harmonizing national legislation on maximum residue limits - problems which give rise to serious barriers to the functioning of the internal market in plant products .
It is also seeking to update the earlier directives , improving and making progress with the harmonization of important aspects such as the monitoring of compliance with the maximum residue limits - which hitherto have been left to the discretion of the individual Member States - and making more flexible the procedure for setting Community maximum residue limits .
With the adoption of this proposal , we shall achieve a great deal of harmony between Directives 86 / 362 , 86 / 363 and 90 / 642 .
This represents a prior step before embarking on the redrafting of those directives - since it seems clear that the Commission either could not find sufficient reason for undertaking this task or encountered significant technical problems with it .
I share the Commission 's view that this should be done in several stages , since proceeding in the manner proposed by Mrs Breyer would mean climbing the ladder in one go instead of step by step , as we are all accustomed to doing .
In the event that Mrs Breyer 's report is adopted , I would ask the Commission to draw up a single proposal for a directive designed to resolve the technical and scientific problems with adequate legal guarantees .
It can be seen that the format of this proposal for a directive is very different from that of Directive 76 / 895 . The reason for this , I believe , is that the directive does not harmonize the national maximum residue limits of the Member States , but establishes Community ceilings for national maximum residue limits which may be equal to or higher than the latter , according to Article 3 ( 2 ) .
In my view , the only way to resolve this issue is to revise the maximum limits for active substances contained in Annex II and transfer these , as Community maximum residue limits , to Annex II of Directive 90 / 642 . This task has already been initiated by the Commission in the context of Directive 93 / 58 and , once it has been completed , we shall be able to abolish Directive 76 / 895 .
I would call on the Commission to display speed and flexibility in this task of harmonizing the maximum residue limits .
Another aspect which I should like to highlight is the attempt to bring the criteria for the establishment of maximum residue limits in plant products into line with those for the purity of drinking water , ignoring the fact that there are internationally recognized and accepted scientific bases for the setting of these maximum residue limits . This could lead to barriers to trade - with regard to imports from third countries , and so on - in breach of the WTO agreements .
Clearly , drinking water is not and should not be treated with agricultural pesticides .
But it can happen that , in some water , soil colloids produce readings which are higher than those indicated in the report .
Similarly , there are active substances which occur naturally in plants - for example gibberellic acid - which give readings higher than those set out in the report .
If these requirements are introduced , even the environmentally friendly farming with which we all agree will be made impossible .
Another aspect to which I wish to draw the attention of the House is the reference to dietary products and food for children .
It makes no sense to allow the marketing of fresh food products - carrots , for example - for human consumption , with the exception of babies and invalids .
Where is the consumer protection here ?
Are these people to be warned that such products are not good for them ?
And can these products be consumed by nursing mothers ?
This is not consistent .
The maximum residue limits must scientifically ensure that there is no risk for any persons from the day they are born .
Let me point to another problem : fixing the same maximum residue limits for fresh products and processed products , for whole products and parts of products , may result in large-scale inconsistencies .
Finally , I would ask the Commission to study carefully the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which were unanimously adopted . And I would ask the House to study carefully Mrs Breyer 's report on the proposal for a directive , for which our group is calling for a change of legal base : the application , that is , of Article 100a of the Treaty .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , how much pesticide will the consumer tolerate ?
That is the question which the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection had to ask themselves in considering Mrs Breyer 's report - a report on four directives on pesticide residues in and on foods and cereals .
In my view , it will simplify administration if everything is dealt with in a single directive , as Mrs Breyer has suggested , and the programmes to reduce the use of plant protection products and pesticides that were mentioned earlier - and are already being implemented in some Member States - can be covered far more easily by a single directive than by four different ones , as the Commission originally proposed .
I think that we really can simplify the administration here .
Now , as you know , I am not a lawyer .
However , common sense tells me that Article 100a , which deals with the internal market , is much more suitable as the legal basis for these measures than the other legal bases that have been mentioned .
What we are talking about today concerns consumers in the internal market .
If we choose the agriculture article , Article 43 , we shall exclude some of the people who wish to consume these products .
Article 130s , on the environment , is undoubtedly very important , and this is also an environmental issue , but I think that in this case we should put more emphasis on consumer protection .
The use of plant protection products is certainly an environmental issue , because there is exceptional danger to the environment from an excess of all these products .
We have now received a communication on the protection of water reserves , and there are proposals for a drinking water directive - a directive for the environmental protection of water resources .
I believe that the only honest approach to such directives and limit values for drinking water is to avoid every kind of substance that can find its way into the water from the air or the soil .
Water is a scarce enough commodity in Europe , and we cannot afford to put it at any kind of risk .
I think consideration should also be given to the possible effect that the intensive use of pesticides can have on animal feed , because it is not only the products destined for human consumption that are sprayed , but also many plants that are eaten by animals ; and nowadays in particular we have to think very carefully about what gets into the food chain and how .
An integrated approach will produce sustainable development : that is what we all want , and it is already the objective of numerous programmes .
I believe that we shall have to achieve environmentally friendly farming if we wish to see agriculture and the environment surviving in equilibrium .
A balance in nature will also produce a balance in farming , balanced production and balanced demand , and I believe that ultimately we shall also achieve a balance as regards the income of the farming population .
I should like to say , in conclusion , that my group supports the position of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Madam President , we have a proposal for a directive before us here which supplements and strengthens the efforts of years of harmonization in the field of pesticides .
This new proposal will ensure greater protection of consumer health without undermining agricultural production , and it is important to say and reaffirm that .
It will guarantee far more systematic information and make the provisions of the 1991 directive on the marketing of pesticide products a reality by setting corresponding maximum residue levels for the various agricultural products .
Furthermore , it provides for procedures for resolving cases where there are barriers to intra-Community trade .
Over the last few years , Spain has suffered frequently - perhaps too frequently - from such problems in the export of its fruit and vegetables , as well as other more sensitive products such as dietary products for children .
We therefore welcome this new Commission proposal , which will prevent such artificial problems .
This draft directive should have received the general support of the Committee on the Environment .
However , the rapporteur - perhaps through an excess of zeal - has produced some proposals which are well-intentioned , but possibly ill-conceived , and which do not correspond to the real needs .
This prevents us from supporting them in the way that we would have wished .
Many of us are able to support her proposals as ultimate objectives or guidelines for a pesticides policy , but wishes should not be confused with proposals for legislation that has to be complied with .
It is one thing to agree with the ideas underlying the fight to reduce pesticide pollution , but quite another to discuss the current limited scope for applying those ideas .
We also agree that there is a need to take into account the combination effects of the different pesticide products , but it is quite another thing , Mrs Breyer , to seek to classify as pesticide residues all possible products of metabolism , even if they are harmless substances .
This completely changes the way in which residue content is calculated .
Nor can we allow the message to be sent out to the public that Community rules are decided by unsupervised bureaucrats , when - as you know very well , Mrs Breyer - the procedure is quite the opposite : it is a very complex one , with the participation of independent scientific experts , the committees which represent the national governments , the Commission and , indirectly , this Parliament - since we follow closely all the decisions that are taken at Community level .
Finally , Madam President , I believe that we should not forget that there are really only two types of agriculture : that which is able to use pesticides and fertilizers , and that which , unfortunately , does not have these means at its disposal and is therefore unable to become self-sufficient .
I do not believe it is desirable to magnify the potential technological risks of progress but to seem to disregard the real tragedy of our society : the fact that millions of children and adults continue to die for lack of food .
Madam President , the directive we are now discussing serves to standardize the legislation put in place by four earlier directives fixing the maximum levels for pesticide residues in fruit and vegetables , cereals , and foodstuffs of animal origin .
This was necessary because , only recently , farming methods caused too high a concentration of pesticides in foodstuffs and water , particularly through the use of nitrates .
Since then , however , farmers have clearly been doing their best , and scientific and technical assessments of the risks associated with pesticides have been carried out which make it possible to legislate on a case-by-case basis .
That is why we are totally opposed to the opinion of the rapporteur , who wishes to fix a maximum residue level of 0.01 mg / kg for all foodstuffs and farm produce when they are placed on the market , the same limit as applies to drinking water .
Yet under no circumstances can foodstuffs be compared with drinking water , and the application of this rate to agriculture would restrict very significantly the number of active substances in use , with far-reaching agronomic and economic consequences for both farming and the food we eat .
Since it seems to us unreasonable to propose rules which are impossible to apply , we therefore feel that it would be inappropriate to adopt Amendments Nos 10 and 11 , 14 and 15 , and 20 to 24 .
Madam President , let me begin by saying that I think Mrs Breyer has done an excellent job and has extended the scope of the directive to include maximum levels .
I will come back to this .
In Sweden , society , farmers and consumers have together led the way in reducing the use of chemicals in agriculture .
It is our task here in the European Parliament to press for a corresponding development .
At the same time , of course , this question should also be taken up in other international fora , such as the World Trade Organization , so that imported foods will not be of a standard lower than those we produce ourselves .
EU cooperation should after all serve as a means of securing drastic cuts in the use of chemicals but , to achieve this , the European Parliament needs to have greater influence over decisions .
We shall get it if we follow up the proposal from the Environment Committee and amend the legal basis to Article 100a . The use of chemicals in agriculture is of course an environmental issue and a consumer affairs issue , not just an agricultural matter , as it may easily be if Article 43 is retained .
Responsibility for cutting down on the use of chemicals in agriculture cannot be placed on the shoulders of the individual farmer or the consumers .
The pesticide producers are too strong for that .
It is a political task to tighten up the maximum level requirements through legislation and thereby to prevent the occurrence of toxic residues in food .
The coordination of several directives on limits for pesticide residues would make for clearer legislation .
It is the dictates of nature that should control agriculture throughout the EU .
Ecological agriculture and integrated agriculture , practised more in harmony with natural processes , must set the future standard for our agricultural production .
It is important for the European Parliament to insist that the Member States follow up the commitments of the Rio Conference on reducing the use of pesticides .
The use of large quantities of chemicals to produce food is not a sustainable route for the future .
It is of course also unreasonable in the long run to allow higher levels of pesticide residues in food than in drinking water ; food must not be more toxic than water .
I have great sympathy for Mrs Breyer 's proposal for a blanket maximum value of 0.01 mg / kg and likewise for an aggregate maximum value of 0.05 mg .
Unfortunately there is still insufficient scientific evidence to enable such a proposal to be made effective .
We cannot therefore support it .
But I hope the Commission will soon come back to Parliament with a proposal on lower maximum levels .
In Austria alone , fixing maximum residue limits would mean throwing out the vast majority of the residue levels and substances listed in the last draft regulation .
Not only would this make it impossible to produce enough plant-based foods , it would also mean that European business and farming ceased to be internationally competitive .
If these arbitrary and toxicologically unjustified residue levels were observed , fruit and vegetables could no longer be produced by conventional means .
Imports of fresh produce in the winter months would be prevented .
That is why we should recommend retaining the present system for assessing residues individually .
It is based on scientific research , and takes into account the toxicological properties of the substances , as well as good farming practice for the foods concerned .
Under this system , the residue levels are precautionary levels , not danger levels for the consumer .
I should like to ask the Commissioner whether biotechnology or genetic engineering offer any possibilities for reducing the use of pesticides and fertilizers .
Madam President , I recognize that Parliament is considering this proposal after long and detailed scrutiny of the many aspects it involves , and I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Breyer , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for the work which they have done on the proposal .
Let me say at the outset that the Commission entirely backs the main thrust of the report , namely that the use of plant protection products should be kept to a minimum , and that production methods such as integrated pest control and ecological farming can help to achieve that goal .
On behalf of the Commissioner responsible , I should also like to say , however , that account should be taken of the fact that the use of plant protection products in conventional farming is strictly regulated under the terms of Directive 91 / 414 on the marketing of plant protection products .
These provisions mean that the products can only be used in the minimum quantities necessary to achieve reasonable pest control , and in circumstances where they do not present a risk to human health or have unacceptable effects on the environment .
In the Commission 's view , the balance between the need for safe and restrictive use of plant protection products and the benefits of these products in terms of effective farming is not adequately expressed in the recitals that are proposed in Amendments Nos 6 to 10 .
We are therefore unable to accept these amendments .
However , the Commission can in principle accept Amendment No 43 , and is therefore prepared to add a general recital stressing the need for safe and restrictive use of plant protection products in agriculture , at the same time highlighting the positive role played by a number of methods , for example integrated production and ecological farming .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 42 , since the proposed recital refers to the principles governing the use of plant protection products in ecological farming , which should , if necessary , be dealt with in the context of Council Regulation No 2092 / 91 on ecological production methods for agricultural products and their indication on agricultural products and foodstuffs .
As regards the legal basis , the Commission takes the view that if a legislative act serves one or more of the objectives of the common agricultural policy as set out in Article 39 of the Treaty , then Article 43 forms the correct and adequate legal basis , as determined by the case-law of the Court of Justice .
We are therefore unable to accept Amendment No 1 .

Amendments Nos 14 and 22 and the subsequent technical Amendments Nos 11 , 15 , 20 , 23 , 24 and 31 seek to introduce a quite arbitrary maximum level of 0.01 mg / kg for all pesticides and crops , regardless of the permitted uses and toxicological features of individual agents .
The Commission cannot accept these amendments and the approach behind them for the following reasons : it would disregard the procedure which is being followed internationally , not least in the Codex Alimentarius , and which is aimed at establishing maximum levels on a scientific basis .
The scientific basis for plant health measures must also be respected in the context of the recent procedure for health and plant health measures under the WTO agreement , and the proposed change would lead to conflicts with our trading partners .
Last but not least , if crops cannot be protected against pests with the aid of plant protection products , the competitiveness of European agriculture and the supply of farm products will be seriously jeopardized .
The Commission does agree that it would have made for greater clarity to bring all the legislation on pesticide residues together in a single directive , or at least to codify the existing directives .
However , we feel it is too early to do this , at a time when Directive 76 / 895 will shortly cease to be valid .
It is also necessary to gain more experience of applying the new procedures being proposed before embarking on new tasks .
At present , the Commission is therefore unable to accept Amendments Nos 2 to 5 , 16 , 17 and 33 , but I can confirm that these ideas will be considered in detail , with a view to a future proposal .
However , the Commission will look straight away at the possibility of regularly sending all interested parties updated and clearly presented tables containing information on the Community 's maximum levels for all pesticide-product combinations , where such levels are established .
The Commission takes the view that a number of amendments represent useful technical improvements to the proposal , and can therefore gladly accept in principle paragraph 5 of Amendment No 14 , which improves the control measures in Directive 76 / 895 .

The Commission can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 12 , 13 and 18 , to the extent that they bring the relevant provisions of Directive 76 / 895 into line with those of the directive subsequently adopted .
Amendment No 21 can be accepted .
The Commission agrees that the conciliation procedure should be applied without unnecessary delay , and may also cover dried , processed and composite foodstuffs .
We can thus accept in principle Amendments Nos 25 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 32 , 39 and 49 .
There are indeed a great many amendments .
The Commission can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 27 , 30 , 38 and 48 , which define in detail how the results of the control measures should be applied .
The Commission can accept in principle Amendments Nos 35 , 37 , 41 , 45 , 47 and 51 .
We believe that the regulatory committee procedure is appropriate for determining the individual maximum levels , since these are extremely technical decisions , based on scientific assessment of well-defined technical data .
Moreover , the same procedure has already been established for similar technical measures , for example the provisional maximum levels under Article 4 ( 1 ) ( f ) .
The Commission therefore regrets that it is unable to accept Amendment No 19 .
However , we can accept that there should be greater accuracy in the data used as a basis for fixing the maximum levels .
The Commission can thus accept in principle Amendments Nos 34 , 36 , 40 , 44 , 46 and 50 .
The last part of these amendments is unacceptable , however , since the requirements for data on pesticide residues are laid down in Directive 91 / 414 .
We are sure that this measure , when adopted , will substantially improve the application of current EC provisions on maximum levels for pesticide residues in agricultural products .
Together with Directive 91 / 414 , which governs the marketing and use of plant protection products , it will further help to see that maximum levels are determined in an effective way , in keeping with the scientific methods used internationally and taking account of the high degree of protection for human and animal health which EC legislation on pesticides is generally seeking to achieve .
I must apologize , Madam President , for giving such a lengthy answer .
Commissioner , I should be very grateful if you could explain to us how it is that the values for residue levels have been continually reduced over the last ten years , and on what scientific data these reductions have been based .
And let me deal with the observation , also made by Mrs Redondo and Mr Valverde , that the value of 0.01 mg is arbitrary .
I have in front of me the German regulation on maximum residue levels , which was adopted on 1 September 1994 .
It stipulates that precisely this value - 0.01 mg per kilogram of food - should apply in the absence of other residue values .
I trust that Germany will not now be accused of having lost touch with reality because it is making this very same proposal .
A final point , Commissioner , and one which may also be made in the form of a question : we now have a series of amendments , in particular by Mrs Redondo , which refer to Annex 6 of Directive 414 / 91 , but we all know that this no longer exists .
The European Court of Justice ruled on 18 June , in a case brought by the European Parliament , that this Annex no longer exists .
In other words , we now have a situation in which there are absolutely no criteria for evaluation .
That is why I should like to hear from the Commission how it proposes to deal with this situation if it does not take its lead from the Committee on the Environment , and there is currently no Annex 6 .
Because this is a very immediate situation , I think that the question of how we approach it is extremely difficult , and in the light of tomorrow 's vote it should perhaps be referred to the Bureau .
I shall not prolong the debate .
On behalf of Commissioner Fischler , I have tried to give a full reply to all the questions arising from the amendments tabled , and I am sure that during the discussions in the various committees there was also an opportunity to go into further detail , for example as regards the well-substantiated scientific results and levels which are referred to in the proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
I should like to thank everyone , including the interpreters , and remind you that our next sitting will be held tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m. )
Topical and urgent debate ( objections )
The next item is the vote on objections to the list of subjects for the next debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance ( Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure ) .
Item I - Situation in Cyprus :
Madam President , as we will have a statement on Bosnia tomorrow , we wish to withdraw the objection .
There are therefore no further objections to Items I and II .
Madam President , we had tabled two resolutions .
The first , about the matter of Bosnia , is withdrawn because it is dealt with elsewhere .
But we are of course maintaining the second .
Therefore we need only vote on the second resolution .
The Union for Europe Group has requested the deletion of the item ' Expulsion of illegal immigrants ' .
Justification : all the Member States are facing serious human and economic problems because of the massive immigration from developing countries .
We are not unmoved by the scale of this phenomenon .
Yet we have to seek a solution together and in a considered manner .
It seems totally inappropriate to us to discuss this in the framework of a topical and urgent debate .
( Parliament rejected the request )
I have received two motions , from the Group of the Party of European Socialists and from the Union for Europe Group , seeking to insert a new item ' Support and conservation of the pilgrim route to Santiago de Compostela ' .
Madam President , a point of order to clarify a misunderstanding .
I heard the destruction of pilgrim route to Santiago de Compostela mentioned .
I come from that constituency - we have no Socialist Members in that constituency - and I must make it clear that the works do not affect the route to Santiago .
The works are on a road which is not part of the route to Santiago .
So Parliament does not need to take action on this issue .
( Parliament approved the request )
Welcome
Before we begin the debate on the state of the Union with speeches from the Presidents of Parliament , the European Council and the Commission , I would like to welcome a very distinguished visitor to our Parliament today who will be listening to this debate , Sir Edward Heath .
( Loud and sustained applause ) Sir Edward Heath was Prime Minister of Great Britain from 1970 to 1974 .
His many years of public service are very closely associated with Europe and with Britain 's membership of the European Union .
He led the British negotiating team in the first round of negotiations in the early 1960s .
He was Prime Minister when Britain joined the European Community in 1973 and since then he has been an unswerving advocate of a strong and effective European Union .
He has never hesitated to criticize those in his country who would wish to take Britain out of the Union and to reawaken the demons of nationalism .
Above all else , he embodies the central fact that there is no contradiction between love of country , loyal service to the national interest , and support for Europe .
Sir Edward , you are very welcome here today .
State of the European Union
The next item is the statements by the President of the European Parliament , the President-in-Office of the European Council and the President of the Commission on the state of European Union , followed by a debate .
Mr President , you said here in last year 's State of the European Union debate that the new nationalism leads straight back to the pre-war Europe .
You were absolutely right .
You went on to say in the debate that the greatest challenge at the end of this century is to reform the Union in such a way that it can expand to the east and the south without disintegrating or self-destructing .
Again , you put your finger on the key question .
We owe a huge debt to the visionaries who gave birth to the European Union , one of whom , the late Emile Noël , was last week compared to James Madison , the constitution-maker of the United States , such was the role he played in the development of the Union .
We can best honour the memory of Noël , of Schuman and of Monnet by ensuring that the Union we pass on to our successors continues to be vital , relevant and , above all , one with which our citizens can identify .
We must not take the European Union for granted .
As one of your Members , Mr Spencer , said in the State of the European Union debate last year , support for Europe must be won anew in each generation .
A ritual restating of elite viewpoints and obscure acronyms will not win that support from our citizens .
Mrs Roth , in her contribution in last year 's debate , said that at the time of the founding fathers Europe had had a heart and no form , whereas she felt that the Union now had a form , but that its heart was made of stone .
Perhaps that is to overstate the case , but there is a truth there .
People are not sufficiently engaged in a positive way by what Europe is doing .
As governments prepare for the special European Council on 5 October in Dublin I ask the Members of this Parliament in this debate for their views on how we can best - all of us , including the Irish presidency - win support anew in this generation for the European Union .
Political theorists of the nineteenth century assumed that a person could have just one sovereign allegiance to his or her territorial nation state .
That was understandable .
Territorially-based natural resources , like agricultural land and minerals , were crucial to the nineteenth-century and early twentieth-century economy .
So nation and territory did have to be one and the same .
On the other hand , knowledge , instant communications and mobility will be the characteristics of the twenty-first-century economy .
And nationalities will all inevitably be more and more intermixed together over the territory of the developed world .
In many parts of the world a new political model is needed to organize this new social reality , a model that recognizes that people have more allegiances than one and yet can live and work happily together with people of different allegiance .
The European Union today and , in particular , the concept of a developing European citizenship are based on this new model .
In the European Union one can be simultaneously someone who owes allegiance to Flanders , to Belgium and to the European Union and , at the same time , work and live together in the same street with somebody who has a different set of allegiances .
Having said that , we must not ask Europe or the European Union to perform the impossible and then judge it severely if it fails .
In an age of multiple allegiances the Union will never be more than just one of the entities to which people will owe or feel allegiance .
We must put the matter in historical context .
Most nation states were brought together by war , and many were just held together by the pursuit of glory at the expense of others , or by a shared sense of grievance .
Thankfully , the European Union lacks these deep , if negative , emotional bonds .
The European Union was brought together , unlike most nation states , in peace and to do many mundane and practical things .
Furthermore , the European Union is now seeking to deepen its unity while , at the same time , enlarging its membership : an especially difficult task , as any student of the nineteenth-century history of the United States can remind us .
To win the hearts of Europeans at this stage in our history , the European Union must show that it is the best vehicle through which the continent and its citizens can prepare for the world of tomorrow .
The world 's population today is 6 billion people - about 2 billion more people on the globe than when the Treaty of Rome was signed in 1958 .
There will be an extra one-and-a-half billion people on the globe thirty years from now .
All of these people will need to be fed and clothed and they will need clean water .
There are now 2 , 800 square metres of arable land on the globe for every person .
By the year 2025 , there will be no more than 1 , 700 square metres of arable land for every person on the globe and grain yields are not increasing fast enough to keep up with that increasing population .
Europe 's share of the world 's population is only 7 % and is going down .
Yet Europe consumes 18 % of the world 's oil .
What happens when everyone else 's demand for energy in the world rises to our European level ?
Carbon emissions in the world continue to increase .
Already the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere has gone from 280 parts per million in the nineteenth century to 350 parts per million today .
Where will it be by 2025 ?
These sorts of problems are too big for the nation state - any nation state - to solve on its own .
That is one reason why we need the European Union .
Only a European Union will be big enough to mobilize Europe 's resources to tackle the world 's problems .
Young people know this well and that is why young people are less sceptical about Europe than their elders .
Last week I had the honour of addressing the United States Congress .
The United States is a great example of the successful integration of a variety of peoples who still remain different .
As we work for closer integration through the Intergovernmental Conference we should not fear that this will mean the end of national or local allegiances .
Closer integration of the European Union and continued identification with one 's Member State are complementary to one another and not mutually exclusive .
Closer European integration is , however , a recognition of the reality that the modern global economy is moving towards a more globalized political model .
Only the European Union is big enough to enable Europeans to influence and shape global politics in an effective way .
Mr President , the Union itself must tackle five principal tasks in the coming years .
These are : to make the Union more relevant to its citizens ; to successfully conclude the Intergovernmental Conference ; to make the single currency a reality on time ; to complete the next round of enlargement to the east and to the south ; and to secure Europe 's place in the world .
The first task is to make the Union relevant to its own citizens .
The ordinary man or woman in the street , whether he or she be in Barcelona , in Berlin or in Belfast , will not judge the European Union by its treaties , by its institutions , or by its policy documents .
The effect of the Union on each person 's daily life will be the yardstick that they will use .
Europe must therefore concentrate on the key concerns of citizens , and in July the Irish presidency summarized the concerns of the citizens of Europe in four phrases : secure jobs , safer streets , sound money and a peaceful Europe .
Secure jobs is not an appeal for massive intervention by the European Union ; it is not an appeal for simplistic solutions - there are none .
The Union must , however , attempt to tackle the problem of unemployment in a coordinated way .
There are more unemployed people in the Union today than the combined population of the four smallest Member States .
This is a waste of human resources .
It contributes to social problems such as crime and social exclusion .
Europe 's welfare systems are being stretched to their absolute limits by unemployment .
We must understand the dynamic of unemployment on a world scale .
The demand price for low-skilled work in the developed world is falling .
When the demand price for low-skilled work falls below the level which society considers to be an acceptable minimum income - what one might call the welfare level - then we have unemployment .
European unemployment is therefore a function of the relationship between the international competitiveness of the skill levels of Europe 's workforce and what European society regards as a minimal socially acceptable income .
If the solution is not to be to reduce our income expectations , then it must be to raise the skill levels and thus enhance the competitiveness of our entire workforce .
That requires coordinated European action on basic education as well as on training , on the mutual recognition of qualifications and on infrastructural investments that make our total economy more competitive .
There are distributional consequences no matter what way one looks at this problem .
Either the better-placed contribute to the cost of raising the skill and competitiveness levels of those less well-placed than they or , alternatively , they would have to pay more for welfare .
It is a simple choice .
The Irish presidency is actively pursuing the mandate of the Florence European Council to produce an integrated approach to the creation of employment .
Our objective is that the Dublin European Council in December will draw together the themes of President Santer 's confidence pact , the Essen process and other initiatives in an integrated manner .
Millions of Europeans are dependent on farming .
Many are deeply concerned about their future .
Against the background of increasing world population , European agriculture has the challenge of producing food efficiently and competitively for world as well as for local markets .
This requires structural change and enhanced consumer confidence through quality assurance .
The fabric of rural life and the single agricultural market must be preserved , so change must take place in an organized way .
This is an important challenge for the Union particularly in the context of the BSE crisis .
The presidency is committed to finding a solution to the BSE crisis based on the restoration of consumer confidence in the beef sector and the adoption of interim measures to ensure the survival of beef producers .
What is clear is that the BSE crisis can only be tackled effectively at European Union level .
All our societies have seen increased crime over the past few decades .
We do not want the single market for goods and services to become a single market for drugs and crime .
The agreement on the Europol Convention at Florence was a major move in the right direction but we must now urgently make it operational .
Dealing with drug trafficking is a major priority for the Irish presidency .
We hope the Dublin European Council will adopt substantive conclusions in December in the fight against drug trafficking .
Recent events have brought home to us all throughout Europe the obscene and shocking crimes perpetrated against children in our continent .
The Irish presidency is working closely with other Member States to draw up measures at European level to deal with this most evil of crimes .
In particular , the presidency has proposed that the mandate of Europol be extended to deal with trafficking in children .
( Applause ) Adoption of this proposal at the earliest time would be a matter of high priority .
I hope that at their meeting next week in Dublin Justice and Home Affairs Ministers will be able to agree to this initiative .
The second task facing the Union is to bring the IGC to a rapid and successful conclusion .
While the conclusion of the IGC is unlikely during the Irish presidency , the Conference is making good progress .
We are moving from the aspirational to the concrete .
We have a mandate to prepare a general outline of a draft revision of the Treaties for the Dublin Council in December .
We will do that .
The draft will address all the issues and will set out the options for Treaty amendments in Treaty form based on the discussions in the IGC .
The new Treaty must equip the Union for the internal and external challenges facing it as it enters the twenty-first century .
It must lay the ground for enlargement .
The functioning of the Union 's institutions must be made more effective , more democratic and more transparent .
The IGC must strengthen the role of the European Parliament in the Union .
( Applause ) Issues which need to be addressed include the extension of the co-decision procedure , the simplification and reduction of the number of decision-making procedures and the question of a ceiling on the membership of Parliament after enlargement .
I acknowledge the valuable contribution made by the European Parliament to the work of the IGC .
It has helped to keep the IGC focused on the broader picture .
I pay special tribute to your representatives Elisabeth Guigou and Elmar Brok .
The IGC offers us a unique opportunity to bring the Union 's work closer to the public by making the Union more transparent and comprehensible .
Transparency without comprehensibility is of little use .
Ireland fully supports inclusion in the Treaty of the general principle of transparency , including access to documents .
But the public will judge Europe not by whether they are entitled to read documents being prepared for European Council meetings but by what the European Treaty does about the problems they face in their daily lives .
Therefore , I am particularly pleased that Treaty provisions in relation to employment , crime and drugs are receiving serious consideration in the IGC .
While these matters remain primarily for Member States there is a European responsibility in regard to each of them and suggested amendments , if incorporated in the new Treaty , will help us carry that Treaty with our electorates .
In institutional matters we must not , however , make the mistake of tackling false problems .
In particular institutional reform should not be based on the unfounded perception that the Union is divided into two camps - one of big and the other of small states .
The new Treaty must also equip the Union to play an international role commensurate with its importance through an effective coherent common foreign and security policy and thereby contribute to peace .
The third task facing the Union is to make the single currency a reality .
Economic and monetary union must commence on time and in line with Treaty requirements .
The single market if it is to be consolidated , must be underpinned by a strong and stable European currency .
The EMU convergence criteria do no more than set out a sensible path for budgetary policy which every state should aspire to in any event .
Stable public finances deliver low interest rates , low inflation , higher investment and , ultimately , more jobs .
In other words , the convergence criteria make social and economic sense even if the project for EMU never existed .
The single currency will eliminate exchange rate risks and transaction costs for trade , tourism and investment between participating Member States .
It will place Europe firmly centre stage in the global economy .
Economic and monetary union will also cement the integration of peoples in Europe and reinforce a European identity .
That sense of identity will be enhanced by the fact that the economic policies of all participating states will be framed within a stable economic environment and will no longer be driven by short-term pressures that sometimes continue to affect individual national currencies .
The fourth task facing the Union is enlargement to include the associated states of Central and Eastern Europe and of the Mediterranean which have applied for membership .
The process of preparing the Union and the applicant countries for enlargement is now well mapped out .
They must intensify their relationships with the Union with regard to the pre-accession strategy , their association agreements and the application of the White Paper on the internal market .
As stated in the conclusions of the European Council at Madrid , enlargement is both a political necessity and an historic opportunity .
While enlargement poses major problems for the Union and for the applicant states , these can be overcome in a spirit of compromise .
Ireland looks forward to holding discussions at ministerial and official level with the applicant countries within the framework provided by the structured dialogue and to welcoming the Heads of State and Government of the applicant countries to Dublin for the European Council in December .
This brings me to the fifth task which we must address , that of building a Europe that is open to the world and a force for development and peace .
Europe must promote democracy and the rule of law and respect for human rights throughout the world .
As you said in your contribution , Mr President , trans-Atlantic relations are of special importance and of some difficulty .
The new trans-Atlantic agenda and the EU-US action plan have both provided the framework for the realization of common policy objectives to the benefit of both the United States and the Union .
They provide a framework to deal with differences which exist from time to time .
And differences exist at the moment with regard to the extra-territorial effects of two recent acts passed by Congress .
I raised these on the occasion of my visit to Washington last week with both the President and representatives of both parties in Congress .
I believe that an amicable resolution to this dispute is in the interests of both the European Union and the United States and can be reached .
A multilateral trading system is of importance to both of us .
We must therefore continue our efforts to make it work in regard to this matter and in preparation for the World Trade Conference in Singapore .
We must also cooperate with the United States in developing more sophisticated methods to deal with organized international crime .
We must also develop political dialogue with our partners elsewhere in the European security area and strengthen the OSCE .
We must support a reform process in Russia and in other countries of the former Soviet Union on the basis of partnership .
We must assist all the parties in the implementation of the peace initiative in the former Yugoslavia and particularly in regard to the Dayton Agreement for Bosnia-Herzegovina .
In the wake of the elections of 14 September , the international community must support the High Representative , Carl Bildt , to ensure full implementation of the constitution of Bosnia-Herzegovina , as agreed at Dayton .
That guarantee is the continued existence of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single state composed of two entities .
In regard to the Middle East , the Union has used recent high-level contacts with the parties there to urge them to re-engage in the peace process and to offer our full support for the pursuit of a comprehensive , just and lasting peace .
Our relations with the Mediterranean regions and with Africa are of vital interest to Europe .
The projected population in these areas will increase rapidly .
We must promote indigenous economic development in those areas and we must implement in full the Barcelona Declaration .
We must enhance the dialogue which has already begun with regional organizations such as the Organization for African Unity and the Southern African Development Community .
We must strengthen our ties with Asia , with Latin America and with Australia .
Ireland holds the presidency of the European Union at a critical juncture in history .
We are determined to ensure that the Union 's agenda is progressed in an effective and diligent manner .
Let me sum up the Union 's agenda : tackling the problems of unemployment and crime ; the successful completion of the Intergovernmental Conference ; commencement of economic and monetary union on time ; enlargement ; and securing an effective voice for the Union in the world .
The European Parliament has a key role to play in all of this work .
The Irish presidency will work together with Parliament to advance that entire agenda .
We are called to develop a new Europe , proud of itself and commanding the pride of all its citizens .
A Europe inspiring confidence by its unity and drawing allegiance through diversity .
It is time to answer that call .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Many thanks to the President-in-Office of the Council .
I call Mr Santer , President of the Commission .
Many thanks to the President of the Commission .
We come now to the debate .
Mr President , I wish to begin by expressing my personal thanks to President Hänsch , Prime Minister Bruton and President Santer for their excellent contributions this morning .
And it is crucial that we begin by saying this : I very much regret that so few of the Members of this House were here to listen to the excellent speeches we have just heard .
There can be nothing else going on in this building that is more important than this debate , and that message will certainly be transmitted to my Group at its meeting this evening .
In our debate last year we looked forward to the opening of the Intergovernmental Conference .
We were then aware that , if we were to prepare this European Union to meet the historic challenge of enlargement to Eastern and Central Europe , the Baltic , Cyprus and Malta , it was incumbent on us all to secure an effective , democratic , open European Union which , more than anything , reconnected with its people , reconnected the vision , the hope and the aspirations which inspired the post-Second World War generation to embrace European integration and reconnected that vision with the people .
Today , six months after the opening of the IGC , there is a general mood of disillusion and depression .
If we allowed ourselves the self-indulgence we would have to admit that there is something to be depressed about .
The Union is dismally uninspiring .
Indeed , to the overwhelming number of people it is completely irrelevant .
Yet it should not be so !
With the global trading environment changing so rapidly that even the most poorly trained and inadequately educated can sense in their gut that life is no longer even as it was ten years ago ; with the information society introducing anarchic communication potential , which all can see will accelerate the pace and nature of change - given ten or fifteen years to refine and to focus and to develop ; with the world moving into regional groupings to facilitate and master the changes , at the same time that the pool of regional and local identities , languages and cultures is asserting itself again , surely our European Union - which is at the fulcrum of these changes , able to operate in recognition and celebration of the diversity of our continent - must have something more inspirational to offer our young people in particular .
But , no !
The last year has been characterized by stagnation and paralysis : stagnation in the fight to create jobs in Europe ; stagnation in the IGC process for all to see ; paralysis in our desire to defend the common policies which make up the European social model ; paralysis in our ability to generate a common will on issues challenging peace and stability on our continent .
I know that I will be accused of undue pessimism and a confrontational approach but can someone explain to me why , when we have a multi-billion ecu surplus on our agricultural budget , we cannot find the political will simply to transfer a proportion of that money to secure funding for tens of thousands of our young people by investing in the funding for the fourth research programme , our investment in the jobs of the future ?
Why we cannot find the will to transfer a proportion of that money to secure peace on our continent by rebuilding civil society in former Yugoslavia ?
That is not European money being spent simply on people and places far away , rather it is money spent to make absolutely sure that our children will not be engaged in a long and bloody conflict for the next generation on European soil .
Somebody tell me why the European Council cannot carry out its side of the bargain on the trans-European networks and find the will to transfer a proportion of that money as it promised .
Somebody tell me why this Parliament , which has done all in its power to support the trans-European network project is now being told that because the governments of the Union want the trans-European networks , but want their money as well , we here must slash the budget for education and training , job creation and consumer protection .
Why some governments in the Council deny the funds for the poverty programme , help for the elderly and the socially excluded .
Somebody , please tell me how it is that we can still talk about the European social model when we are being driven further down the road to the Americanization of European life , a model which I must tell you is rejected by European people who do not want to be a low-wage , insecure , ill-trained workforce .
We are underestimating the determination and will of European citizens .
What is missing in our political analysis and thinking for the future is the recognition of the importance of our culture to our people .
Our aim is surely to preserve and protect that which is precious and unique in each country of the Union , that which gives the people of that country or region their sense of wellbeing , their security within their own cultural and historical identity and , whilst preserving that confidence for all our people , we seek to pool what is common to all of us in the search for the answers to the mounting crises of our age .
Frankly , there is not much time left for us to make this Union a source of pride to its people , through adding value to their cultural and historical life .
Please , Mr Bruton , at the special meeting which you are organizing in Dublin , try to raise the ambitions of the prime ministers .
Ireland has , as you said , a unique opportunity at a watershed moment for the European Union and Ireland has a proud record during its presidencies of the European Union .
You asked us , Prime Minister , to help you to find the answers in securing the support of Europe 's people .
Let us have a strong message to Europe 's people ; let us hear that the leaders of our countries are at least united in insisting that there will be an employment chapter in the new Treaty with real bite .
Let us hear that there will be a commitment not just to economic and monetary union but to people - their economic future and their well-being - and let us hear , as well , that the Union can be united in securing a commitment to fight discrimination against our ethnic minority population .
Let us give to all those living in our countries trust and confidence in tolerance as our first virtue , to give non-European citizens and residents confidence in our humanity .
This is even more important , Prime Minister , given the shameful remarks made recently by Mr Le Pen .
We here abhor and reject his philosophy and we are demeaned , frankly , by his presence in this House .
( Applause ) Let us hear that we will preserve the European commitment to a universal public service for all its people and let us hear that our culture , history and tradition , all the diverse strengths and beauties of our continent , are what makes us tick , not just a slave-like devotion to some economic or academic model of society .
Let us hear that the European social model is alive and kicking , is secure in the hands of our government leaders and will be the building block on which everything else is built .
In conclusion , after a year dominated by grubby stories of deception and dishonesty over mad cows , the trauma of the abuse of our most vulnerable young children , the continuing exclusion of 18 million people and the total stalling of any effort to improve the ecology crisis as if somehow with economic problems the environment has ceased to be of concern - after all this , it really is time to demonstrate the positive political will to move forward .
We , on this side of the House , have that will but know it can only be achieved through a rededication to collective and cooperative responsibility which underpins our Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the three presidents for their probing speeches .
I do , however , feel compelled to endorse the words of Mrs Green .
This Parliament has still not succeeded in transforming itself from a sort of European forum into a parliament with real powers .
We will all have to work on this , and I will also be transmitting this sentiment to my group .
For the second time we are to assess the three political bodies , the state of the European Union , and the path along which we are together travelling to the birth of a unified Europe .
Our group would be gratified by this historical perspective , was it not for the fact that we are also constantly confronted with the doubt , the fear and the unrest that spellbinds our peoples .
Reports about wars and points of high tension confirm to us that after the Cold War insecurity and instability have not yet been driven from our world .
Therefore , a strong and organised Europe is needed more than ever before to bring peace and stability and radiate humanism , social justice and freedom , values with which we so like to identify ourselves .
On the eve of the special Summit in Dublin , the PPE Group urgently asks for the Intergovernmental Conference to finally shake itself up .
The Union was once again divided with respect to the events in Iraq .
Proof was yet again provided that the Union is powerless when it speaks with dissonant voices .
This reminds us of the Yugoslavia drama , about which the Belgian general Francis Briquemont , who was in charge of the UN troops , recently said : " since the events in Bosnia I have become aware that you must intervene as an outsider if innocent civilians are systematically being slaughtered .
For seven months I witnessed the atrocities that people can inflict on other people , and just a thousand kilometres from Brussels !
In Sarajevo I was ashamed to be European ' .
How can we succeed in expanding the Union by five to ten new members if with fifteen Member States we are not yet capable of preserving the essential interests and the authority of Europe ?
How can we convince our fellow citizens that European integration is the best plan for the future when our institutions cannot transcend national egoism , and are incapable of serving the common European interest ?
Our citizens also feel insecure .
Free movement , the opening of the borders , globalization and free trade offer great new opportunities for economic growth and employment .
But if this obstacle-free space is seen as an unsafe place , with cross-border crime , the mafia , terrorism and the sexual exploitation of children - the great drama in my own country - the resistance to European integration will increase further .
We must not underestimate the legitimate desire of our people to preserve the safety on which the social contract is based .
We urgently ask for the Intergovernmental Conference to achieve fast and clear results in the framework of the third pillar .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you are now preparing for two important summit meetings .
You can bring an end to the insecurity and the doubt .
You can also develop a dynamism which even the most reticent of Member States would not be able to resist .
A great deal of information is appearing over the course of this Intergovernmental Conference .
We therefore have two important questions .
Firstly , have the governments decided to complete the negotiations of the IGC under the Dutch presidency by June 1997 at the latest ?
Secondly , are certain reports correct in stating that the Council has already resigned itself to limiting its objectives to a minimum , and to put off to a future IGC the reforms that are necessary to have an expanded Union which works efficiently ?
I must stress to you that our group will not be at all satisfied with a Treaty that does not take a qualitative leap forward , more specifically regarding common foreign and security policy , majority decisions in judicial cooperation , majority decisions in the first pillar , and European Parliament participation in decisions .
We are aware of the range of possibilities that will arise in the first six months of 1998 , when almost at the same time new the Treaty will have to be ratified , the negotiations for the entry of Malta and Cyprus as well as most candidates from eastern Europe will be starting , the decision will be taken who will be among the first members of Monetary Union , and finally the financial commitments will be up for renewal .
We also realise that these first six months of 1998 , have many possible dangers , but it is a period on which all hope is pinned .
The Commission will have to play its part to the full in this relaunch , and we will not deny it our political support .
Together with these negotiations the Union must achieve two important fundamental objectives .
Firstly , the achievement of the economic standards for the transition to the single currency .
Public opinion in our Member States must be convinced of the necessity of frugal policy , without which no durable growth is possible .
The second objective is to make daily progress in the fight against the cancer of our society , namely the unemployment of the young and long-term unemployment .
Our group is a great advocate of respect for people , solidarity and freedom , values that cannot continue to exist if the social fabric is torn , or if exclusion results in the marginalisation of millions of people .
Renewal and creativity can adapt European society to growing globalization .
Have our political institutions , our trades unions , our associations and our churches indeed sufficiently judged how fundamental these changes will actually be ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to quote Jean Monnet , and would recommend everyone to read his biography to rediscover the true sense of European integration .
Jean Monnet said before this Parliament : " Nous n & # x02BC ; avons que le choix entre les changements dans lesquels nous serons entrainés et ceux que nous aurons su vouloir et accomplir ' .
This is our challenge in searching for a model for European civilisation for the 21st century , based on the values we so like to express here , and that we , through the European Union , must transform into reality .
Ladies and gentlemen , the coming two years will determine the future of the European Union : either the Union will develop to become a cornerstone of geopolitical stability on our continent , or it will deteriorate into a centre of instability .
The Monetary Union and the Intergovernmental Conference can decisively strengthen the Union , but they could also bring about a split in Europe between Member States , governments and peoples .
At the moment I see the second possibility as the most likely .
So why this warning ?
Because in the eyes of its people the Union has become a sort of autistic organisation .
The Union does not listen to its people .
They are concerned about work , crime and international security , but at the IGC the negotiators talk about other things , such as the number of junior commissioners for example .
Moreover , when the Union talks about the concerns of its people , talk is often all there is .
Words are spoken , but where is the action ?
A common foreign policy was promised by the Member States in Maastricht , but in Bosnia the Union was , and is , politically irrelevant , and in the Middle East France plays cavalier seul .
The Member States stated in Maastricht that they considered asylum policy and drugs policy as matters of common importance , but in the matter of accommodating refugees from Yugoslavia most Member States left Germany on its own , while the dialogue between France and the Netherlands about drugs falls on deaf ears .
A common market was promised by the Member States before Maastricht , but the same countries are not taking the slightest notice of what they agreed in Brussels .
In regard to public tenders alone there are currently 35 infringement procedures .
The establishment of a citizenship of the Union was promised in Maastricht , but there is no accountability for policing or juridical activities in Europe - neither through the European court , nor through the European Parliament .
This is how the credibility of the Union crumbles .
It threatens to become an organisation of aims without means , of promises without consequences , of words without deeds .
And the less credibility the Union has , the smaller the chance that the IGC will be ratified by all fifteen countries .
This chance is now already small enough , particularly in those countries which will not be permitted to join the single currency .
And if the IGC is not ratified , the admission of countries such as Poland and Hungary will be delayed .
So it is time to act .
It is time for the leaders of our governments to call a halt to the erosion of Europe & # x02BC ; s credibility .
It is time our Member States finally permitted the Union to act against the three most important scourges of our time : nationalism , crime and unemployment .
The countries of the Union have not been willing to fight the genocide in Bosnia , nor work against the division of Bosnia along ethnic lines .
There remains only one honourable course for Europe : to ensure that war crime suspects are brought before the tribunal in The Hague .
Is the European Council prepared to exert the necessary pressure for this ?
Is the Union prepared to consider the exclusion of Croatia from the Council of Europe until President Tudjman hands over Croatian suspects ?
Will the countries of the Union on the Security Council suspend the lifting of economic sanctions against Serbia until President Milosevic hands over Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic ?
That is what it is all about , action and not words .
The Union is nothing if it is not a juridical community , as Mr Hänsch rightly said .
This also applies to fighting crime within our borders .
Nowhere is the amendment of the Treaty more necessary than here .
So my question for Mr Bruton is this : is the European Council prepared to devote the IGC to fighting fraud , drugs and and trafficking in women and children under the first pillar ?
Only then can deeds follow .
The fight against unemployment is primarily a responsibility of the Member States .
The Union only has a supplementary task , but let it carry out this task .
Is the Council finally prepared to take the decisions the business community has already been requesting for years , such as the harmonisation of corporation tax and the introduction of a corporate statute ?
The latter alone would represent an annual economic injection of ECU 30 billion .
Financial support from Member State governments is much too high .
The richest country , Germany , tops the list of countries paying subsidies , which distorts competition .
I therefore compliment the Commission on reminding Germany of its Treaty obligations in the Saksen case .
Commissioner Van Miert did excellent work here .
However , where support for ailing airline companies is concerned , the Commission continues to be accommodating .
When will the last intervention actually be the last intervention ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Union talks too much about secondary matters and too little about the main ones .
This also applies to Parliament .
The Commission emphasise more strongly its role as the engine of the Union , but the credibility crisis of the Union is above all a task for the Council .
The Council must listen to the people , who want Europe to ensure freedom , rights and employment .
Not in words but in deeds .
That is what we have to work on , under the Irish presidency , then under that of the Dutch .
Mr President , this debate is certainly an excellent opportunity for the representatives of the people and the European institutions to made a diagnosis of the state of European society and the way its democratic institutions are operating .
We want and we ought to state out loud what concerns , alarms or gives false hope to those carrying on their daily lives , those on the receiving end of the great political and economic decisions .
We want to comment on and assess what is discussed in the parliaments and the communications media of our countries .
At first sight the situation is disturbing .
As we all know , according to the official statistics there are 18 million unemployed - something over 10 % of the active population .
Half of them are long term unemployed with slim chances of getting back into the labour market and with a growing dependence on social services .
A third of them are under 25 .
50 million Europeans live on less than the minimum wage .
In plain language , there are 50 million people in poverty , and over 2 million of them are homeless .
Mr President , I do not mean to sound apocalyptic but I am forced to mention all these problems bluntly , and we need to find a solution to them .
We have to speak the language of the man in the street before we talk about macroeconomic policies , dual societies and structural unemployment .
We must understand and share the anxiety and fear for the future of wide groups in society .
We must make sure that these feelings do not become a culture medium for racism and xenophobia suffered by 13 million immigrants , especially those without residence permits .
In this panorama our parliamentary group is very critical of the decision taken by governments to refuse to consider the effects of the current model of monetary union at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Its focus and its rigidity mean that achieving the single currency and implementing a policy which prioritizes employment are incompatible .
This contradiction in the short and medium term must be explained to public opinion , to the European people , so that they can consider it and make a decision .
In a democracy it does not make sense for propaganda to hinder information , fully responsible decisions and , in some cases , reconsideration of decisions .
Mr President , - and I am also speaking particularly to President Santer , whom I have almost give up trying to convince , and to the President-in-Office of the Council - in many Union countries , in order to meet the convergence criteria , the public deficit is being drastically reduced by cutting spending and this is being accompanied by a massive sell-off of public heritage and a deregulation of the labour market .
All this with the aim , laudable in principle , of bringing down inflation .
This logic even reaches as far as the European Parliament , with cuts in the cohesion funds and also on the use of the surplus from the common agricultural policy .
It has to be said that social services are also being cut significantly .
All this hinders the creation of employment and fuels anxiety amongst the population .
But here is the most interesting thing : the paradox is that the convergence criteria are not being met by these measures .
The reason is easy to understand because although in some countries , for example , inflation is falling to a minimum , the extreme competitiveness we are subject to has meant that the existing differential from the convergence levels - which is the average of the three countries with the lowest inflation - has increased .
It is an unending race towards an ever-receding convergence .
Under these monetarist policies jobs come to be regarded as no more than a scarce commodity on the market , with no respect for the values of democracy , which must take the human being as reference , and no account taken of the future cost of unemployment in political , economic and social terms .
In our opinion the right way forward is another way .
We must move towards the single currency with policies of employment and social cohesion , and parallel fiscal harmonization .
That is what would give sense and credibility to a truly single currency for all Europeans .
Monetary union with political union .
We must make progress in the definition and consolidation of the areas of competence of the European institutions , and in building great links with the national institutions to overcome the democratic deficit .
We must not waste the opportunity offered by the Intergovernmental Conference to strengthen the institutions and bring them closer to the citizens .
We support the ' communitarization ' of common foreign and security policy , and justice and home affairs , because Europe needs to have one voice in an international scene where the language of force continues to be given priority , in a world where the economy is becoming globalized and where organizations without democratic legitimacy , like the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund , take the principal decisions .
We want and we demand institutions close to the people and responsible to them , European institutions where information , discussion before decisions are taken , and subsequent evaluation of the results of the policies are possible .
That is the only way to revitalize democratic life and overcome the demotivation , demoralization and anxiety of a large part of European society .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I turn directly to you to conclude . We trust in the good sense and the good offices of the Irish presidency to drive forward political union at the Intergovernmental Conference and to propose reconsideration of the economic and monetary framework .
As you are well aware , it is a wise man who can correct mistakes .

Mr Hänsch , Mr Bruton and Mr Santer , ladies and gentlemen , what is Europe , what is the EU really there for ?
Is Europe there for the people or the people for Europe ?
Everyone in this House will say , of course Europe is there for the people .
Everyone will say , of course Europe must not instil fear or fright in the people but give them a sense of security and hope .
Of course Europe should be a protective community in which the fundamental rights are guaranteed .
Of course Europe should make people 's lives more peaceful and safer .
But if all that is such a matter of course , why does this European Union not act on it ?
Why does the opposite happen , under the guise of the Maastricht criteria ?
Can and should we allow social and democratic achievements to be eroded in order to fulfil these criteria ?
The great majority of people are to suffer so that the economy can flourish and we can keep to an unrealistic timetable .
That is the disastrous continuation of a policy that has led us where we are now .
Europe is very distant from its citizens , anti-Europeanism has grown and will continue to grow because people have the feeling they are no more than chess pieces on the European board in a game which industry and the economy are winning .
The people will ask us : ' What do we need monetary union for if it is doing harm even before being introduced ? '
Let us beware of turning Europe into a weapon that knocks down the social and democratic rights that have been built up over recent decades !
For in the end it will not just be these achievements and rights that are destroyed .
The Council , the club of national government interests , is playing with fire if it believes it can provide for the urgent need for a more pan-European approach , social ecology , the principle of democracy , which also means participation , transparency and openness , and take the aims we set for the Intergovernmental Conference ad absurdum .
This would not result in a different , solidary Europe but in the renationalization of politics and the re-emergence of nationalism .
Today the political fight to establish civil rights as its foundation is the key to the survival of European integration .
The Member States , the governments will have to learn that democracy does not interfere with the development of Europe but is essential to it .
Mr President , referring back to my last speech on the state of the Union , I might be tempted to repeat what I said then , virtually word for word .
Despite the good intentions of many people , scepticism is gaining ground .
A climate of intolerance , xenophobia and violence is developing in Europe .
The mad cow business has not enhanced the image of the Union , although the Union is far from being the party primarily responsible for that disaster .
In most of the states of the Union , the economic situation is very mediocre and unemployment is still high .
On this point , President Santer , we regret that your pact for employment has aroused so little enthusiasm from the national governments .
The Common Foreign and Security Policy continues to disappoint its keenest supporters .
This summer , in view of the conflict in Iraq and the strong American response , we once again regretted the failure even to adopt a common position .
Once again , the impression we gave was one of hesitation and differences of opinion .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , President Santer , I would like to emphasize three specific points that are causing us concern .
As far as the IGC is concerned , ideas being put forward especially - though not exclusively - by the authorities in my own country suggest that we might renounce an ambitious reform and be content with minimal modifications .
Since , at the same time , those same authorities are promising Poland early accession - which I personally welcome - I cannot help seeing a serious contradiction here , because if this enlargement is to be successful , significant institutional reforms must come first .
The success of enlargement is conditional upon the success of the IGC , but at present the IGC is dragging its feet .
My second point is addressed more specifically to the President of the Commission , and relates to the public services .
It would seem that the Commission is persisting in an attitude of indifference towards Parliament and hostility to the existence of the public service and to what it means for the peoples of Europe .
On 9 May this year we adopted amendments to a draft directive on the postal service .
The debate was highly detailed , and Parliament 's position carefully considered .
Now we learn that the Commission , in its new version , has adopted none of Parliament 's principal amendments .
Obviously , this approach is politically unacceptable .
It is contrary to the code of conduct which we had undertaken to respect , and , in the present case , it shows how little interest the Commission persistently takes in this fundamental concept of public service in the general interests of the citizen .
Finally , let me mention the mad cow crisis .
Once again , we deplore the fact that the British government is delaying the procedures which would offer a way out of the crisis and restore consumer confidence .
We call upon the Council and the Commission , as a matter of urgency , to display all necessary firmness in finally putting an end to this crisis .
In this gloomy climate , let me offer a gleam of hope .
My words are addressed to you , Mr President-in-Office .
Your European commitment , your determination to make a success of the single currency , your concern to solve the problem of unemployment and the social problems , your desire to strengthen cooperation with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe on a pragmatic , effective basis - all these things give us encouragement , and we thank you for them .
We wish you every success , and not only in the areas I have just mentioned .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , President Santer , ladies and gentlemen , the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference - of which , incidentally , two thirds of Europeans have never heard - are clearly displaying deep-seated differences about the objectives of European integration and the ways of achieving it .
In point of fact , instead of a Union , with all the virtues you believe it has , what we have is chaos .
Secessionist movements are coming to light .
Belgium is in danger of disappearing .
Germany is trying to use the proposal of economic and monetary union to regain its former influence in the East .
France , disorientated by the strategic and tactical errors of some of its leaders , is sinking into a climate of economic crisis and will not meet the Maastricht criteria in 1997 , with a real public spending deficit in excess of 4 % of GDP , despite everything you may have heard to the contrary .
Once again , the Commission would have us believe that almost everything is going well , and that those things which are not going well can only improve as a result of the rush to integration .
Yet these optimistic declarations are doing little to conceal fears of failure of the Intergovernmental Conference , whose minimalistic objectives now amount to no more than the introduction of the single currency .
How much has happened since the Lammers report , with its recommendations for a federal Europe !
Despite your desire to enable this conference to end as soon as possible , President Santer , you cannot escape the constraints of the French and British electoral timetables .
The French , in any case , radically reject your supranational conception of Europe and will no longer tolerate this endless moralizing , so remote from their own interests and concerns .
In any case , the French government will be heavily defeated at the 1998 elections because of its European policy .
Do you really believe that the government which follows it - whether left or right - will not feel called upon to renegotiate the convergence criteria and the socalled ' stability ' pact , which incidentally is devoid of any legal value ?

Mr President , the Union seems to me to be ailing : we have 20 million unemployed ; in our countries there is unrest and racist outbursts even , like that of Bossi in Italy where greens shirts are reappearing , rekindling the very grim memory of the brown shirts ; and we have governments uninterested in achieving the kind of central Union that leads to political Union .
President Santer , just talking about a change in voting procedures does not amount to taking a closer look at enlargement .
Enlargement will not be possible until political Union has been achieved .
Political Union at least involves a common defence policy ; a joint effort to tackle unemployment ; and the effective operation of Europol , which does not appear to be to be working very well ; and it thus requires the surrender of certain national prerogatives to a supreme European body .
None of that exists and so we have no political Union .
We must therefore have the courage to say that enlargement cannot be on the agenda until we have political Union : Europe is not the Franco-German axis alone , we have all to respond to political events .
If we do not , then the same will happen as has occurred in Iraq and other places , with Europe continuing to cut the same old figure .
Those who do not agree with this are actually working to prevent the creation of a European political Union ; they are seeking the end of Europe ; they are influenced by specific and particular interests linked to certain financial concerns but also to certain countries within and others outside Europe and on the other side of the Atlantic .
We want a Europe that guarantees its citizens greater security , that understands their needs and is not a fundamentalist Europe : a Europe that is at last political and able to guarantee cultural as well as economic growth .
To achieve that , we have also to get rid of the democratic deficit from which this House continues to suffer .
I hope that the Irish presidency will be able to set political Union on track again , even if that involves delaying enlargement and tackling it once more , through Maastricht , in a constructive spirit but one which takes proper account of the true state of affairs in our countries .
We must not go against history and , above all , we must not go against the needs of the people of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this kind of debate is of course always a chance to take a critical look at ourselves and see whether have done everything right in the past measured against our common aims .
If we hear notes of criticism here in Parliament , then that is important and necessary .
But it would also be a good idea for the Commission and Council at least to put something of this critical awareness into words .
It is rather disappointing to know one is in troubled waters but then not to describe it oneself critically and clearly .
After all , we all know , as has been said a number of times , that our citizens are not just becoming more sceptical and critical about Europe but , above all , less interested .
Surely that is far more dangerous !
I much prefer to see people who take a critical look at Europe than people who do not care about Europe at all any more !
For then it is impossible to get through to them .
Europe - who is it ?
Who is to blame for its state ?
Here we cannot ignore reality and it remains the case that the number of Member States is decisive when it comes to the distribution of power .
Parliament has also acquired more power .
But within the triangle of power , the corner taken up by the Council , by the Member States , remains the strongest one .
Here it is easy to name the failures .
We all know what troubles the citizens .
But nothing is moving in regard to employment , in regard to foreign policy or to internal security .
The cumbersome tanker of Europe with its 12 captains - some fatter , some thinner - is not making headway or following a definite course .
As long as this is clearly perceptible , as it is now , and as long as the Member States ' main cashiers - our ministers of finance - have the final decision on how much European integration we can actually afford , in other words what kind of Europe is worth how much money to us , we will not make progress in this area .
It is not enough for our governments - including my German chancellor in whom I do believe as a good European - to insist every day on our common aims .
But when his own team - starting with the minister of finance - plunders the cash-desk on the one hand and then criticizes Europe again because this or that task has not been accomplished , then that is bound to reinforce nationalist tendencies rather than counteracting them .
That is the situation we find ourselves in .
What can we do about it ?
The first thing would be for the Commission and the Council to take stock of the situation in a real , honest and , where necessary , self-critical way .
Now I know that bodies that act together find this difficult .
But , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , since we all know where the problems lie , why not have the courage to name them by name loudly and clearly , even at the risk of being criticized for so doing by others ?
Nobody can escape the truth .
If the Intergovernmental Conference does not hoist any new sails on our common European ship then we will certainly be putting Europe at risk by not being able to move in heavy weather , in troubled waters .
For God have mercy on us if the international situation continues to go the way it is heading and the treacherous argument of globalization is used to tear apart all the social foundations , and the security policy and the democratic foundations of the Union !
I ask for a little more courage !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I think the way Europeans feel about Europe at the moment can be very well expressed by three Ds : disappointment , disenchantment and disinterest .
Disappointment because Europe is not meeting expectations .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you gave a good example : all Presidencies begin by declaring that the priority is to create employment , and then the results are very meagre .
In the end , Europeans say : right , we are not going to believe those gentlemen in Europe when they say they are going to create what they are then incapable of creating .
Disenchantment .
Why disenchantment ?
I will tell you telegraphically .
I will tell Mr Bruton .
The European position on the Helms-Burton law is the right one .
The whole world heard that Europe had spoken with one voice and had faced down our American friend , saying that it cannot do what it wants without reckoning with us .
On the other hand , the lack of a European position on the American attack on Iraq is a sad situation .
People ask : how is it that we can agree in some cases and are incapable of speaking with one voice in others ?
And in the end - here I take up the gauntlet thrown down by Mr Puerta to talk about subjects that interest people - people do not know anything about planning cells or majorities or positive abstention . They do not understand why Europe exists in theory but not in reality .
Disinterest .
We have all talked about disinterest .
The last speaker did too .
Lack of interest in the Intergovernmental Conference .
Why ?
Because nobody understands what is at stake .
Because we have not been able to instill poetry into politics .
Because we talk about things that do not interest people in the slightest .
People are not interested in the issue of majorities , or whether the autonomy of the Committee of the Regions should be strengthened .
They are not even remotely interested in whether a statement of human rights should be included in the Treaty .
No .
What people need is what inspires them . Ideas that inspire them .
Someone referred earlier - President Santer - to the ideas which gave birth to the Community in the 1950s : peace and reconciliation .
These ideas do not impress anyone today , because all the younger people have grown up in peace , thank God .
Today we must find other inspiring ideals , and I believe there is no greater idea than building a great Europe .
We must build the Europe of the enlargement .
With that ideal we will succeed in inspiring Europeans .
But to do that , to be able to achieve the great enlargement , a step forward must be taken .
We must succeed in reforming the treaties at the Intergovernmental Conference , because unless we succeed , unless we achieve a more effective , more democratic and more transparent Europe , the enlargement will be impossible and that will take us back to the three Es : Euro-sclerosis , Euro-selfishness and Euro-disenchantment .
That must not happen .
Mr President , we are today discussing the state of the Union , as we move closer to two events which will shape Europe 's future : the enlargement of the Union and , more especially , the achievement of the single currency .
This is a process that will take some years , two phases during which Europe will finally come into being or will cease to exist !
As we move along this track , we must confer real substance on this process , combatting and fighting , with the resources of a whole continent , the problems of our people face : unemployment ; the need for an economy that is close to consumers and entrepreneurs ; the need for security founded on peace ; the need to protect children from all forms of squalor and to guarantee social justice .
President Santer was right to say that we need to bring politics closer to citizens .
If we do not confer on the European Union the kind of substance that brings it close to citizens , the effect will be that of an egg pierced underneath by a pin and emptied of its content : from the outside it will look perfect but in reality it will be redundant - an empty shell .
One last point linked to the current situation .
There are some people who are now working to divide individual states internally .
That would simply be the first stage in breaking up the whole of the Community , thereby undermining our future .
All of us here in this House should work to combat division and for a united Europe , united in diversity and independence , but united still .
Let us work together on that which unites us , it will always be greater than that which divides us !
Mr President , peace has prevailed on this continent since the 1940s .
Even so , each generation has to find and create its own Europe , and I do not believe that Jean Monnet will be the patron saint of future generations .
However , the fundamental mission of the EU is seriously incomplete , as what peace means nowadays is partly that people should feel a sense of belonging to society , that children should not be abused and that the economy should be brought into line with the requirements of environmental protection .
If EMU is attained too quickly , we shall certainly be confronted with these problems , and it will cost us dear .
Mr President , subsidizing tobacco growers is undoubtedly a sign of intellectual poverty , but it is a far worse one to believe that our continent 's problems can be solved by building thousands of kilometres of motorways and supporting very large enterprises .
Sustainable jobs can best be created by means of ecological tax reforms .
We cannot export our own model even to Central and Eastern Europe , let alone to the world as a whole .
It is quite true that only the EU is sufficiently large and capable of changing the global ground-rules , and this is something which the EU will have to consider seriously at the WTO conference in Singapore in December .
It will then be possible to do something about child labour , to improve environmental protection and to make proposals to reduce global speculation .
But citizens should also have the opportunity to influence the Union 's constantly increasing activities in the world , so democracy and transparency really must not be forgotten at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , could I suggest a speech of welcome to be made by the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Bruton , at the extra summit meeting in Dublin ?
Ladies and gentlemen , welcome to Dublin .
There are now 21 392 regulations , directives and other legal acts which apply to our citizens .
I propose that we tidy these up , rather than creating even more rules .
How are we to make democracy work for ordinary people , when I cannot find out the legal situation in a sector without expert assistance ?
Laws on the same subjects must be codified and made transparent and accessible , so that we can all find our way around them and pick things out .
The newspapers write that secret protocols are still being drawn up which say something different from the laws that are published .
Let us publish all the existing protocols and tell our ministers and Commissioners : secret legislation must now come to an end .
We shall never be able to defend secret decisions .
We all have constitutions which require laws to be adopted in open , democratic assemblies .
The Council 's debates and votes on Community legislation must be opened up .
We also need to extend our citizens ' right of access to documents .
I suggest that we back the European Parliament 's proposal to open up the meetings and provide automatic access to documents , unless there is a two-thirds majority and sound practical reasons for not doing so .
The time has come for us to clear things up , to simplify matters and create transparency , instead of just pressing on regardless .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I want to address myself today to the Irish presidency to express my congratulations and my appreciation .
My congratulations are for the work it is carrying out : in the brief period since Ireland took over the presidency , Ireland has demonstrated its great ability and its government 's great responsibility .
And my appreciation is because , on the basis of this work , we expect that at the end of the Irish presidency we will have taken a step forward in the construction of Europe .
I also want to thank you for the speech you have made .
I think it was widely appreciated in this Assembly .
I want to tell you that I identify with your position and , above all , with the leap that has been taken to make the ideals underlying economic union coincide with the concrete objectives we must achieve .
I think you combined a large dose of idealism and a large dose of realism in one speech .
The point you made on the globalization of the economy and the challenges it presents for our competitiveness is important , but at the same time - repeating what previous speakers have said - I do not think we can regard competitiveness as conceivable if it has to be based on social cost .
European practice ever since 1945 has been based on achieving a very high level of competitiveness with an increase in our social welfare and in equality between our citizens .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I want to stress a point I am sure you regard as highly sensitive and highly important .
I refer to the problem of cohesion .
The European Union has achieved the present degree of economic development by facing up to a fundamental economic law .
When an economic union is being built , when a territory is being unified , enormous imbalances usually occur .
Perhaps the best example is what happened in the United States after the Civil War of 1861-65 , when there was enormous enrichment of the North and enormous impoverishment of the South .
The European Union has managed to avoid that .
It has succeeded in preventing widening differences between the regions , allowing the rich regions to develop but not at the cost of the poor regions .
At this moment we face a major challenge : economic and monetary union .
Economic and monetary union presupposes the demolition of another existing barrier , with the consequent danger that imbalances may occur between the richest and poorest regions .
At this moment there are some who talk of dismantling the structural funds , the structural policies , the agricultural policy and the cohesion fund in order to achieve other objectives .
If this were to happen , Europe would be heading for a social and economic crisis which would put our construction at risk .
I urge the presidency to continue along the path followed up to now , strengthening the elements of cohesion which have made possible the development of our Union and the peace of our continent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for having the courage to remind Parliament about something we have forgotten , namely that the basic problem relating to the European Union 's economic performance is its low level of competitiveness .
The main characteristics of low competitiveness continue being addressed in an inadequate way .
The Single Market is still incomplete .
Basic functions of economic activity , such as telecommunications , energy and others , have not been liberalized .
The requisite structural changes are not being implemented consistently and with coordination , and while some governments are courageously taking the necessary though often unpopular measures towards financial discipline , society 's reactions are dissuading other governments from progressing towards a true convergence of the economies of the Member States .
Low rates of development are perpetuating serious social problems , especially that of unemployment , and many of us - even here in Parliament - are seriously considering a reduction of working hours as a panacea for that problem , and instead of trying to make Europe more investment-friendly , inspiring it with a spirit of development and making its human potential more capable of meeting the challenges of new technology and competition , we are seeing how best to share out human misery and indigence more fairly .
Economic and Monetary Union has lost its way in a multilingual and verbose environment .
While the Maastricht Treaty was not very well understood by Europe 's citizens because even today it is interpreted in a static and bureaucratic way , the problems raised within the scope of the Intergovernmental Conference are creating the same and perhaps a still more intense feeling of insecurity since they have a disorientating effect on Europe 's citizens .
Enlargement is addressed with a narrow , economic rationale , whereas it could be the beginning of a new age of development for United Europe .
And while we are prolific with words , the Union 's budget , the instrument that would enable us to establish Community policies with a long-term horizon , continues to be meagre and to undergo cuts by the Council .
In my humble opinion , ladies and gentlemen , that is the situation in the Union today and Europe 's citizens are wondering whether there are any leaders who can provide us with enough vision to emerge from the swamp .
Mr President , it seems to me to be appropriate today , as we are debating the state of the Union , to talk about Bossi and his outbursts .
Despite what is said , this is not just an Italian problem , it is above all a European problem and there are three reasons for this : first of all , Bossi is a Member - albeit an absentee Member - of this Parliament and , paradoxically , although illiberal and racist , he is active in the liberal group ; secondly , Bossi has asked to for his sham Padania to be attached to the European Union - that request has been refused but it is does constitute a dangerous precedent ; thirdly , Bossi 's activism , although crude and ridiculous , may attract converts in many European states which are similarly seeing a growth in intolerance , racism and secessionist trends .
We are therefore faced with the risk that while the states of Europe hum and haw and prattle on about constructing Europe , they are undermining their internal legitimacy , thereby destroying themselves and the European dream .
History often moves from the absurd to the tragic , but we must not let that happen now just because we are unable to perceive the gravity but also the global nature of the problem .
Gentlemen of the Council and Commission , you have constructed a fortress of words here today against Parliament 's criticisms but above all a fortress of words against the fears and concerns of the people .
President Santer presumed to claim that the convergence criteria of monetary union do not conflict with the requirement of full employment .
He did this in face of every scientific finding and in face of the opinions of countless experts in Europe .
The reality is that this project of monetary union produces unemployment , has strangled growth and is being misused for making cuts in social services .
Gentlemen , do stop confusing your policy with Europe and stigmatizing any criticism of your policy as anti-European .
Destroy the fortress of words and stop closing your minds to the knowledge that the fears , the concerns and the criticisms of millions and millions of people are right and your policy is not right .
In connection with the state of the Union , I would like to say a word about the insecurity affecting the weakest members of our various societies .
This Europe of ours has seen a five-fold increase in crime since its creation in 1957 .
The lax attitude to crime which is often fashionable in the various States is not a complete explanation .
The truth is that this Europe is the Europe of cash and the golden calf ; it has allowed materialism to deflect it from Christian values ; it has allowed egalitarianism to deflect it from the classical humanism of ancient Greece .
What standard remains ?
Money .
This moral situation was a deliberate political choice , because the politicians wanted to denigrate family values in the name of a cut-price Freudianism .
They wanted to strangle patriotic values in the name of a Masonic-style cosmopolitanism .
They wanted to disregard values of personal virtue and responsibility in the name of a decadent egalitarianism .
And the result : five times as much crime as in 1957 .
This is no fault of the nationalists , this is the fault of the cosmopolitan materialists who govern us and who govern Europe today .
Presidents , let me take up the words spoken by President Hänsch , ' people are not against Europe but do not know why they should be for it ' , and by Pauline Green , who spoke of stagnation and paralysis because of the lack of progress in the Intergovernmental Conference , and also by Willi Görlach who said that at present the EU is in the hands of the ministers of finance .
Through our activities we must give the people of Europe reason to be pro-European , i.e. , we must find solutions to the burning problems and concerns of the people .
We must produce ideas .
What do the citizens want ?
You know that we will be holding elections in Austria in three weeks ' time .
In spite of the high level of employment and high social standard in Austria , our citizens ' first wish is to see employment and high social standards in Europe .
So long as we still have politicians here like Mr Voggenhuber from the Greens , who spoke before me , who fuel unjustified fears and tell the people that monetary union means cuts in social welfare , it is difficult for the other politicians here who want to work for Europe .
We need to incorporate a chapter on employment in the EU Treaties with control mechanisms to monitor the Member States ' employment policies , but we also need a larger budget .
Pauline Green called for a reduction in the agricultural budget .
That is my view too .
We have to invest in social programmes , in research programmes and above all in educational programmes .
For education , training and further training are very closely linked to employment .
Young people can see the advantages of EU membership in the training and occupational field - as emerged from a survey we recently conducted in Austria .
It is taking increasing part in the European programmes .
That is where it sees the chances for Europe .
So let us also give the young people of Europe a chance by increasing the funding for this .
It is equally important that we resolve environmental questions and set high environmental standards .
And a final point : I am very glad that next year will be the year of combatting xenophobia , racism and nazism .
Le Pen 's most recent statements prove how important that is .
Combatting racism and xenophobia is just as important to peace and security in Europe as combatting drugs and crime , as the endeavours to establish a common security and foreign policy .
Mr President , the tripartite interinstitutional dialogue - Council , Commission , Parliament - is the essence of the Community institutions ' originality .
We should always congratulate ourselves on these joint deliberations , although we must also remember that the formal debate on the overall political assessment of the state of the European Union must take place under the auspices of Article D of the Treaty which provides for a debate after presentation of a written report from the Council of the European Union , so we will have to put that off for a few months .
But as I said , I think this debate is an excellent opportunity for transmitting our main concerns to the Council .
And it does not matter if every one of us may repeat ideas that have already been expressed or if we express a few rather individual opinions .
They reflect the great diversity of this Parliament , where there are vast areas of coincidence but also many points of sensitivity .
I want to highlight a fact that I consider essential at this time : the basic point the President-in-Office of the Council made was that economic and monetary union and the single currency are irreversible , and the decision has already been taken .
This must be made very clear to all the citizens and it is the great message which must go out from this debate .
I am convinced that even those who are reticent about this great objective will be major beneficiaries of the consequences of this great historical step which will give us European Union .
There are also the day-to-day issues , the crises we have to live through .
And I think the BSE tragedy ought to teach us a great deal .
National governments , amongst others , have a grave responsibility to shoulder , not only towards their citizens but towards the whole Union .
Any negligence in the performance of their duties affects all the citizens .
So when rhetorical reference is made to subsidiarity , a poorly understood concept , conclusions should be drawn from such day-to-day events which demonstrate the complete opposite .
We too must mention the implacable challenge of security which both you , Mr President and President Santer , have mentioned .
Citizens must be able to feel they live in a free and safe Europe , so the fight against terrorism and organized crime must pass from rhetoric to action .
A Treaty provision covering the impossibility of political asylum for citizens of the Union is a priority .
Empowering the Court of Justice of the Union in these areas is another necessity .
Looking at the Intergovernmental Conference - and repeated references have been made to it - everyone regards the enlargement as ethically necessary .
It is also an economic necessity , but we must face the great challenge of economic and institutional change it involves .
We cannot disregard that situation and imagine we can take another step forward without deepening our institutions .
At the same time , Mr President , another challenge is to convince the citizens that the project of European Union is worth the effort , that it forms part of our future and that , in spite of the contradictions we may fall into and our stinginess , Europe continues to be the only hope for us all .
Mr President , as this House goes about its usual business - which includes this often sterile debate on the state of the Union - none of our Italian colleagues has sought to focus attention for even a moment on the fact that , on Sunday last , a Member of this House - albeit one who has not deigned to grace the House with his presence for a year now - officially proclaimed the creation of an independent and sovereign republic inside one of the founder countries of the European Union , announcing the setting-up of a provisional government and a paramilitary national guard .
No-one from the Commission , President Santer , wished to respond to the question we put three months ago , expressing concern at the risk of armed struggle and civil war in Italy .
No-one realizes - or perhaps they just pretend not to understand - the extent to which this exaggerated regionalism , based on socio-economic self-interest , may have the devastating effect of triggering all kinds of regionalist irredentism in Europe .
Non-one wants to consider the fact that the legitimate grounds that those voting for the League have in opposing the centrist state which is grasping , bureaucratic and inefficient may be used by Bossi - a Member of this House and an unscrupulous demagogue - to seek out personal power , with very serious risks of instability throughout Europe .
Someone needs to wake up to this !
Mr President , I should like to thank you and the Presidents of the Council and Commission for your constructive statements .
In the debate on the same subject just under a year ago I spoke about employment and aid to shipbuilding .
I could speak about them now too .
Unemployment is still far too high , and no satisfactory solution has been found to the issue of aid to shipbuilding either .
At the beginning of Ireland 's presidency I said that improving the employment situation was crucial to the whole of the EU 's credibility in the eyes of the public .
I reiterate that .
In Finland we organized a hearing on the IGC for nongovernmental organizations , at which employment was seen as being by far the most important issue .
The organizations ' statements reflected a belief that the EU could decisively influence the employment situation for the better .
The trade unions demand that responsibility for employment be clearly enshrined in the Treaty .
The Federation of Municipalities says that the IGC should ensure that greater account is taken of employment aspects in the EU 's activities , in accordance with the principle of transparency .
The organization representing the unemployed naturally considered employment and revival of the economy the most important points by far .
A common policy on sustainable economic growth must be adopted , the internal market must be made to operate so that it genuinely promotes employment , Europe absolutely must develop a more stable common monetary system , say the unemployed .
The employment objective is also supported by social organizations and even pensioners ' organizations .
At the hearing , it was also observed that the area of forest in the EU and the capacity of its forestry industry had doubled when the new Member States joined the Union .
Representatives of forestry stressed the importance of the single currency and said that the details of forest management in the various Member States should not be regulated by directive .
However , a common strategy , for example with regard to timber certification , could benefit the sector .
Child protection organizations called for systematic evaluation of the possible impact of the EU 's decisions , provisions and directives on children and families with children .
Organizations representing the disabled called for a prohibition on discrimination ; consumers ' organizations wanted consumer affairs to be included in the agenda for the IGC .
Mr President , all these demands have been put forward by members of the public .
It is time to fulfil their expectations .
Mr President , could I say , being thoroughly objective , that the Irish presidency is doing a very good job .
It is providing strong leadership and a clear vision for all of us in Europe on a whole range of complex issues , from drugs and crime through to the difficult preparations for enlargement .
Unemployment remains an open wound : there are 18 million people unemployed and unemployment is bringing despair and poverty to our people ; unemployment is depriving our young people of their life chances ; it is contributing to rising crime and the instability of our societies ; unemployment is breaking up families and fuelling nationalism and racism .
What Europe requires today is coordination and cooperation at a European level to create jobs for all of our people .
But what do we have ?
Instead of practical measures to stimulate our economies and generate growth , we have the finance ministers of Germany and France advocating and pursuing measures which will do the exact opposite .
If economic and monetary union is to be a success it must not be associated in people 's minds with increasing unemployment and cuts in welfare .
It follows , therefore , that rather than maintaining a blind fixation on a rigid timetable for a single currency , we need to recognize that flexibility ought to be the order of the day .
Equally , when it comes to how this single currency is to be achieved , we cannot ignore the importance of real economic convergence .
Frankly , the essential debate now should not be about a stability pact to enshrine still further the Maastricht convergence criteria , with talk of sanctions against those who fail to keep their deficits low .
This is taking us back to the 1930s , not forward to the new millennium .
What is required is a change of emphasis .
Job creation should now assume centre stage .
The European Investment Fund needs to be expanded , resources ought to go to TENs and to small businesses and the idea of a Delors White Paper needs to be made real and the structural funds have to be used more effectively .
This should be the agenda now and into the future .
This is the way to create the kind of Europe which is truly relevant to our people and I hope that this is what will happen in the future .
Mr President , Mr Santer , I too am delighted to have this opportunity to welcome the Taoiseach here today .
I also want to compliment you , Taoiseach , on your contribution .
This debate is a great opportunity for those of us who are involved in EU politics to get away from the mundane dayto-day affairs and look at the broader picture to review the progress that the Union has made in the past year and to try to chart out a future direction for the Union .
Looking back over the past year we can see that some progress has been made , but it has been very slow and , as many people have said to you here today - and I think you know it yourself , Taoiseach - Europe is not inspiring the ordinary people .
They do not see Europe as having any direct relevance to their lives .
We in Parliament represent over 340 million individuals across the continent , all of whom suffer from the same problem of unemployment .
Now you have heard the repeated calls here today that something be done about unemployment and we are used to this in these types of debates .
We are always hearing that it should be placed at the top of the agenda .
I said to Commissioner Flynn last year and I am repeating it here to you , Taoiseach , that I want to see us getting to the point where unemployment is at the bottom of our agenda , not because we are not interested in solving it , but because it has been solved .
While I compliment you on your good intentions , the European project will not progress if hard decisions are avoided .
We appreciate that no major breakthrough on any of the important issues at the IGC is likely until after the British general election .
However , you must resist the temptation to let things stagnate until then .
Presenting us with your vision of the future is all very well , but actually making it work for the people of Europe is the real challenge .
It is generally accepted that the agenda for the summit in Dublin in October is not a very heavy agenda , so I think that it would be an idea for you to place unemployment on the agenda , to knock heads together and to start taking the important decisions that have to be made .
If you are looking for the respect and the hearts of the people of Europe , and particularly the young people , why do you not start by reversing the 10 % decrease that the Council of Ministers have proposed in the development cooperation budget ?
I call Mr Voggenhuber for a personal statement pursuant to Rule 108 of the Rules of Procedure .
Let me remind you , however , of the wording of that rule ; I will make quite sure that this really is a personal statement .
Mr President , Mrs Hawlicek has accused me of fuelling fears in my speech here in Parliament and of electioneering .
I most emphatically reject that accusation !
I am not speaking here as an election campaigner but am speaking before the European Parliament as an elected Austrian Member .
I am not fuelling fears but putting the concerns of large sections of the population before this Parliament and the representatives of the Council and the Commission .
It is not a question of fears here .
With regard to employment , in the space of a few years Austria has the highest ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Voggenhuber , you are now speaking on the substance of the debate .
You have made your point and we do not want to prolong the debate with further discussions .
That is not covered by Rule 108 .
We now come to some answers to questions .
I call Mr Bruton , President-in-Office of the European Council .
Mr President the predominant theme in this debate was an attempt to answer the question ' Why is Europe not inspiring its citizens at the present time ? ' .
Mr Méndez de Vigo offered the view that there was no poetry about Europe .
I think that what we lack is a sense of history , a sense of understanding the historical perspective in which we are working .
The fact of the matter is that in this century , 190 million people have been killed in wars , 60 million of those in Europe .
There have been virtually no people killed in warfare in Western Europe since this Union was created and we need to dispel some of the pessimism by reflecting on that important historical fact .
Secondly , it is easy to whip up enthusiasm around nation states , because as I said in the debate , many nation states were created by war or taking advantage of other states .
This Union was created in peace to do mundane things .
Naturally it does not inspire the sort of atavistic passions that nation states sometimes do but that is a compliment to Europe and not a criticism .
Thirdly , we should realise how difficult the task is that Europe is now undertaking .
We are hoping to expand our membership radically , while at the same time making our Union even closer .
Anybody who reflects on what happened in the United States between 1861 and 1865 and who understands the immediate reasons for the American Civil War , will understand that this task is not an easy one .
It is one that was not succeeded in by the United States in a peaceful way .
We will succeed in it in this Union and we should compliment ourselves on our ambition in that regard .
Furthermore , history is on the side of the Union because all the trends of modern technology show that interdependence is the order of the day .
We can not live without one another .
We are affected by one another , whether it be through the Internet , through international communications , or through money moving across the exchanges .
The only way that people can control these things that affect their lives is through a large entity like the European Union .
Nation states simply cannot do the job .
Rather than being so self-critical , as this debate was , and it was far too self-critical of the Union , we should reflect on the fact that history is on the side of this Union .
Furthermore , the problems of the environment , on a world scale , can only be tackled by the Union .
Individual Member States would not have a chance .
I accept very much that we need to focus on real day-to-day concerns .
The need to focus on employment came through very strongly in this debate .
I will carry that message back to the Dublin One Summit and the Dublin Two Summit .
Likewise I will carry back the united view of Parliament that we must act on the drugs menace and we must act on the use of modern technology by criminals and we must adopt legal means of dealing with that at Union level .
But again , there is no case for Euro-pessimism , because it is only a body as large as the Union that will be capable of tackling internationally organized crime .
Individual nation states will not and do not have a chance .
So please , you , the Members of the European Parliament , you are the leaders of European public opinion and if you keep saying in debates here in this House that the Union is not achieving its objectives , that there are grounds for Euro-pessimism , then people will begin to believe you , and your predictions will become the reality .
The truth of the matter is that this European Union is having a problem because of its success .
It is because of the extent of its success that people are taking the Union for granted .
So I would hope that in future debates on the state of the Union we will not have a surplus of pessimism of the kind that we have been listening to in this debate .
I would like to say that one message I take very strongly from this debate is that you are ambitious for the Intergovernmental Conference .
You do not want an unambitious patching together of a few small changes to give people the sense that they have done some work and that they can go home .
I take that message very strongly from this debate and I will take it to Dublin One and Dublin Two .
You want the problems tackled and I will do everything in my power as the presidency to ensure that happens .
But I will need the support of your electorates and of each of my colleagues from the Member States .
I want to say one thing about the Dublin One summit .
There have been some points made here in this debate which suggests that Dublin One should do this , Dublin One should do that and Dublin One should solve this problem and solve the other problem .
Let me put clearly on the record that the purpose of Dublin One is not to take decisions .
We agreed at Turin that Dublin One would not be a decision-making Council .
No conclusions will be issued .
Why ?
The truth of the matter is that the problems of Europe are so profound that the European Union 's Heads of Government need to get together once in a while to talk about those problems in a preliminary way without having the pressure of microphones put under their noses immediately they come out of the meeting and being questioned about what they have been doing for the last hour and a half .
We need time to reflect together at Dublin One if Dublin Two is to be a success .
It is at Dublin Two that the decisions will be taken .
So I ask you not to raise undue expectations about results or decisions from Dublin One .
It is not designed for that purpose .
It is designed to be a preliminary to decision-making at Dublin Two and in other Councils .
Finally , I want to make two points in response to views that have been expressed here in the debate .
Those of you who criticize the single currency should not forget that the single currency will mean that individual national currencies will no longer be the subject of speculation on the foreign exchanges .
That will help protect employment .
Secondly , those of you who call for a vision of Social Europe should not forget that it can only be created if Europe is competitive .
We have to sell our goods in competition with goods from elsewhere .
We can only create a Social Europe if we have the economic means of doing so .
So , we need to tackle the two problems - competitiveness and redistribution together - not one after the other .
We cannot afford to ignore either .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Many thanks to the President-in-Office of the European Council .
The debate on the state of the European Union is closed .
On a point of order , Mr President .
In future the night sittings will be reported not just in one language but in both English and French .
The two language versions will also be published on the Internet .
Why is German not also being used ?
Mr Rübig , we are working towards that , but Parliament 's network is not yet in a position to be able to satisfy both your request and the requests by other colleagues for other languages .
Votes
Mr President , I will be very brief .
I know that the first amendment we are to vote on is a motion for rejection , supported by a letter sent to everyone which contains complete untruths .
I would sincerely request that you do not act upon this .
Yesterday evening in this Parliament the Commission accepted the most important amendments presented by the Committee on the Environment .
This letter states that more than 510 species are to be dropped from the list .
The number is actually 609 .
However , these species are not actually to be dropped from the list : they will go to list B. The Commission has even appointed a special body to study if further protection is possible .
So what is stated here is completely untrue .
My advice is to not accept this .
Mr President , you are now required to ask the House to vote on the reports .
Why not stick to the order in which they were debated yesterday ?
You have reversed their order , and we ask that the Tongue , Herman and Barzanti reports should precede the others because they were debated before the others .
Mr Herman , as you have seen , the order of business specifies the sequence that you have before you .
This was not called into question this morning .
I would just like to explain to Parliament - because I too asked for clarification when I was preparing the votes - that it has always been the tradition to take the votes on legislative proposals first .
After that , of course , the Rocard report was put before the three reports we did not have time to vote on yesterday , namely your own , Mr Barzanti 's and Mrs Tongue 's .
I have no objection if Parliament would like to take those three reports before the Rocard report .
I fear that we may not be able to vote on them all .
I will put the matter to the vote , and will accept one speaker against the proposal .
Mr President , you have already mentioned the argument , but here we have the habit of first dealing with reports concerning legislative proposals before we vote on the other reports .
I must point out that as the hours go by this House becomes emptier , and there is a report from the Committee on Women 's Rights , which I represent , on the agenda .
It concerns a legislative proposal , and voting can quickly take place .
I cannot see why we should depart from our usual procedure , and I would ask you to bring the legislative reports to the vote first .
Mr President you know full well that yesterday they stopped unexpectedly because it was too late and the debate on the three reports was completed .
The press conferences had already been convened and the journalists had all already prepared their articles discussing these issues which are of great interest to them .
If we vote today - and the journalists are waiting for the result of the vote - those articles will appear in the press .
If we vote tomorrow the issue will sink without trace : stale news as far as the press is concerned .
The fact is that not all of the work of this House is so keenly followed : if we then operate in such a way as to make the work of the journalists impossible , our work will be far less likely to attract attention on other occasions !
( Parliament rejected the proposal to change the order of voting )
Welcome
I would like to welcome the delegation of Australian Members of Parliament who have just taken their places in the VIP gallery .
Our Australian colleagues , whose delegation is led by Senator Watson , have come to Strasbourg to take part in an interparliamentary conference between the European and Australian Parliaments .
That conference , which will be jointly chaired by Senator Watson and our colleague Mr Kerr , President of the European Parliament 's delegation for relations with Australia , is the 20th of its kind and that number clearly reflects the length of time that we have maintained friendly relations with Australia .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish you every success in your work and welcome you to the European Parliament .
Votes ( continuation )
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commission whether , given the overwhelming support given to these proposals by the European Parliament , it is willing to accept our amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to confirm what Mr Flynn has told you , namely that the Commission can only accept Amendment No 5 .

Mr President , in that case , I ask for this report to be referred back to committee .
We think it very important to continue this discussion .
( Parliament decided to refer the report back to the committee responsible )
Mister President , I am sorry but I would still like to speak briefly about this matter , as something peculiar has happened .
We have conducted protracted discussions about this report in the Committee on Women & # x02BC ; s Rights which concern pensions for women , and during these debates we have always carefully ensured that the Commission was present .
In all those debates it did not appear that the representatives of the Commission were concerned about these amendments .
I find it extraordinary to only now be confronted with the fact that the Commission finds all of these amendments unacceptable .
I do not think it sensible for the Commission to handle Parliament 's work in such a way , as we obviously cannot quickly complete all the proposals that the Council would like approved .
So in this case the delay is not attributable to Parliament , but to the Commission .
I would ask Commissioner Fischler to pass this on to his colleague Mr Flynn .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I will of course pass on what you have said here to my colleague Mr Flynn , and secondly I can tell you on his behalf that he is quite prepared to come to your committee and explain his point of view .
Mr President , I would remind Members that we took a very clear position in committee on the legal basis .
I would , however , ask the Group of the European People 's Party to withdraw Amendment No 42 because the maximum residual quantities from organic agriculture are fixed in Regulation 2029 / 91 and cannot be fixed in this directive because there is a separate regulation on this .
I would also point out once again to this House that Amendments Nos 34 , 36 and 40 tabled by Mrs Redondo create problems because they relate to Annex 6 of Directive 91 / 414 .
As you know , the European Parliament was successful in the proceedings it initiated against this annex and on 18 June the European Court of Justice declared Annex 6 to the directive null and void , so that we now have the situation of reference being made to an annex that no longer exists .
I would like to inform Parliament that its technical services have already adapted the wording of the amendments following the decision by the European Court of Justice .
Mr President , we can agree to Mrs Breyer 's proposal to withdraw Amendment No 42 .
But we do not agree with what she has said on Amendments Nos 34 , 36 and 40 , because although the directive has in fact been cancelled , the annexe has not been cancelled .
I would like to speak again .
Mrs Redondo , it was not the directive that was declared null and void but this Annex 6 .
You just presented the situation as being the reverse , as though the annexes would continue to exist but not the directive .
Since there is serious confusion here , I would ask the bureau to clarify this point so that Parliament can take its decision on the basis of correct information .
After the adoption of Amendment No 40 :
Mr President , without referring to any particular person , can I point out that there is a ruling by the Quaestors confirmed by the Bureau , that mobile phones should not be used in the Chamber .
Could I ask that that ruling be adhered to ?
Mr Balfe , thank you very much for pointing that out .
That ruling indeed exists , and I hope we will all respect it .
( Parliament adopted the draft legislative resolution )
Mr President , I would like to ask you to interrupt the voting .
We have changed the order .
We cannot just take the Rocard report and then not the following reports .
I also sense that many Members in this House do not approve of this .
I would ask you to suspend the sitting .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Mr President , on a point of order .
Having votes on this basis - we are running well into lunchtime and will not finish - is a nonsense .
It really is time that the Conference of Presidents had a look at the way we time our voting to ensure that we can do these things sensibly .
This is a shambles and it cannot go on .
Mr Hallam , what you are saying is right , but the Conference of Presidents is not to blame for the order of business , which we ourselves determine .
It is we who perhaps ought to rethink our procedure .
Mr President , this may be unusual , but even so I would like to take this opportunity to express my personal regret to Mr Herman about the way all this is going , and to assure him of my friendship .
This is not my fault .
I just wanted to say that I understand his point of view and to show him how I feel about it .
For the first time for a long while social Europe is making positive headlines again with the directive on the posting of workers .
In view of the many risks of social dumping , especially in the building industry , as a result of the temporary posting of workers from EU and third countries , it has become increasingly obvious that free competition in the single market and the policy of openness towards third countries must be flanked by social measures if the entire social system is not soon to collapse .
It is to be welcomed that the Luxembourg Government took a very hard line in the Council , especially in relation to the period of time during which the host country 's wages and social provisions did not apply .
That period no longer exists now , which means that barring a few minor exceptions the right to a minimum wage and to a minimum paid annual leave must apply in full in the host country , thus also precluding social dumping .
Controls will be an important question here .
The principle that has been retained will stand or fall on that .
It will also be essential for the EU Member States to cooperate closely in order to establish and protect the rights of the workers .
This directive on the posting of workers , once applied , not only represents real progress for workers but also progress for the single market which clearly and specifically prescribes cross-frontier social absorption in addition to the freedom of entrepreneurs .
That is why the report by Mr Helwin Peter deserves our full and entire support .
It was not easy to reach an acceptable compromise on the question of the posting of workers .
But it was essential to have this kind of compromise in order to close the door to social dumping as a result of the freedom to provide services in the single market .
It is indeed unacceptable for national social legislation ( e.g. on minimum wages , social insurance contributions , labour law ) to be undermined by the posting of temporary workers from EU states or third countries and for undertakings that respect the legal requirements to be ousted by providers of services that ignore these requirements .
The text before us now makes it possible to prevent this social dumping from the first day of posting .
In that respect the Council followed Parliament , which has to be recorded as a positive step .
However , it was also made possible for either national legislators or national social partners to extend this threshold for a period up to one month .
In accordance with the subsidiarity principle , this possible derogation is to be welcomed , even though it would be better to find a uniform solution for the whole of Europe .
We regret that the common position did not end up being any clearer or more precise but as it nevertheless demonstrates a willingness to go in the direction of benefits for workers we are voting for it .
Pollack recommendation
We all know that good intentions not followed up with action are just straws in the wind .
And that has never been more apt , because greater exchange of information on air pollution , while positive , is not enough in itself to decontaminate the air we breathe .
So the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection reiterates the amendments presented at first reading , because the Council and the Commission must take it on board that the said information must be made public and available to all the citizens for their control .
Even politicians know that air pollution is one of the pressing problems in the cities of the Union , and hence the need to adopt the amendments Mrs Pollack has tabled again . I shall vote for them .
Cooperation in collecting and exchanging reliable data on air pollution in the Member States is an important part of the efforts to identify the major sources of pollution , and is therefore an essential prerequisite for combatting the growth in air pollution on a more systematic basis .
As we know , limit values have already been laid down in the EU for emissions of various harmful substances into the atmosphere , including CO2 , lead and ozone .
However , as the Committee on the Environment pointed out at the first reading of this proposal , the Community 's action so far in this area has been all too sporadic in nature , not to say haphazard .
Consequently , there is a need to introduce uniform rules on establishing limit values for emissions of all harmful substances .
It goes without saying that such limit values should be laid down on the basis of the most complete scientific data which can be obtained .
Unfortunately , the present proposal only requires the Member States to report data on pollutants which they are currently measuring .
Through the amendment calling for a review of the proposal after two years , Parliament 's Committee on the Environment emphasized its wish to see a tightening of the individual provisions of the proposal at an early stage .
The crucial point here is for the public to have full access to the data that are collected .
It is to be welcomed that the Commission has accepted most of Parliament 's amendments from first reading , including in particular one which sought to involve the European Environment Agency in the work on collecting , evaluating and disseminating the measurement data in question .
Virgin recommendation
As regards this recommendation from the rapporteur of the Committee on the Environment , Mr Virgin , it need only be said that , last year and in January this year , the rapporteur made thorough , strenuous and commendable efforts to bring the Commission into line with the European Parliament on the issue of the supervision and control of shipments of hazardous waste within , into and out of the territory of the Member States .
Unfortunately - as it appears from the Council 's common position - there was no success in persuading the Council of Ministers of the need for consistent application of the principles of proximity and prevention in this context .
According to the former , waste should be processed as near as possible to the place where it is created .
As things stand at present , Parliament hardly has any alternative but to follow the recommendation of the rapporteur , in other words to reintroduce the amendments which it adopted earlier in the year at its first reading of this proposal to amend Regulation ( EEC ) No 259 / 93 .
We can thank a non-EU Member State - Norway - for the fact that the Commission has changed its mind and taken on board the proposal that exports of waste from OECD countries to non-OECD countries for recycling purposes should also be prohibited .
However , it is important for me to stress the point that we must continue to work towards a sustainable approach , in which the quantity of waste produced is brought down to an absolute minimum .
At first reading , I proposed that a single list should be drawn up which has only one colour , namely red , and I stand by that proposal .
Nor can I help mentioning again that it is grotesque that the Commission threatened Denmark with legal action for taking it upon itself to propose changes that would ensure stricter rules for the benefit of the environment .
I am pleased that the Commission has now completely changed its stance and is in agreement with Parliament .
I have voted in favour of this recommendation from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , because the adoption of Parliament 's amendments is a good step in the right environmental direction .
As the rapporteur states in his report , the categories in the new Annex IIa should not be exported , since there is no guarantee that an environmentally sound use of the waste can be expected in the importing countries .
I hope that the Council will share the views of the Commission and Parliament .
Van Putten recommendation
As draftsman of the opinion on the proposal for a CITES Regulation , I should like to say that I am particularly satisfied , because the Council 's common position endorses the opinion tabled at first reading by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
The text no longer refers to the keeping of species of wild fauna and flora for non-commercial purposes , as is apparent from the change in the title of the Regulation .
However , the text does still contain one weakness in Article 9 , which makes any movement of the specimens referred to in Annex A subject to prior authorization , which would make life difficult if not impossible for the competent authorities .
They would have to deal on an everyday basis with applications for ' prior authorization ' from falconers , who quite naturally - and lawfully - move around unimpeded .
My group has tabled an amendment to correct what I regard as an unfortunate chance accident in the common position , because there is no reason virtually to prohibit falconry in the European Union .
I regret that Parliament has not adopted this amendment .
That apart , the common position is acceptable , and there is certainly no reason to reject it .
Our group tabled six amendments to Mrs van Putten 's report .
The trade in species of wild fauna and flora must be regulated and controlled .
What is at stake , of course , is the preservation of certain species which may be at risk in the present-day ecological , environmental and economic context .
However , too many constraints , too many obstructions , too many regulations may produce results contrary to those desired .
That is why my group has voted against some amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I am thinking particularly of Amendment No 12 , which does away with the possibility of using species of wild fauna and flora for research activities or educational purposes designed to safeguard or preserve species .
It is necessary for our students and researchers to be able to work on real samples rather than on photographs or other so-called ' teaching aids ' .
The six amendments proposed by my group are designed to protect the traditional activity of falconry .
We all know that displays take place using falcons and birds of prey .
These displays enable the public to see the extraordinary powers of these animals , and enable them to be appreciated by as many members of the public as possible .
It would be absurd to do away with this educational opportunity and to forget that these animals were for a very long time persecuted because of the negative image they had among the public .
I was pleased to hear - through Commissioner Bjerregaard - the Commission 's response , accepting our proposal , because it is very much a matter of common sense .
I hope that this position will be adopted by the majority of my colleagues during the vote .
Breyer report
The maximum levels for pesticide residues in agricultural products consisting in 0.01mg / kg for every individual substance and to 0.005mg / kg for the sum of pesticide residues , laid down in the proposal for an amending directive , have very serious implications for the production and consumption of foodstuffs in the EU , the productivity and competitiveness of European agricultural products and international commercial standards .
The current system of fixing the individual maximum levels , at the point of authorization ( registration ) for every substance and every crop on which that substance is used , has been operating at an international level for more than 30 years .
That system has been evaluated and improved by the FAO , the World Health Organization and the Codex Alimentarius so as to facilitate international trade in foodstuffs , by averting the risk of damage to health .
It has never caused problems and has been applied by all of the major countries - both developed and developing .
The fact is that , currently , the use of every substance is authorized for one or more crops in accordance with directions for use that are specifically laid down , and a maximum residue level ( MRL ) is set for each of them .
That level is the maximum concentration of residue of the substance in the crop obtained if the product is properly used , allowing for adequate and wide human safety margins .
Compliance with the maximum level both provides the maximum safety for man and guarantees that the product is used properly .
It is apparent from what has been said that the MRLs are not linked to the environmental issues , already considered by Directive 91 / 414 , but are designed solely to provide the maximum protection for human health .
Directive 91 / 414 requires that comprehensive documentation be submitted in relation to each product and crop , in the light of the specific chemical and physical , toxicological , environmental and agronomic characteristics , because the persistence of residues and the danger they represent varies from product to product and crop to crop .
Consequently , the demand for that documentation would not be justified solely on the basis of a single maximum residue limit on all products .
The effect of adopting a very low single MRL ( maximum residue limit ) would be to prevent most use of pesticides , in particular on the fruit and vegetable crops of the Mediterranean countries .
Furthermore , there is no technical or scientific evidence of risks to health arising out of the sum of residues at issue , nor are we aware of the scientific bases for setting the limits on the sum of residues ( why 0.05mg / kg and not 0.004 or 0.006 ? )
The economic and social damage to agriculture in Italy could in no way be offset by adopting alternative techniques such as organic farming .
Therefore , abandoning this in favour of the new criteria would have grave consequences on international trade in agricultural products , both exported from and imported into the Community , with devastating consequences - of both an economic and a social nature - for agriculture .
Moreover , it has been amply demonstrated that plant health products are crucial if we are to be able to meet food requirements , which are increasing apace as the world population grows .
In Italy , the adoption of the combined approach - involving the use of chemical and biological products - the attempt to rationalize use , technical progress and the development of new products has already achieved a reduction of some 25 % in the quantities of pesticides used .
We therefore accept the proposal in question but must point out that we shall be voting against all of the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , in particular Amendments Nos 1 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 20 , 22 , 23 , 24 and 31 concerning changes to the MRLs .
Rocard report
Mr President , unemployment represents so much wastage for the countries of Europe , and governments ' room for manoeuvre seems so limited against a background of free trade , the defensive shrinkage of the various socio-professional categories and , for some of us , over-valuation of the currency that , fatally , people are beginning to look to unorthodox solutions which had previously been discarded unconsidered .
What was a bad idea then is not a good one now .
It is tempting , for example , to feel that the money now being given to the unemployed would be better used to pay companies to reduce their personnel 's working hours and take on new staff .
Unfortunately , this attractive theoretical balance is more difficult to bring about in practice . It is typical that the Rocard report , despite all the experience of its compiler , a former Prime Minister of France , proposes not ready-made solutions but mere lines of thought , dubious lines in some cases , which the Commission is asked to consider in greater depth and which , ultimately , serve no purpose except to raise false hopes .
The fact is that this policy bears a heavy burden .
In order not to appear to be a social step backwards or a redistribution of poverty , it ought to include compensation through wages ; but in this case , even allowing for the saving in terms of unemployment benefit , it is in danger of proving expensive and so destroying the jobs it hopes to create .
In order to avoid this vicious circle , such an approach has to remain cautious and contractual , and , above all , must not cost the public treasury more than the total saving in terms of unemployment benefit .
After all , we must not lose sight of the overall situation .
The age-old trend towards a reduction of working hours has now been broken in the developed countries by the apostles of free trade and by the entry into the field of competitors who are not governed by the same social standards as ourselves .
Until such time as this problem is solved - either by a deliberate policy or , perhaps in the much longer term , by a gradual restoration of international balance - the reduction in working hours cannot be the subject of a general policy , merely that of isolated experiments .
The European Parliament has today voted to ask the Commission to study how more jobs could be created through shorter working hours with full financial compensation for those whose working hours are reduced .
We - the Swedish members of the PPE Group - have voted against this report .
We believe it is wrong to hold out to the public the prospect of miracle cures for unemployment .
The Socialists have now proposed on the one hand incorporating a chapter on employment in the Treaty on European Union and on the other reducing working hours .
All this does is to give false hopes to the general public which it will then be impossible to fulfil .
We can only achieve increased employment through deregulation of the labour market , improvements in general education , higher education to promote the use of advanced technologies in production processes , reasonable employment conditions for small businesses and lower taxes which encourage people to make efforts on their own behalf .
To put forward the reduction in working hours as a solution to the unemployment crisis in Europe is a proposal which attempts to defy logic .
The new world market in which we now compete makes it imperative that we must be as competitive as possible .
To introduce measures which impose extra costs on the production of goods is something that must be regarded very carefully .
Flexibility in the organization of working hours that will not infringe on workers ' basic rights could form part of an integrated solution to unemployment .
However , the proposals put forward by Mr Rocard , deal only superficially with the other mechanisms which could assist in our ultimate goal , i.e. more employment opportunities .
In particular the lack of a cost analysis on the SME and VSE sectors flies in the face of other Community actions to assist this sector , recognised by all as the engine for employment growth and economic growth in Europe , for example the third multi-annual programme for SMEs - Article 118 of the Treaty .
The gradual permanent approach would put on the scrapheap persons with years of knowledge and experience .
More regulation in the employment field will hinder job creation .
As we speak , the Working Time Directive has still not been transposed into national legislation in many countries and surely we should learn from the difficulties that have arisen with this legislation .
To abolish overtime would particularly discriminate against certain sectors where a high level of seasonality would have added cost .
For these reasons I cannot support the whole report although there is much within to which I would subscribe .
My congratulations to Mr Rocard for his tenacity and persistence .
Under present conditions , when the problem of jobs and the spectre of unemployment are at the core of working peoples ' concerns , it is urgently necessary to find reliable and effective solutions .
Under these conditions , reduction of the working time without loss of earnings could be a decisive step in addressing the problem , and would ensure the standard of living of working people and the creation of new jobs .
However , Mr Rocard subscribes to the view that working peoples ' earnings should be reduced in proportion to the reduction of their working time .
The innovation , supposedly , in his proposal consists in compensating for the loss of income by state expenditure which , he tells us , will come from the savings which Member States make in their expenditure on the unemployed .
This compensation , he says , could take the form either of a direct subsidy , or a reduction of employer contributions , for example for the first 32 hours of work , increasing them after that for any subsequent hours .
We disagree with that view , which in effect exempts employers from any contribution towards dealing with the crisis .
Earlier , we were told that working people would have to bear the cost .
Now , it is to be borne by the social security organizations .
But at a time when those organizations face very serious problems , savings of their expenditure could be used to improve their financial situation and enhance the level of public social security .
In parallel , the second interpretation leads both to a reduction of working peoples ' earnings and to reduced employer contributions , in other words the only beneficiaries of such a move would be the employers .
In parallel , the rapporteur proposes a range of measures to promote the dislocation of the labour market and make the organization of working time more flexible .
However , reality shows that on the contrary , such practices lead to increased job losses , lengthening of the working time , and the spread of social dumping .
For these reasons , we will vote against the report .
In our opinion , a policy to deal with unemployment should be based on shortening the working time without loss of earnings , on a reduction and gradual abolition of overtime , on the encouragement of productive investment , especially in labour-intensive branches , and on addressing the problem of relocation to third countries where labour is cheap .
These measures should be accompanied by a policy of income support for working people , consonant with the need to stimulate consumption and other factors related to production and employment .
As representative of the Green Group I naturally welcome this report on using shorter working hours as one weapon in the battle against unemployment .
Today 's labour market is distorted , since a large number of people are without work while at the same time those who are in work are working a great deal of overtime .
A reduction in working hours is therefore necessary to put this situation right .
Lower unemployment will also improve the state finances of the Member States .
For workers a reduction in working hours can only be a good thing , since their quality of life will improve and the social gulf which exists between those in work and those without it will be reduced .
In connection with a reduction in working hours it is also appropriate to reduce employers ' contributions , in order to encourage companies to appoint more staff , and to increase environmental and energy taxes to make it expensive to pollute the natural environment .
This report is a step in the right direction .
However , it is important to point out that I do not support the idea of the EU deciding how this should be done ; it is an issue which should be dealt with through intergovernmental cooperation rather than supranational decisions .
I have voted for the Rocard report .
I did not do so because I believed that it would solve the problem of high unemployment in Europe .
However , this is part of the debate which has to be conducted since proposals for the reorganisation and reduction of working hours , flexible working hours and flexible forms of work are just some of the ideas which must be tested .
No proposal should be regarded as unimportant before it has been tested to see if it can help solve the problem of the 18-20 million unemployed .
A reduction in working hours will also improve the quality of life of those in work today - many have long hours and have to work a long day .
20 million unemployed in the 15 states of the European Union , 52 million citizens living below the poverty line : this is a disastrous situation which strikes fear into us and paralyses our imaginations .
We adopt social flanking measures or measures to encourage recruitment , which are costing fortunes to all our countries : ECU 350 , 000 million ( or more than 2 billion francs , 4.5 % of the gross national product of each Member State , 120 , 000 francs per unemployed person per year ) , yet without creating any jobs , without restoring the dignity of the millions suffering from exclusion , without giving any hope to our millions of young people .
What we need is a different way of organizing society , a different way of organizing working hours .
It is time to be bold , to have new ideas .
For this reason , I can only thank Michel Rocard for having worked so hard on this subject , giving priority to the human aspect of this challenge .
In his report , Michel Rocard makes proposals which will be accepted by a large majority in this Parliament - I have no doubt of that .
The 32-hour working week makes sense in historical terms .
Let me remind you that in 1880 people in Europe worked for 3200 hours a year - today , they work half as long !
And technological changes are forcing us to accelerate this process .
Only a massive reduction in working hours , only a different way of organizing work , more flexible , with more diversification as between jobs , negotiated between the social partners , can meet the challenges of unemployment , with a statute of equality guaranteeing the same rights , the same safeguards , the same career prospects .
10 % more people could be recruited and millions of new jobs created in the European Union !
The critical problem is still the problem of earnings - of wages .
Michel Rocard 's original idea deserves our full attention .
The wage compensation could be provided either by direct subsidy based on savings made on the cost of unemployment , or by changing the social security contributions : the contributions could be cut by half up to 32 hours , and multiplied by 4 over and above that .
Which , at the same time , would be a strong deterrent to challenging the additional hours , the equivalent of 3 or 4 million jobs in Europe .
The rapporteur favours negotiation between the social partners in order to implement this device .
Will this approach be effective in every country ?
I doubt it as far as France is concerned , when we see the current stagnation of negotiations on working hours : in all probability , legislative action will be needed .
The 32-hour working week , selective part-time working , progressive retirement , the reduction in overtime will bring a change in lifestyle .
Allowing people two or three days off each week means one more day devoted to a different way of living .
Unemployment has reached such a scale in Europe that we must not reject any ideas on ways of reducing this evil .
The proposals on shorter working time in the Rocard report are in fact most unrealistic in their absolute form , however a pragmatic approach to the problem could certainly produce positive results .
I have the following comments to make on this .
.
Experience has shown that growth alone cannot substantially reduce unemployment .
A redistribution of existing work would therefore seem appropriate .
.
A linear reduction in working time without a cut in wages would be an economic heresy that would lead to a decline in competitiveness and therefore also to a further loss of jobs .
.
The question therefore needs to be discussed at enterprise level .
Given the very different situations in the different regions of Europe and within them in the different enterprises , it is up to the social partners to formulate specific models of reductions in working time that are adjusted to the specific situation of these enterprises .
.
For example , it might be worth considering the formula ' shorter working time instead of wage rises ' , accompanied by the employment of jobless people , with the costs accessory to wages being borne by the employment exchanges .
Such programmes should be formulated by the social partners at specific enterprise level and certainly not be a political dictate .
The political actors for their part should provide the legislative framework and necessary resources so that nothing can prevent such models from being implemented .
A reduction in working time is certainly not a cure-all .
But if the social partners act at enterprise level , this could lead to a better distribution of work without making the enterprise in question less competitive .
That is why this idea should not be rejected out of hand but we should continue considering it realistically and implement it as one model among many according to the principle of subsidiarity .
As was clear from the debate here in the House , this report by Mr Rocard has been met with a great deal of criticism and scepticism .
This is not only due to the fact that the fixing of working hours is typically a national matter , and in several Member States one which is the subject of agreements .
It is also because our experience so far with the reduction of working hours , introducing different systems of leave and so on in the individual Member States has not been especially positive .
At best , schemes of this kind could be described as welfare-promoting measures with no stimulating effect on employment .
This applies in particular to the private sector .
In this context , it is worth pointing out that unemployment throughout Europe - despite an accompanying fall in working hours - has kept on rising over the last 20 to 25 years .
The reason for this is not just that the private sector has been forced to offset increasing wage costs - both direct and indirect - through rationalization .
It is also that there has been a steadily growing gap between the skills of the unemployed and those which private firms now have to demand .
The cost in time and money of training a highly specialized workforce is in itself a barrier to maintaining existing jobs , when a skilled worker leaves a firm temporarily or for good .
A general obligation to reduce working hours will have a similar effect .
The problem of unemployment therefore cannot be solved by measures which do not take account of the skills requirements , now or in the future , of what is an increasingly internationalized labour market .
In the light of this , I am obliged to vote against the report drawn up by Mr Rocard .
The customers decide the jobs , politicians can only create fair and just framework conditions .
Austria has the second-lowest unemployment rate in Europe and the lowest youth unemployment rate in the world because of its very efficient dual training and further training system .
Education must not disregard the labour market .
A year after our accession to the EU , we saw a historic employment peak .
First one needs orders , only then can one distribute work , and then performance has to be rewarded .
That is the only guarantee for an ecosocial economy .
In Sweden the number of hours worked annually in a fulltime job has , on average , increased by 100 hours per year .
A normal working week of 40 hours is in reality 40.7 hours .
During the same period 600 , 000 people have become unemployed .
What is missing from the Rocard report is any reference to the distribution of work between the sexes .
In Sweden wage-earning fathers of small children work most of all .
It is the endeavour of the Swedish party of the left to achieve a more just distribution of working hours between men and women , between wage-earning and unpaid work .
We therefore regard a reduction of the working week as the best method but share the rapporteur 's view of the necessity of shortening working hours as a means of reducing the number of unemployed . We are therefore voting for the report .
It is a challenge to the European institutions , the governments and the social agents to end the waste of one of Europe 's most valuable assets , its human resources .
The challenge is complex and unfortunately there are no easy solutions .
It would send the wrong message to the people to say that reducing working hours is going to produce full employment .
The ideas and proposals in the Rocard report are additional factors in the range of measures that need to be mobilized .
It needs to be reiterated that economic growth is necessary but not sufficient .
Technological innovation needs to be socially assimilated .
Man has made major technical advances to liberate himself from the heaviest work and to increase efficiency , but technical advances cannot and must not lead to men sinking into unemployment and despair .
As well as directly productive activities we also have to consider those which improve the quality of life .
It is essential to organize and distribute across those two great sectors .
The resources of social solidarity need to be dedicated to financing work and not just promoting inactivity .
This challenge of distributing work is difficult to meet with simplistic formulae .
Society needs to find its own equilibria .
Firms must be a point of encounter and agreement .
The family , as the basic economic and social unit , is another fundamental pole of redistribution .
To achieve that , certain essential revolutionary fiscal measures can make it possible to ensure sufficient income for each home and allow its members a flexible range of options .
On the other hand , measures like environmental taxes which ease employment cannot be dismissed either .
Changes in habits of production and consumption would be another useful measure .
I consider the report as a whole to be good and have absolutely nothing against the Commission undertaking a study of the situation .
However , I have reservations on the following points .
Recital F : I disapprove of the suggestion made here that taxes and social security contributions hinder recruitment .
Recital M : It is suggested here that public and private employees should be treated differently in any process to reduce working hours , with one category receiving compensation for loss of wages and the other not .
This is completely wrong .
All employees should of course be treated in the same way , irrespective of their employer .
Paragraph 2 : This is where the central idea of the report is advanced , that is that social security contributions should be reduced if less than 32 hours per week are worked and increased if more than 32 are worked .
In the Explanatory Statement it is suggested that they should increase to ECU 4.5 per hour if more than 39 hours a week are worked and / or be reduced by ECU 4 per hour if the working week is less than 32 hours .
This would mean that a half-time job ( 20 hours per week ) would cost SEK 50 or 100 less an hour than a full-time job .
I am sceptical about this differentiation because it will result in two part-time jobs being created rather than one full-time job and this is a development that we in Sweden wish to prevent .
Finally , I believe that the rapporteur could have mentioned increased employment in the public sector as an effective means of reducing unemployment .
This is much neglected within the Union and there are many things which need doing in schools , the infrastructure sector , the care sector , health care and in the care of the elderly which could give the EU 's 20 million unemployed meaningful employment .
I am nevertheless voting for the report as I believe that its main demand - that the issue should be investigated - is very reasonable .
With the Rocard report I presume Parliament will finally state quite clearly that it will not be possible to tackle the scandal of mass unemployment in Europe , which now affects more than 30 million people , without massive cuts in working time .
The promises made in the past by the neo-liberal-conservative political model , namely that it would fight mass unemployment and social exclusion by means of growth and by a reduction in the incomes of the employed , have proved hollow and impossible to keep .
The fact that the European Parliament is beginning to suggest a clearer alternative to this mistaken approach is doubtless a positive sign .
It remains to be hoped that Parliament will define this approach in more concrete and specific terms in forthcoming reports and resolutions .
But even on the basis of these interim proposals , all the social forces in the Member States who are striving for an economic and social changeover to a new type of full employment can and will give new impetus to the public debate .
However , the amendments by Mr Rocard and the Group of the Party of European Socialists that were accepted during yesterday 's compromise discussions show on what a weak political basis these discussions are currently still being conducted .
It was evidently considered necessary rapidly to abandon the central approach of re-allocating at least part of the current ECU 350 000 million spent in the Member States for the administration of unemployment on state support for the reduction of working time .
Moreover , the important task of replacing overtime payment with compensatory leave has been reduced to being merely a matter for study .
During the preliminary discussions on the report , the Greens managed to introduce and emphasize some ideas on integrating the instrument of a reduction of working time into a strategy of transition to a new development model that promotes sustained care of the environment and communication , makes the work process less intensive and hectic and gives women and men more choice in planning their lives fairly .
The Greens have supported this report as a positive signal even in the sadly weakened version now before us for decision , although they have also tried to check some of the worst attempts to water it down .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Communities ' draft general budget for 1997
The next item is the presentation by the Council of the draft general budget for 1997 .
Mr President , honourable Members , may I commence by saying how pleased I am to be here today to present to this plenary session the draft budget for the financial year 1997 , established by the Council on 25 July this year .
I would stress at the outset a feature of the budgetary procedure this year , namely the cooperation between the three institutions , which , before the Council established the draft budget , united them in a genuine and frank discussion .
That is a feature we would hope to continue with .
The budgetary procedure set up by the Treaty should be the high point of collaboration between the institutions concerned .
The Interinstitutional Agreement of 1993 established the framework for such collaboration .
Since then the importance of cooperation has clearly increased year by year .
The procedure began this year in a spirit of cooperation .
It took account of the need for budgetary discipline which is greater than ever in the exceptional economic context of 1997 .
The trialogue on the possible priorities for the coming year prompted extremely detailed discussions between the Council presidency , Parliament and the Commission , making it possible to set down the first markers by reconciling certain approaches .
Subsequently , our trialogue in early July made the Council aware of Parliament 's principal concerns , particularly in the area of compulsory expenditure , and thus proved to be a valuable preparation for the meeting and conciliation held on the morning of the Budget Council on 25 July .
That meeting provided an opportunity for all sides to spell out the crucial points of the 1997 budgetary procedure and to take cognizance of the objectives they saw as essential in this particularly testing financial year .
It also allowed your representatives to raise specific issues of concern to Parliament , in particular the possibility of a review of the Financial Perspective , the question of legal bases and some other matters .
The exchange of views on these issues proved to be extremely useful .
The ad hoc conciliation , particularly on agricultural expenditure and the fisheries agreements made it possible to bring substantially closer together the approaches of the two arms of the budgetary authority with the assistance of the Commission .
These talks showed the considerable amount of mutual understanding which exists .
The special economic and financial circumstances surrounding the 1997 budget may well have something to do with that .
However , whatever the reason , such close cooperation can only be advantageous to the Community and is to be welcomed .
In the light of these detailed exchanges of views with representatives of Parliament and the Commission , the Council established its draft budget for the financial year 1997 .
In so doing , the Council was guided by the same principles of budgetary discipline and rigour as the Member States have set for themselves in 1997 .
To achieve the same objective at Community level , the Council decided to reduce the preliminary draft budget by ECU 1 , 000m in the area of agricultural expenditure and to make an identical reduction in the payment appropriations for structural operations .
It is also convinced that these reductions must go hand in hand with savings in internal policies and external measures , amounting to some ECU 550m in payment appropriations , together with corresponding savings in commitment appropriations .
The Council takes the view that these measures are inextricably linked and should run in parallel .
In particular , it is essential that agricultural expenditure and structural expenditure be given even-handed treatment .
These essential measures for the 1997 budget procedure constitute the crux of the discussions at the conciliation meeting on 25 July .
All those taking part acknowledged their prime importance .
Clearly , the Council regards it as absolutely vital that the European Parliament go along with this overall strategy and we hope that it will .
In that context , the Council noted with satisfaction that , when drawing up its guidelines for the 1997 budgetary procedure , Parliament was already aware and supportive of the need for budget entries to be as realistic as possible .
That is precisely the objective of the measures the Council advocates in this draft budget .
To limit the budget allocations to what is strictly necessary with an eye to the likely outcome without , however , impeding important Community policies or reneging on the Edinburgh commitments .
I now turn to the various components of the draft budget established by the Council on 25 July .
Let me begin with agricultural expenditure .
In this area the Council has amended the preliminary draft budget in two ways .
In the first place , under the overall strategy I have just outlined , the Council made an ECU 1 , 000m reduction in the appropriations for heading 1 of the Financial Perspective .
This reduction applies horizontally to all budget items under this heading , with the exception of the beef and veal chapter and BSE temporary reserve .
In so doing , the Council entered appropriations amounting to ECU 40 , 805m under the EAGGF Guarantee Section , an amount which is ECU 1 , 000m under the agricultural guideline laid down for the 1997 financial year .
Account being taken of the monetary reserve expenditure , it amounts in all to ECU 41 , 305m , 0.6 % down on the 1996 financial year .
Moreover , in accordance with the conclusions reached at the ad hoc conciliation meeting , the Council agreed to enter appropriations totalling ECU 62m in the reserve , drawn from the three budget headings for which the Commission agreed that its budget estimates could be altered .
Starting with agriculture , therefore , we want to display our commitment to reasonable budgetary proposals and achieve a 1997 budget which remains at the 1996 level .
In the area of structural operation the Council entered the entire amount of commitment appropriations suggested by the Commission , that is , ECU 31 , 477m in accordance with the undertakings entered into by the European Council in Edinburgh .
However , as regards the payment appropriations for this heading , the Council introduced the second aspect of its overall savings strategy by effecting a ECU 1 , 000m reduction in the payment appropriations .
In so doing the Council wishes to assure you that this measure can be undertaken without jeopardizing the smooth operation of the essential policy funded by such appropriations in the light of the out-turn in the recent past .
On the basis of this criterion the reduction has no effect on Objectives 1 and 6 of the Structural Funds , nor is the Cohesion Fund affected in any way by this reduction .
The Council accepted all the allocations proposed in the preliminary draft budget for the Cohesion Fund , namely , ECU 2 , 749m in commitment appropriations and ECU 2 , 326m in payment appropriations , which represents an increase of about 12.5 % in commitment appropriations and just over 21 % in payment appropriations over the 1996 figures .
For structural operations as a whole the amounts entered in the draft budget stand at ECU 31 , 477m in commitment appropriations and ECU 26 , 300m in payment appropriations , increases of ECU 2 , 346m and ECU 545.8m respectively .
Where internal policies are concerned the Council has again this year placed emphasis on two of the Community 's priority policies , namely research and trans-European networks ; that is , B6 and B5 .
In that context the Council agreed to all the commitment appropriations proposed by the Commission for sub-section B6 , namely ECU 3 , 450m , an increase of 8.4 % over 1996 .
Where payment appropriations were concerned the Council accepted the allocation suggested for the Joint Research Centre .
For title B6 ( 5 ) - that is , completion of the second and third Framework Programmes - and titles B6 ( 7 ) and B6 ( 8 ) , the fourth Framework Programme , the Council has made a 5 % reduction in payment appropriations .
Given the 1995 rate of out-turn a reduction of this nature will not hamper normal funding of these programmes .
With regard to the trans-European networks - that is , B5 - the Council accepted the preliminary draft budget allocations in commitment appropriations for financial support for transport networks , namely ECU 352m , an increase of ECU 72m on 1996 .
The payment appropriations entered , while slightly down on the preliminary draft budget , nonetheless show a 25 % rate of growth .
For the energy networks the draft budget is slightly under the preliminary draft budget and in the telecommunications field the draft budget equals the 1996 budget where commitment appropriations are concerned and exceeds it for payment appropriations .
For this title as a whole the Council has entered substantial amounts , namely ECU 489m in commitment appropriations and ECU 346m in payment appropriations , which corresponds to an increase of ECU 79m in commitment appropriations and of ECU 69m in payment appropriations .
In this way the Council has clearly demonstrated its wish to give preference to these two major Community policies which can exercise a direct influence on growth and unemployment .
As a result , where other internal policies are concerned , the Council has had to make some deliberate choices .
For example , it has laid stress on essential policies such as education , vocational training and youth and other social operations .
It has also reserved a special place for policies which are now well established such as that on the environment , consumer protection , the internal market and industry .
The Council has allowed a margin of ECU 348.2m in this heading of the Financial Perspective .
It trusts that the other arm of the budgetary authority , namely Parliament , will approve these or equivalent measures and join the Council in a policy of confining itself to realistic budget entries in the particular context of 1997 .
I come now to the last major Community policy area funded from the budget , namely external measures .
To cover the whole of this sub-section the Council has entered a total of ECU 5 , 310m in commitment appropriations and ECU 4 , 106.5m in payment appropriations .
These numbers are practically the same as the 1996 budget .
The Council considers that the budget authority cannot avoid its duty to accord preferential treatment to those areas that represent high priorities for the Community .
Thus it has entered all the commitment appropriations provided for in the preliminary draft budget for the Central and East European countries and Mediterranean third countries in line with the conclusions of the Cannes European Council .
Regarding international fisheries agreements and in keeping with the conclusions of the conciliation procedure on compulsory expenditure , the Council agreed to insert a second budget heading under the relevant article entitled ' Contributions to international organizations ' and to increase the amount transferred to the reserve .
The sustained effort in the field of cooperation with Latin America and Asia continues .
Another essential cooperation policy vis-à-vis the independent states of the former Soviet Union has been allocated ECU 541m in commitment appropriations and ECU 445m in payment appropriations .
The share for TACIS has been increased slightly in relation to 1996 .
Cooperation with the former Yugoslavia has also been allocated substantial funding .
Elsewhere the draft budget broadly follows the Commission 's requests for other cooperation measures , in particular , in respect of measures in favour of democracy and human rights , whether in Central and Eastern Europe and particularly Yugoslavia , in the newly independent states , in Mongolia , Latin America or in other countries .
Thus , while on the one hand the Council has endeavoured to maintain essential policies by agreeing to substantial commitment appropriations , it also considered that it can be more realistic with the payment of appropriations needed in the light of expected out-turns .
Finally , I come to expenditure on the administrative operation of the Community 's institutions .
Aware of the problems which are currently entailing severe restrictions in public expenditure in the Member States , the Council is advocating and implementing a very stringent approach to expenditure in this area .
In providing for an overall amount of ECU 4244.6 million , the draft budget represents more or less the status quo in real terms .
In its decisions the Council has been particularly stringent in respect of certain types of expenditure , such as consultancy costs , and expenditure relating to restaurants and canteens , data-processing and transport equipment .
The Council has not agreed to any new posts , except for the Commission , and in a very restricted sense for the Court of Auditors and the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions ' common structure , and then only for requirements arising from enlargement .
Under this heading the Council has left a margin which it regards as essential .
I would stress , however , that , as for last year , the Council considers that this margin should not be used for the requirements of any single institution .
Those then are the main points of the draft budget established by the Council .
This draft budget was not easily established .
It required a considerable effort on the part of every Member State and a good deal of compromise .
But it must be said that it achieves the sought-after balance in its measures , which mirror the major domestic objective which Member States must strive to attain in order to implement economic and monetary union on our stated schedule .
This objective cannot but have a significant effect on the Community budget as well .
Moreover , the Council is very much aware that its draft budget constitutes only one stage in the budget procedure .
It is conscious of the fact that close collaboration , and even a shared understanding with your Parliament , is indispensable for implementing a budget which is well balanced .
There is no need to emphasize the exceptional nature of the measures which the Council is proposing in this draft budget , nor is there any doubt that an agreement acceptable to both the budget authorities , achieved with the help of the Commission , would be bound to augur well for the future development of relations between the two authorities and for the well-being of the Community as a whole .
On behalf of the presidency , I should like to say that it will spare no effort in working towards that end throughout the budget procedure in order to obtain , together with Parliament and the Commission , a budget which most closely reflects the Community 's interests .
In conclusion , I wish to thank everyone who has been involved in this exercise and who will doubtless continue to be so , within the two arms of the budgetary authority and the Commission .
In particular , I thank the Committee on Budgets , its chairman , Detlev Samland , who unfortunately cannot be here , Laurens Brinkhorst , the general rapporteur , Mr Fabra Vallés , the rapporteur of the institution 's budget , also the Commissioner , Erkki Liikanen , and the relevant departments of the Commission and , finally , the Council secretariat , particularly Joseph Lentz , who has been of such assistance to me .
Since assuming the presidency I have come to appreciate the huge amount of time , effort and commitment which all of those people , and others indeed , have brought to this challenging task , and I want to say thank you for that .
Mr President , the Union cannot stand aside from the efforts made in most Member States to work themselves out of excessive budget deficits and public debt .
As the moment of truth for the successful start of economic and monetary union approaches , these efforts have become urgent and inevitable .
The preliminary draft budget presented in April was up to that challenge : growth rate , without BSE , below the rate of inflation , significant margins in Categories 3 , 4 and 5 , and a growth in personnel down to zero , except for enlargement .
Since then , however , budgetary moves in the Member States have required additional measures both for the current year and for 1997 .
It is understandable that Member States in this situation took a hard look at Community expenditure and found a majority for a so-called zero growth draft budget .
For this the Council majority decided to take risks .
It is a safe bet that the unavoidable legal claims in Categories 1 and 2 can each be met with ECU 1 billion less than estimated in the PDB .
Given the sizeable under-execution of these categories in recent years this is not an unreasonable risk .
But as long as the Council does not vote real savings in the underlying regulations , the Commission may have to propose a supplementary budget if credits turn out to be insufficient in the course of the next year .
As far as Categories 3 , 4 and 5 are concerned , they cannot escape from exceptional rigour .
But at the same time the Community cannot switch off the lights .
The tighter the budget , the more the priorities have to be right .
The priorities of the draft budget are not the priorities of the Commission .
All activities need to be reviewed .
But the investments in the future of the Union have to be maintained or even strengthened .
Funds for research , for transEuropean networks , in particular for transport , and for small- and medium-sized enterprises are investments in the future .
Numerous European Councils have stressed their priorities and the Commission remains convinced of their importance , as I understood the presidency does also .
The draft budget wants to stop the pilot programme for voluntary civil service without giving it a proper chance , cut the funds for consumer protection , cut funds for the fight against fraud , reduce the information budget by more than half and cut funds for programmes for equality between men and women .
These cuts weaken the fabric of the Union , which needs to be strengthened , in particular in difficult times .
Funds for environmental protection should at least be maintained .
In external policies the draft budget eliminates the contribution to the European Development Fund , which the European Council at Cannes had decided .
It cuts food aid at a time when the list of recipient countries has considerably expanded .
To some extent the Council 's draft budget priorities are due to a mechanical and uneven application of the principle of legal base .
This underlines again , as I have pointed out repeatedly , the importance of an agreement between the Institutions on this very question .
Progress seems to have been made at a technical level and this now needs political agreement .
Clarity on this question would be an important achievement of the 1997 budget procedure .
The Commission is ready to contribute as much as it can to this end .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the President-in-Office has just said that he appreciates the spirit of dialogue with Parliament .
He means that personally and I would like to say that I have no doubt that he is a fine man and a fine President-in-Office .
But there is a difference between form and content .
I do not hesitate to call the Council the stalemate Institution of the European Union .
On all the essential points the Council has been very self-congratulatory while making its own life very easy .
Before making some specific comments , I should like to say something about the outcome of the dialogue .
Here not only is it a stalemate Institution but also an Institution which wants to turn the clock back .
On the substance of the matter we are further away than we were a couple of years ago .
Certainly we have had a lot of meetings but the ad hoc procedure has not yet been closed and the Council says , with dry eyes , on fisheries , for instance , that it is clear that it should be compulsory expenditure , when it knows that is not the view of Parliament .
On the legal base , we have made no improvement whatsoever and there is a danger - and the Commissioner has already made the point - that we shall turn the clock back .
We have more than forty budget lines where the Council has either cut back totally or nearly totally on the grounds of the legal base .
That is not the way that the two budgetary institutions can work together and Parliament cannot simply accept this without drawing certain conclusions .
On issues such as comitology , the European Development Fund and the famous issue of compulsory and noncompulsory expenditure , it is a stalemate Institution and a turn-back-the-clock Institution .
I do not see any willingness among a large part of the Council to make any progress .
I now come to the Financial Perspective - perhaps the most sorry development we have seen this year .
President Santer of the Commission has of course made proposals for changing the Financial Perspective - the revision which was wanted by Parliament .
The President-in-Office understood that was the basis of our willingness to work on reasonable margins in the various categories .
As you know , Mr Colom i Naval and myself attended the Council meeting last Monday and since the Council wants to be transparent it is my duty to report on what we heard .
We heard that there was not a chance in hell that there would be any change in the Financial Perspective .
It was said a little more politely and perhaps I did not hear all eleven translations - but basically that is what I heard .
So , we are in a very difficult situation .
We are faced with a situation where Parliament is being asked to undress itself , to undertake a collective striptease while the Council clothes itself in a cloak of holiness .
That cannot be the outcome of the dialogue we want on first and second reading .
The Council is also a pretending Institution - it pretends to save .
Commissioner Liikanen made the point very clearly : ECU 1 billion in structural funds to be saved in agriculture .
But these are not real savings .
This situation has quite clearly been caused by the lack of willingness on the part of Members of the Council to spend structural funds .
In agriculture the so-called reserve has already been eaten up four weeks after the reserve was entered under BSE .
Yesterday there was a suggestion that we should have ECU 1 billion simply thrown over the counter .
All those present here - and unfortunately there are more members of the public than Members of Parliament here - know that ECU 1.3 billion is quite a significant sum for a normal household .
There is no democratic political control at either national or European level so long as it is a question of compulsory expenditure .
That brings me to the question of the priorities and the holier-than-thou attitude of the Council .
How can the President-in-Office say that essential policies were not affected ?
He mentions consumer policy which was cut - and I have the list here - by 40 % , energy policy by 80 % , transport policy by 62 % and the internal market by 33.88 % .
That is not the way to enter into real dialogue .
I should like to end with two specific questions to the Commission .
I should like to ask the Commissioner , who is very courageous , whether he could say something about his support for non-governmental organizations not only in the A but also in the B part of the budget .
Secondly , because I appreciate enormously what the Commission is doing in terms of reform of the administration , could the Commissioner say what has been done about the transfer of appropriations in respect of posts ? 300 people are concerned but if I have understood correctly very little has been happening .
It would be much appreciated if you could reply to these questions .
Mr President , the President-in-Office of the Council told us he was pleased to address the House , and looking around me , I am pleased that at least the interested parties are here .
The Committee on Budgets not only recognizes but praises the fact that the budget reflects the continued climate of rigour and austerity indispensable to achieving monetary union , and follows the lines agreed at the meeting of the delegations from the Council and Parliament .
As regards the 1997 budget procedure , I want to stress the significant agreement achieved in the tripartite dialogue between the Council , the Commission and Parliament on 16 April , which limited the creation of new items within the commitments already contracted in the context of the enlargement .
The Council proposes to strengthen the language departments as regards Finnish and Swedish , as well as persevere in the improvement of the cost / efficiency ratio , on which , of course , we are in agreement .
The Committee on Budgets pointed out that , in the first draft of the 1997 budget and in the area of administrative costs , the limit of heading 5 had been exceeded by ECU 14.55 million .
We note that the Council 's draft has not only removed the lack of financial cover , but left a certain margin .
As regards the adjustments made to the credits in Chapter XI - Staff on active service - we think it is right to have incorporated the most recent information available on the evolution of certain economic parameters .
For the information of the Assembly - those present - the forecasts have been adjusted downwards .
As regards the credits in Title II - Buildings , equipment and miscellaneous operating costs - it has to be said that the most striking increase - 49.81 % -relates to Parliament but , in the end , we are all aware of that the Council has taken on commitments which forces Parliament to follow suit with the same commitments .
On the other hand , the credits allocated to the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions have been revised downwards .
Greater precision as regards the Court of justice , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions would not disturb us , Mr President .
We are glad that account has been taken of the report from the Court of Auditors - and as I am mentioning it , I want to pay homage to its good work - on the leasings for the Court of Justice .
This report , which was requested by Parliament , will serve to unblock an entry of ECU 60 million reducing the last instalment on the annexes for the Court of Justice or , through renegotiation with the government of Luxembourg , permitting a reduction of ECU 6 million annually in leasings .
I believe the Court of Justice should also take advantage of the current state of the building market to obtain a general renegotiation downwards of these leasings .
Gentlemen of the Council , I shall not hide from you the fact that , at this stage in the procedure , Parliament is still awaiting additional information on the Palais .
What is the state of the building ?
What is happening about the equipment ?
What are the actual leasings ?
Will they be renegotiated ?
Because they can be renegotiated , as I have just said .
As regards the Economic and Social Council and the Committee of the Regions , I am sorry that Chapter XX - Buildings - of the Council 's draft does not consider the needs of these institutions now that the European Parliament has announced its intention of leaving the Van Maerlan building , agreeing to the conclusions and questions I put to it in my document No 5 .
I would just mention that in our draft we only have allocations committed for the first six months .
What will happen if this is not brought to a conclusion in the required time and Parliament has to go on finding the rent for Van Maerlan ?
That is not provided for in our budget .
And finally , it just remains for me to mention the lack of agreement in the system of calculating and invoicing the average cost of interpreting per day .
I agree with you that this is not easy , given that we are not even in agreement inside Parliament , just as we cannot reach an understanding on the increase in pensions costs .
We think there should be further study , thought and information about the fact that a quarter of the allocations authorized in 1996 - ECU 94 million - and intended for redundancy payments is reserved for invalidity pensions .
Mr President , those are the comments from the Committee on Budgets on the Council report .
In spite of great coincidence of view , we find ourselves obliged to present some amendments to protect the proper functioning of the institutions .
You are witnesses to the exceptional difficulty of the 1997 budget .
I want you to know that my only compensation in this budget is working with you , because you are people who , so far , have been very well-prepared and open to dialogue .
Both the President-in-Office and the Commissioner have asked to give a brief response .
Mr President , enough has been said to have a considerable debate here , and I am sure we will have that at a future time .
I thank those who spoke and I have listened carefully to what they have said .
Let me reiterate : we are living in an unusual period where all of the Member States are under varying degrees of difficulty with their own budgets , and clearly that has to be reflected in our work .
That is why this is a particularly difficult year .
The Commissioner spoke about legal bases , as did Mr Brinkhorst ; that is a key issue .
We are working constructively with the authorities concerned and we hope during our presidency and in Council to make progress on this issue which , we are all agreed , is not just desirable , but absolutely necessary .
The Commissioner 's choices and priorities are of course somewhat different to our own , but as long as he appreciates that this is a time for making difficult choices and having to relinquish some of the things that we would all like , we can work together and , I hope , find a solution that we can all agree with in the end .
Mr Brinkhorst was kind enough to refer to the fact that I have tried - and I will continue to do so - to bridge the gap that does exist , but the Council and Parliament have to have different priorities at times and there will always be a feeling that cooperation could be better and we can but work in that direction .
But I think that the level of dialogue this year was very real and we are not finished yet .
I can say little about the revision of the financial perspective .
As you know , it is down on the agenda for the Ecofin meeting this weekend and I have no doubt that we will return to that subject .
But it is not really for me to deal with it two days ahead of my Minister for Finance , who was dealing with it in Dublin at the weekend .
I have noted what Mr Fabra Vallés has said .
Many of the points were of such a detailed nature that I do not think he would expect me to respond to them this afternoon , but I will note them and I have no doubt that we will have further dialogue on them .
Mr Brinkhorst raised two rather detailed questions .
First of all as far as support to nongovernmental organizations is concerned he took the valuable initiative of organizing a hearing next week in the European Parliament .
We have cooperated with this .
We have sent letters to all the organizations and asked them to be present .
I do not want to make an impromptu analysis of this report today but we are willing , later , to present an assessment to the Committee on Budgets .
The same is true regarding the transfer of credits for employment .
I fully agree with him that if there is a transfer of credits for employment the idea is to decrease the dependence on external work .
If that is not the case then there is no logic or justification for our efforts .
I am prepared to report to the Budgets Committee on how this situation develops .
Finally , to Minister Coveney , the Commission is willing to cooperate on a budget based on the utmost rigour .
But as I said before , when there is great rigour we need to agree on priorities .
This is even more important under such circumstances than when there is a wide margin for expenditure .
The debate is closed .
Events in Iraq
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on recent events in Iraq .
Mr President , I am aware that Members have been carefully watching events in Iraq .
The conflict in northern Iraq has led to a serious humanitarian emergency and there is even the threat of further consequences , with the possibility of military action between Iraq and the United States .
We all know that for many years the Iraqi dictatorship has brought great suffering on its own people and on its neighbours .
Abroad , its expansionist ambitions and seizure of Kuwait caused the Gulf War with all the huge suffering and destruction that entailed , and even now Iraq still continues to threaten the stability of the Gulf .
At home , it has consistently and massively violated the human rights of its own population , in defiance of Security Council resolutions , as well as the international human rights instruments .
In southern Iraq , the regime has devastated the lifestyle of the Marsh Arab people in an attempt to subject them to Baghdad 's control .
In the north its oppression of its Kurdish population in the aftermath of the Gulf War was so severe that the international community had to step in and set up safe havens to protect them from the regime .
As a result of the oppression of its own population , the international community felt obliged in the aftermath of the Gulf War to modify the basic rule in international relations of the inviolability of frontiers and to assume responsibility for ensuring , through the No-Fly-Zones , that Saddam Hussein eased the pressure on his own population .
Unfortunately , despite this international protection , it did not prove possible to resolve the bitter and long-standing differences between the two main Kurdish parties of Iraq - the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan - after the Gulf War .
For some reason , a temporary cease-fire in the hostilities between the two factions was established and certain confidence-building measures were agreed between them , but the fragile peace that existed through 1995 has recently given way to renewed hostilities .
The fighting between the factions and the general state of lawlessness in northern Iraq added to the existing pressures on the area 's stability , and led to border incursions by both Turkey and Iran .
Turkey argued that its incursions were justified on the grounds that elements of its own outlawed Kurdish Workers Party , the PKK , have been availing of their relative protection in northern Iraq to strike at Turkey .
Iran for its part claimed that a subgroup of the KDP had been mounting attacks on its territory from northern Iraq .
The volatile situation has offered Saddam Hussein the opportunity and pretext for reasserting his influence over the whole of Iraq , which had been denied to him by the establishment of the safe havens .
His incursion into the Kurdish areas upset the element of stability that Resolution 688 and the subsequently-established No-Fly-Zone had brought about and led to last week 's US missile attacks .
The situation in northern Iraq was discussed by EU Foreign Ministers at their informal meeting in Tralee on 7 and 8 September last .
As it was an informal meeting there were , of course , no formal declarations , but I believe that on the basis of the Tralee discussion there is a broad measure of agreement among Member States on the central issues of the current conflict .
I would list the areas of agreement as follows .
The Union is greatly concerned at the potential for large-scale deaths and economic and social disruption involved in incursions into northern Iraq by outside forces , including those of the Iraqi regime .
The Union attaches major importance to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq .
The Union remains in favour of the maintenance of a Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq .
There is agreement on the need for the continued existence of a No-Fly-Zone in Iraq as a means of controlling the oppressive policies of the Iraqi Government against the people of Iraq .
The European Union is still willing to pursue contacts with the neighbouring countries in the region with a view to de-escalation of tensions in northern Iraq .
The Union wishes to ensure that steps are taken to relieve the suffering of the Iraqi civilian population , and of children in particular , through the implementation of Security Council Resolution 986 , which would allow the sale of Iraqi oil to pay for food as soon as conditions permit .
The Union will continue to pursue these objectives in cooperation with the international community through all available channels .
As Vice-President Marín of the Commission will explain to you in detail , the Union , which has a long-standing commitment to alleviating the humanitarian plight of the population in northern Iraq , intends to respond to the current refugee emergency as generously as resources allow .
The estimates of the number of refugees are currently put at about 150 , 000 on the Iraqi side of the border , and about 59 , 000 which have been allowed to enter Iran .
The presidency has also instructed the Troika Heads of Mission in Ankara to request the Turkish authorities to remove recent administrative changes in NGOs working from Turkey into northern Iraq , so that the NGOs can be better placed to help alleviate the humanitarian consequences of the current situation in northern Iraq .
We are also concerned that local Iraqi aid workers on EU projects should be covered by the amnesty recently announced by the Iraqi regime in respect of northern Iraq .
The presidency and Commission representatives in Ankara will seek assurances from Mr Barzani , leader of the KDP , regarding the safety of local aid workers employed on EU projects at a meeting in northern Iraq tomorrow , Thursday , 19 September .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council Mitchell , the Commission is naturally very concerned about the increase in tension in northern Iraq and the humanitarian situation caused by the recent military conflicts .
The risk of destabilization in such a strategically important region is a cause of deep concern for all , although the latest information appears to indicate that the danger of an aggravation of the conflict has decreased .
As the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Mitchell , has just pointed out , the European Union reaffirms the need to respect the territorial integrity of all the states of the region , including Iraq , and calls on all the governments in the area to respect this basic principle of international law .
The European Union continues to be firmly convinced of the need to apply in their entirety all the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council relating to Iraq , emphasizing the obligation on Iraq to respect Security Council Resolution 688 and refrain from taking action against the Kurdish people or against other minorities in Iraq .
In this context , the Foreign Ministers condemned the Iraqi incursion into the Kurdish protection zone and called on the Iraqi government to withdraw its forces immediately , and the European Union also welcomed the agreement reached on Security Council Resolution 986 authorizing Iraq to export oil in exchange for humanitarian supplies .
According to available information there has in fact been a large flow of refugees towards the Iranian frontier .
Some estimates put the number of refugees in the tens of thousands on the Iraqi side of the border , and this is in addition to approximately 40 , 000 refugees who have already been permitted entry to Iran .
That country has appealed for international aid to cope with supplying food , medicine and shelter for those refugees .
Although tension is still great in the border area with the presence of PDK forces and several thousand UPK refugees who may be preparing for a counter-offensive , the Commission remains committed to alleviating the humanitarian situation of the innocent victims of the conflict to the extent that circumstances permit .
As requested by Mr Mitchell , I shall go on to inform you about the measures the Commission is preparing .
The Community 's department for humanitarian aid ( ECHO ) is actively collecting all possible information through its partners in Iraq .
At this moment , the Commission is working in Iraq through 22 non-governmental organizations and it is expected that the relevant United Nations agencies will shortly draw up their estimates .
All this would allow ECHO to determine the priority interventions , with the aim of responding to the most urgent needs .
There is no need to remind Members of Parliament of the significant aid already given by the European Union to the Kurdish peoples of northern Iraq in the tragic situation following the end of the 1991 Gulf War .
From 1992 , the European Union has committed approximately ECU 83 million to humanitarian aid in Iraq and 80 % of this sum has been specifically assigned to the north of the country .
In addition to this amount , the Commission has earmarked ECU 8 million for rehabilitation programmes in northern Iraq , and other amounts have also been channelled to NGOs for the development of decentralized cooperation .
We wanted to demonstrate not our satisfaction but at least our hope at knowing that the PDK forces undertook to protect the members of NGOs from possible attacks after the conquest of Arbil and Sulamainiya .
However , I must make it clear that we are very concerned about the Iraqi government 's statement of 11 September that the amnesty promised to the Kurdish population of the north would not apply to Iraqi nationals , described as traitors because they have worked for international humanitarian aid agencies in northern Iraq .
The Commission wants to take this opportunity to point out that both the foreign members and the Kurdish members of the humanitarian aid teams funded by the European Community in northern Iraq have been carrying out purely humanitarian work and therefore the Iraqi regime cannot call them traitors , which is an unacceptable and unjustifiable form of pressure .
So the Commission calls on the Iraqi government to avoid any reprisals endangering the safety of either national or foreign staff members of NGOs in the north of the country .
And here we are pleased to say , as Mr Mitchell has already mentioned , that the President of the PDK , Mr Barzani , has agreed to deal with this issue - guaranteeing the safety and work of humanitarian aid staff in northern Iraq - at a meeting which will take place tomorrow , Thursday 19 September .
We hope this meeting will produce a commitment from the apparent victors of this war between Kurds that will protect Union and Kurdish staff working on the ground .
The Commission also agrees with Mr Mitchell that it is very important - noting that you will be discussing Turkey later - that the Turkish authorities should demonstrate their willingness to cooperate with the European Commission departments to facilitate all necessary measures and effectively allow us to use the Turkish corridor if necessary to channel humanitarian aid via Turkey to the north of the country .
That is very important .
That summarizes the position as I can report it at this moment to the European Parliament .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , let me begin by saying that I appreciate the humanitarian effort that the Commission is making in the region : it is very important and I do not undervalue it .
But I want to consider for a moment the general political aspects .
This is the second time that Saddam Hussein has put the international community , the UN and its resolutions to the test , and there is no doubt in our minds that the international community must respond , both in order to protect the Kurds and to prevent any resumption of the conflict between Iraq and Iran . It must respond with the aim of getting Iraqi troops to withdraw from the UN protected areas , but also by facing up to the variety of reasons which have in a few months wiped out or are likely to wipe out the prospects for what is albeit the difficult and gradual process of bringing peace to the region .
The situation in the region has greatly deteriorated compared to what it was a few months ago .
Many commentators have asked why Saddam Hussein chose this moment to open up a conflict with unpredictable results and assume there to be some kind of link with the forthcoming American elections .
I do not believe that to be the case .
I actually believe that the deterioration in relations between Israel and the Arab countries ; the real danger that the measures for peace - taken by Arafat with the support of the moderate Arab governments - may collapse and fatally undermine the political role of those promoting that peace , has reopened the leadership battle in the Arab world .
Since the Gulf War , in recent years Arafat , Mubarak and King Hussein of Jordan have occupied the international political stage by adopting an approach that is strategically opposite to that of conflict with Israel and , in the final analysis , the United States and Europe .
Iraq , Iran , Libya and , although in a very different way , Syria , have remained outside the major political processes in the region .
Saddam Hussein is now relaunching his leadership bid in the face of the possible collapse of the Oslo agreements .
The decision of the Israeli Government to resume the policy of settlement in the Palestinian area instead of gradually withdrawing as provided for in the agreements calls radically into question the strategy based on territories in exchange for peace and has a more general impact on the political situation .
That policy makes negotiations with Lebanon and Syria on the Golan Heights impossible , by driving those countries back into a situation of conflict .
In those circumstances , it is possible that the many causes of crisis that exist in the region may again be triggered .
It is therefore our view that it is not merely a question of taking military action to deter Iraq but of evolving economic and security policy measures and doing so jointly with all countries that have influence in the area : the United States first and foremost , the European Union , Russia , the moderate Arab countries and the UN .
The limit on American intervention is that it is unilateral and partial .
The failure to involve the other protagonists weakens the pressure on Saddam Hussein .
That , moreover , has already resulted in a dangerous distancing , including of the most moderate of the Arab states , and makes the UN appear an institution that is dependent - and excessively so - on the United States , and that is in the interest of neither party .
We must reflect on this if we want to tackle the situation generally and respond adequately to Saddam Hussein .
The first thing that is needed is for the European Union to shoulder its responsibilities by seeking cooperation with the United States , Russia and the Arab countries which have so far supported the Middle East peace process .
Mr President , it is good that the European Parliament can agree on the resolution condemning the Iraqi incursion into the Kurdish security zone and demanding the total withdrawal of all Iraqi forces .
The resolution stresses the seriousness of the fact that the Kurds cannot agree among themselves , urges the Council of Ministers and the Commission to arrive at a common position on the conflict and suggests that they should put themselves forward as possible mediators between the Kurdish parties the PUK and the KDP .
Certainly all this is good , Mr President , but on one of the central issues no agreement was reached in Parliament .
All the parties have tabled motions for resolutions .
In its proposal the Liberal Group expresses its full support for the American missile attacks - a response to Saddam Hussein 's incursion into the Kurdish security zone which he can understand .
We Liberals are glad that there is at least one party which dares to and can act .
Other Groups on the other hand sought to distance themselves from or totally condemn the American action .
The only possible compromise was to say nothing at all on the subject in the joint resolution .
We in Parliament were no more able to arrive at a common standpoint than the Council .
Now Parliament is asking the Council of Ministers to try again .
Like everyone in my Group I hope that the Council will succeed .
In any event , Mr President , the Council should feel highly flattered at Parliament 's great confidence in it .

Mr President , the statements by Mr Mitchell and Commissioner Marín seemed to us limited in terms of the issues broached , evasive in terms of the refusal of the Commission and the Council to assume responsibility and , as a whole , disappointing in the extreme .
The intervention by the Baghdad regime in the southern provinces of Iraqi national territory has provoked not only the desperate flight of Kurdish civilians and a political and military crisis with unpredictable consequences throughout the Middle East but has perpetuated and aggravated the unprecedented suffering of the whole of the Iraqi population .
While no-one can justify Saddam Hussein 's action , similarly unjustified and completely disproportionate is the violent unilateral response of the United States , the long-range missile attacks , the preparations for further and more massive military operations against Iraq and the extension without any UN mandate of the no-fly-zones .
Those are the implicit and explicit conclusions reached at the United Nations itself by the great majority of those governments which participated in the 1991 Gulf War coalition .
We are therefore very surprised , not to say downright dismayed , to hear more or less veiled or explicit declarations supporting the foolish initiatives of the United States made in this House , or declarations that will at any rate be interpreted as such by the Clinton administration which , until yesterday , was able to count only on the support of Kuwait , Bahrain and the British Government .
That is not what we actually want to talk about but about the insensitivity of the House and the promoters of this resolution , which I read a few moments ago , in relation to the crime verging on genocide perpetrated over five years using sanctions as a weapon against the Iraqi civilian population .
There have been 560 , 000 deaths from poverty and sickness between 1992 and January 1996-480 , 000 of them children under the age of five .
The Clinton administration has now decided to extend those sanctions sine die and not even allow the exchange of limited exports of Iraqi oil for foodstuffs and medicines .
This is an abominable decision that runs counter to the explicit resolutions of the UN , and - over and above the escalation that is taking place - it is a decision that should be condemned by the civilized world and , we hope , by this House also .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we utterly condemn the intervention of the Iraqi troops .
This Iraqi regime destroyed thousands of Kurdish villages in the 1980s and killed and deported tens of thousands of people by the use of poison gas .
But I also criticize the renewed American attacks , for the USA and its allies are at least partly responsible for the desperate situation in this region and in Kurdistan .
The real tragedy , however , is that it is the conflict between the PUK and the KDP , which has cost some 2000 human lives over the past two years , that made the continued interference of the neighbouring states of Iran and Turkey and the most recent Iraqi invasion possible in the first place .
The leadership of both parties bear a heavy responsibility for the destabilization of Kurdish independence , and that is the real tragedy for the Kurds .
But let us also remember that after the Gulf War in 1991 part of the Kurdish territory in Iraq was declared a safe haven .
But under pressure of the economic blockade this area has become one of the poorest and least safe in the whole world .
That too is a cause of the outbreak of conflict between the two major Kurdish parties for power and resources .
For years the Kurdish people have not really been protected against constant attacks , including military attacks , on the part of Iran , on the part of Turkey and on the part of Iraq .
There was no real willingness to create a solid basis for inter-Kurdish reconciliation in the form of economic support and the international recognition of Kurdish selfadministration ; for that is in fact the only real basis for a peaceful political solution , which is the only possible solution .
But first and foremost let me urgently appeal to the Kurdish parties finally to agree a cease-fire and to bring this insane war between them to an end .
I thank the President-in-Office for his very succinct and useful analysis of the situation .
However , as the presentations from the Council and then from the Commission rolled on , I came to ask myself increasingly what we were doing in the Kurdish area , or what were we doing in Iraq .
The answer seems to be that the European Union is providing humanitarian assistance and we are doing it very well .
We hope very much that our aid workers will not be touched by the problems , and that the people that have helped them will be immune .
That is a very minimalist ambition indeed .
It is very sad if the European Union 's foreign affairs effort is to be limited to picking up the pieces after the damage has been done , however important that may be .
We have to ask ourselves some questions about the European Union 's Common Foreign and Security Policy and where we are going in this year of the IGC .
Would it not be far better if , instead of the post-imperial fiction of having two Members of the EU who maintain that they are nuclear powers with a world role , which entitles them to a permanent seat on the Security Council , we were to get our act together as a European Union and say : let qualified majority voting apply to the CFSP .
This would prevent any one state from vetoing action which the majority of Europeans would like to see .
Then we might find that the bizarre situation of people condemning Saddam Hussein and condemning the Americans for attacking him could be abandoned , because then we could say ' if there is something that Europe could do , let 's do it ' .
We are part of the international community .
All fifteen Member States belong to the United Nations .
The European voice and the European effort are not being maximized .
The last speaker , Claudia Roth , was right when she pointed to a democratic solution .
We have got to put our efforts into self-determination for the Kurdish people , autonomy within Northern Iraq and within Kurdistan in Turkey , all these areas , because that is the only way to a lasting solution .
From the point of view of international law there may be a number of critical questions concerning the recent military action of the United States in Iraq .
The setting up and protection of safe areas for the Kurds cannot be directly traced back to a resolution of the Security Council .
But it is clear that Iraq still poses a great threat to the Middle East .
The country is gradually recovering from the Gulf War .
Military power is being rebuilt , and there are indications that Iraq is disposing of weapons of mass destruction .
To sustain the balance of power in the region no-one would be served by the break-up of Iraq , but this country must be prevented from again having the opportunity to fulfil its aggressive ambitions .
Considered in that light , the American action deserves our support .
The lack of unanimity on the part of the European Union concerning the events in Iraq once again demonstrates the difficulty of putting in place a common foreign policy .
A difference of opinion such as this is not simply resolved by institutions or decision-taking procedures .
The sovereignty , traditions and interests of the Member States always seem to be of decisive significance .
Expectations should therefore not be too great .
This does not alter the fact that the difference of opinion between the United States and a number of European countries puts a great strain on transatlantic relations .
In view of the peace process between Israel and its neighbouring Arab states and vital interests in the Middle East , it is exactly in this region that Western allies must speak with one voice , and the situation must be prevented where the Middle East causes the United States and Europe to be played off against each other .
This would only work to the advantage of the aggression of Saddam Hussein .
Finally , regarding the Kurds , the position of this population is awkward .
The Kurds are once again the victims .
The struggle between Kurdish factions is one of the reasons , but the West cannot shy away from its partial responsibility . It must act now , by giving priority to the protection of these people against Iraq and by stimulating autonomy for them .
Mr President , for electoral and oil-related reasons the Clinton administration has just ordered several thousand American troops to Kuwait .
In the wake of the recent unilateral attack perpetrated by the US air force and navy against Iraq , this action poses a new and grave threat to world peace .
This gunboat diplomacy is no longer even being concealed behind the facade of the UN .
Clinton cannot forgive the Iraqi government for having thwarted the plot hatched by the CIA to overthrow it and demonstrated that the great majority of the four million Iraqi Kurds would prefer , together with Mr Barzani 's party , to remain within their national borders .
Once again , as in the case of the former Yugoslavia , the European Union has demonstrated that it cannot have a common foreign policy .
France , which was Iraq 's ally , has admittedly distanced itself to a certain extent from this insane policy .
The United Kingdom and Germany immediately supported the act of aggression , as they have for five years been supporting the criminal , methodical and hypocritical genocide of the Iraqi people .
All observers of all shades of political opinion have denounced the fact that , every day , the blockade kills more than a thousand people in Iraq , including six hundred children .
This criminal policy has already killed more than a million Iraqis .
They have no more drugs , no more anaesthetics , no more medical or surgical supplies , no more books and very little food . The ' oil for food ' agreement has never been implemented and is still subject to embargo .
And you say nothing .
You do nothing !
So who is the racist ?
That is what I would like to know .
Those who defend Iraq 's Muslim and Christian Arabs or those who , like you , are murdering them and starving them in the name of human rights ?
It is absolutely essential , in the name of justice and human rights , to lift the blockade totally , and even that will not appease your conscience or pay for your crimes !
I would remind members of the public sitting in the gallery that they are not permitted to comment in any way on the debate that is taking place in the Chamber .
They are required to remain silent and listen to all of the speeches , if they so wish .
Visitors should be aware of this because it is stated in the information they are given when they enter the premises of the European Parliament .
Mr President , the return of Saddam Hussein 's forces to Iraqi Kurdistan after all he has done over the years to destroy Kurdish villages and oppress Kurdish people is appalling , but it is monstrous that he should have been invited back by one of the main Kurdish parties , the KDP .
Unfortunately , the PUK , the other main Iraqi Kurdish Party is every bit as guilty since it had previously cooperated with Iranian revolutionary guards in attacking the camps of Iranian Kurds who have been mercilessly persecuted by the Iranians and then conducting a vicious military campaign against the Iraqi KDP .
All this demonstrates that the divide between the Kurdish parties at the present time goes deeper than that which divides them from their outside enemies and it is a massive threat to the real interests of all Kurds .
This development has been facilitated by the lack of any permanent settlement in the Gulf to guarantee Kurdish rights in the long run .
Much as all of us long to see a democratic regime in Iraq , delaying the consolidation of Kurdish autonomy until then leaves a vacuum in which the murderous intrigue of recent years can continue .
While there must be no relaxation whatsoever of the embargo on military supplies to Iraq , if arrangements could be reached to lift sanctions on other supplies , which are hurting the population more than Saddam , in return for the stabilization of Kurdish autonomy , this would be a very important step forward .
The KDP now controls the majority of Iraqi Kurdistan and is said to have promulgated an amnesty and allowed the parliament to meet after being paralysed for two years .
Maximum pressure must now be exerted on the KDP to keep Saddam 's agents out , to protect NGO workers and to provide the freedom for all and facilitate new elections .
As proposed at the talks in Drogheda , the militias operated by the parties must be dissolved and replaced by a single Kurdish armed force under the control of a Kurdish elected authority .
Military strikes by US forces , apart from other objections , are no substitute for constructive policy and , whatever they are effecting in Washington , in many respects they are counterproductive in the area .
The European Union should never leave it to the United States to take the lead .
The Union should be involved in efforts to resolve the differences between the Kurdish parties and helping to rebuild the economy .
We have a very good record on the aid provided but the position is that we must not allow that area to be left to armed bands to collect illegal taxes and tolls and to carry on in the way they have been doing .
If the NGOs were to pull out , conditions would deteriorate and armed conflict escalate .
There is a very strong case at this time perhaps for Parliament - and certainly for the Union - to send a new factfinding delegation which could also convey our profound concern and help us to make an even better contribution to resolving the problems of that region .
Mr President , the assumption by the United States that it is able unilaterally to resolve problems dating back to 3000 B. C. , to Sumerian and Akkadian times , is on a par with Europe 's inconsistent approach to crises .
That inconsistency is clearly the effect of conflicting interests in the European Union as well as the absence of a common foreign policy ; that both lends support to the assumption by the US that I have just mentioned but it also underestimates the age-old threat from Muslim fundamentalism . That threat should not , however , lead us to ignore that fact that the prime victims of fundamentalism are in fact the peoples of that geographical region .
We have therefore to welcome the humanitarian aid and urge the European Union finally to assume the role of active player incumbent upon it .
Mr President , the members of the USA-Europe interparliamentary group discussed the HelmsBurton legislation in Washington a few weeks ago and criticized the fact that the European Community was not consulted .
Europe forms the basis for a new political culture .
The most important task of politics is to resolve conflicts and not to create conflicts , to try to understand the other side and to seek realistic joint solutions on the basis of rules of play and framework conditions appropriate to the situation at the time .
The trans-Atlantic dialogue is a model of cooperation , of the exchange of information and the definition of common aims .
It is extremely urgent to resolve the conflict by means of financial and material incentives and the creation of an administrative institution responsible for ensuring a continuous dialogue .
Let us consider the alternatives and let us put them before our partners so that they can choose and evaluate them .
Following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait the USA took the lead in tabling an international resolution in the UN Security Council .
It is extremely important in our own interests that we speak with one voice .
We must prevent any further escalation and ensure that no nuclear , biological , chemical or other weapons capacity is available for this kind of conflict .
We must make early progress with the ' food and medicine for oil ' campaign .
In particular , we need prompt aid for the refugees .
I call upon the Council and the Commission to agree a tactical and strategic common European Community position on the necessary measures .
Over the last decades Europe has demonstrated that it is possible to resolve conflicts on the basis of European culture and European policies , by sitting down together , by discussing the problems , by creating rules of play .
We need new attempts to resolve the conflict .
Escalation alone is no guarantee of future peace .
And the most important aim and motive of political activity is to secure peace for our citizens the world over .
Mr President , I think that the essential comment from a Member of the European Parliament on Iraq must be that , once again , events have taken us by surprise .
Perhaps if we had implemented that mechanism we have so often talked about for analysing possible conflicts this might not have happened .
But there is no doubt that our diplomatic fragmentation and , in spite of the mechanisms of intergovernmental cooperation , the lack of a real understanding between the governments , means that the European Union seems to have been taken by surprise .
That is the kind way we can and must - and above all want to - explain the fact that such varied , fragmented and indeed contradictory responses have already been made by Members of the European Union to an episode which we could have known would occur again some day .
Apart from that , I think we ought to insist on the need for a firm and clear response to Saddam Hussein 's action , for rejection of the principles of totalitarianism and implacable dictatorship which he imposes on Iraq and for the rights of the people of that country to be respected first and foremost by whoever governs them .
Of course very sad consequences derive from that situation for the people of Iraq in general and for the youngest groups in particular , as well as for the populations whose historical fate is full of internal contradictions , the peoples occupying that territory .
The right to autonomy , the right of all the variegated peoples of Iraq to express their personalities , must be accepted and recognized , and that certainly does not mean weakness or going against the interests of Iraqi unity .
The desire to maintain that unity is perfectly understandable : other countries in the area do not want to see the unity of a nation endangered when it could have repercussions on their own unity , but I believe the moment has come for the European Union , at last showing solidarity with the action the United States has had to take , to show the same solidarity with the single destiny of this people and with the internal diversity of the various populations that compose it .
Mr President , first of all , I have noted the comments of the distinguished Members in the debate and I would like to assure the House that the European Union is fully committed to the search for a just , lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East in general .
The European Council in Florence reaffirmed that the success of the Middle East peace process remains a fundamental interest of the Union .
The challenge before the Union and the international community is to restore momentum and impetus to the process and we will continue to engage constructively with all the parties in the region in our efforts to support the peace process .
A number of speakers raised the question of the Union 's response to the future of northern Iraq and the humanitarian situation of the Iraqi population .
The Union has a number of clear objectives .
These are : ensuring the continued safety of the Iraqi civilian population ; the de-escalation of tensions in northern Iraq , principally through the withdrawal of Iraqi government forces , as well as through support for dialogue between the Kurdish factions ; the maintenance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the states in the region , including Iraq ; and ensuring that steps are taken to relieve the suffering of the Iraqi civilian population , and children in particular , through the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 986 , as I stated earlier , which would allow the sale of Iraqi oil to pay for food as soon as conditions permit .
The Union will continue to pursue these objectives through all channels .
I would repeat , as Commissioner Marin has stated , that the Union , which has a long-standing commitment to alleviating the humanitarian plight of the population in northern Iraq , intends to respond to the current refugee emergency as generously as resources allow .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Political situation in Turkey
The next item is the statement by the Council on the political situation in Turkey and the statement by the Commission on the implementation of the customs union with Turkey .
Mr President , I understand it was intended to take the question of Turkey and Cyprus together .
The European Union has long recognized the importance of close and constructive relations with Turkey .
The formal relationship established with the Association Agreement of 1964 has now entered a new phase with the entry into force , at the end of last year , of the Customs Union .
The Customs Union should be seen as a central element in the European Union 's strategy to support the process of democratization and internal reform in Turkey .
Notable progress has been made in these areas since the restoration of elected civilian government in 1983 , although reform of the legislation inherited from the period of military rule remains incomplete .
A customs union is one of the closest forms of external partnership offered by the European Union .
While it is essentially an economic arrangement , the potential benefits of a customs union extend well beyond the economic sphere .
Economic development , which the Customs Union is intended to stimulate , should contribute to the creation of a favourable climate for accelerating internal reform in Turkey .
Increased economic interaction between the European Union and Turkey should foster greater mutual understanding and awareness on both sides of a shared community of interest .
The closer integration into European structures which the Customs Union entails can be expected to strengthen Turkey 's European orientation and enhance the European Union 's capacity to exercise a positive and helpful influence on developments in Turkey .
The Council has continued to monitor the human rights situation and democratic developments in Turkey as requested by the European Parliament when you gave your assent to the Customs Union .
We have continued to make it clear to the Turkish authorities that observance of the rule of law and basic liberties are the basis for the rapprochement between Turkey and the European Union .
The process of ratification of the Customs Union , and the clear stance adopted by the European Union in that context , gave valuable impetus to internal reform in Turkey .
The constitutional changes and amendments to Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law adopted by the Turkish Grand National Assembly last year were welcome steps in the right direction .
We were encouraged , moreover , by the assurances that the Turkish authorities saw these measures as a stage in a continuing process of constitutional and legislative review .
Mrs Çiller , when she visited Dublin in July last , assured the Irish presidency that she would pursue in her present capacity the reforms she initiated as Prime Minister .
The Council recognizes the seriousness of the internal security problems which the sustained campaign of violence in south-east Turkey poses for the Turkish authorities .
It condemns all acts of terrorism unreservedly .
Democratic government can best withstand the terrorist threat , however , by remaining true to the values on which it is founded .
The enduring appeal and resilience of democratic society is rooted in large measure in the protection it affords to the individual and the scope it offers for freedom of expression .
It follows , as a matter both of principle and practicality , that the fight against terrorism must be pursued within the law and with full respect for human rights .
The Council believes that the situation in the south-eastern provinces should not be approached exclusively as a security problem .
We are encouraged in this regard by the legislation recently enacted by the Turkish Grand National Assembly aimed at lifting the nine-year-old state of emergency in those provinces .
( Protests ) We urge the Turkish authorities to pursue their efforts to improve the situation of the Kurdish minority .
A sustainable solution will require the acceptance and confidence of the broad mass of the people of the area .
It should be imaginative and generous enough to allow for appropriate expression of the Kurdish cultural identity in a manner consistent with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Turkey .
A lasting political settlement would ensure internal stability and cohesion in Turkey and release valuable resources for economic and social development .
The entry into force of the Customs Union has been accompanied by the introduction of enhanced arrangements for political dialogue between the European Union and Turkey .
This provides a framework for contact on issues of mutual interest and concern where cooperation between the parties can contribute to international peace and stability .
Turkey has an important role to play in the emerging European security architecture and has been an active participant in the international efforts to consolidate the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The Euro-Mediterranean partnership launched in Barcelona in November 1995 has added a new strand to the European Union 's relationship with Turkey .
Both parties are now actively engaged in a major initiative which aims to ensure that the Mediterranean region becomes an area of trade and dialogue guaranteeing peace , stability and prosperity .
The adoption of the MEDA Regulation by the General Affairs Council last July , following Parliament 's assent , was an important step in developing the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
It established the regulatory and budgetary mechanism necessary to give concrete expression to the Union 's commitment to contribute more actively to the socio-economic development of its Mediterranean partners , including Turkey .
The special financial regulation , a complementary measure intended to help Turkey adapt its industrial sector to the new competitive environment created by the Customs Union , remains to be formally adopted .
The draft regulation , approved by Parliament earlier this year , envisages financial assistance of ECU 375 million for Turkey over a five-year period .
The Council issued a declaration in July recalling that relations between the European Union and Turkey have to be based on a clear commitment to the principle of respect for international law and agreements , the relevant international practice and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Member States and Turkey .
The Council considers that disputes should be settled solely on the basis of international law .
Dialogue should be pursued along the lines which have emerged between the interested parties .
It is hoped that this may contribute to the improvement in their bilateral relations as well as to the establishment of a crisis prevention mechanism .
At the request of the Council , the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Dick Spring , presented the declaration to Deputy Prime Minister Çiller during her visit to Dublin in July and asked the Turkish Government to indicate whether it could commit itself to the principles contained in the declaration .
She confirmed that the Turkish Government would give careful consideration to the declaration .
Mr Spring will be meeting Mrs Çiller again ...
Mr President , it is very difficult to speak if Members interrupt .
There are few honourable Members present - those few should at least be quiet and show respect for the presidency !
If we all did that , what a spectacle we should present !
Mr Spring will be meeting Mrs Çiller during the UN General Assembly and will be seeking her response to that declaration .
The presidency will remain in contact with the Turkish authorities on the matter .
It hopes very much that a constructive response will be forthcoming and that appropriate conditions for a further development of EU / Turkey relations can be created .
On Cyprus , the European Union has decided that accession negotiations will commence with Cyprus six months after the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference , taking the results of that conference into account .
A structured dialogue has been established with Cyprus as part of the pre-accession strategy .
This innovative mechanism is designed to facilitate in a spirit of partnership the progressive alignment of the policies of future members with those of the Union and thereby smooth the transition to membership .
As well as providing a framework for the adjustment of economic policies , political dialogue arrangements have been developed which allow for the association of candidate countries , including Cyprus , with the foreign policy positions of the Union .
The prospect of membership of the European Union offers an historic window of opportunity to find a solution to the Cyprus question .
It is vital that this opportunity is grasped and that the pre-accession period is used constructively to make progress towards an equitable and sustainable settlement .
The recent disturbances and tragic deaths in Cyprus are matters of deep concern .
They represent the most serious outbreak of violence on the island for some considerable time and have led to an increase in tensions between the two communities .
The European Union has strongly deplored the recent violence in Cyprus and the disproportionate use of force by the security forces in the north of Cyprus in response to unauthorized entry into the buffer zone .
It condemned the brutal killings of two civilians and expressed its deep concern about the injuries sustained by many others , including United Nations peacekeeping personnel .
The Council has called for restraint and calm in the wake of these tragic events .
It has urged both sides to avoid further confrontation and to cooperate fully with the United Nations force in Cyprus in its efforts to defuse tensions .
The immediate objective must be to restore calm and advance efforts to establish a political dialogue between the two sides .
The announcement last week that President Clerides would meet the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community , Mr Denktash , to discuss the demilitarization of Cyprus is a positive step forward .
The Council hopes that this meeting will lead to a resumption of political dialogue and progress towards an agreed solution .
These incidents in Cyprus have highlighted the urgent need to intensify efforts towards promoting a comprehensive political settlement under the aegis of the United Nations .
It is widely acknowledged that the broad parameters for a solution have been identified in the Set of Ideas elaborated by the Good Offices Mission of the United Nations Secretary-General .
The European Union fully supports the Secretary-General 's efforts to make progress towards a solution on the basis of a bi-zonal , bicommunal federation within the framework already established by the relevant UN decisions and resolutions in regard to Cyprus .
Close coordination of the activities of the international community in support of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative is crucial .
The various states and international organizations concerned with the Cyprus issue should play complementary roles reflecting the different contributions they can bring to the search for a solution .
The European Union 's role in this process flows logically from the accession perspective and its potential as a catalyst for a settlement .
The Union has a natural and vital concern for the stability of countries with which it will engage in accession negotiations .
It also has a legitimate interest in the shape of any internal settlement in Cyprus given that this will have to be reconciled with the acquis of the Union .
The Council , accordingly , is actively engaged in the international effort to find a comprehensive political solution in the framework of the United Nations .
The Irish presidency representative , Ambassador Kester Heaslip , visited the region recently and had contacts with representatives of all the interested parties .
He is also liaising closely with other special representatives , including Professor Han , the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the UN .
The Council is also conscious of the contribution which closer relations with Turkey could make to the promotion of a climate of greater mutual understanding and confidence .
I have outlined in my earlier contribution the Council 's efforts to create appropriate conditions for the further development of the Union 's relations with Turkey .
Accession by Cyprus to the European Union should bring increased prosperity and security for both communities on the island .
Access to the single market should act as a powerful stimulus to economic development throughout the island .
Appropriate application of Community policies , including the principles of economic and social cohesion , should be of particular benefit to the Turkish Cypriot community .
The Union , moreover , as a community of democratic states founded on the principle of unity and diversity , has the capacity to accommodate different identities .
As well as its economic benefits , membership of the Union could help resituate the relationship between the two communities in a broader international framework and reinforce the existing guarantees of their position .
The Union is actively seeking to ensure that the advantages of membership are understood by all Cypriots .
We will pursue our efforts to convince both sides that there is everything to gain and nothing to lose from the entry of a unified Cyprus into the European Union .
Mr President , following the recent serious incidents in Cyprus , as the President-in-Office has just announced , the European Union has expressed its forceful condemnation of the fatal violence on the Turkish Cypriot side .
The Commission has also endorsed this statement .
The reaction against the Greek Cypriot demonstrators was disproportionate and unacceptable .
Now we have been made aware that a Turkish Cypriot soldier was also killed by an unknown cause .
Obviously this must also be deeply regretted .
It must be feared that the perpetrators of such aggression are attempting to convince public opinion in Cyprus that it would be dangerous to allow the Greek and Turkish communities to live together in a future federal state .
The European Union must not allow itself to be pushed from the path it has chosen .
This means that we must keep to our decision to start the accession negotiations with Cyprus six months after the closing of the Intergovernmental Conference at the latest .
It also makes it necessary to double our efforts in finding a political solution to the Cyprus problem .
The presidency and its special representative , Ambassador Heaslip , together with the United Nations and the United States , must do everything possible to bring life back into the negotiating process .
In this respect a contribution must also obviously be requested from all parties .
This brings me to the Union & # x02BC ; s relations with Turkey .
In the month of October I hope to be presenting to Parliament the promised progress report concerning the customs union with Turkey .
This report will also contain our evaluation of the developments in the field of democracy and the protection of human rights .
Mr President , please just allow me to express my amazement about the rumours circulating that in the draft resolution it is stated that the Commission has not fulfilled its obligations concerning human rights reporting .
I must refute this assertion .
When the report appears next month , the Commission will have fulfilled all its promises .
And that is leaving aside information that is regularly given by the Commission at numerous committee meetings or on other occasions when we are asked for information by Parliament about the developments in Turkey .
But shortly before the presentation of the report you will be receiving next month , I would like to say the following .
Regarding the customs union that has been in force since 1996 , as far as we can determine at the moment , this is functioning without too many problems , and difficulties which have arisen have been reasonably easily solved by people on both sides .
Exports from the European Union to Turkey have grown considerably , while imports from Turkey have also increased .
The extent to which this has been influenced by the state of the economies is difficult to establish over this period .
But it is clear that , as expected , the detrimental effects of the customs union , namely to the Turkish national budget as a result of greatly reduced customs incomes , has had a serious impact on a Turkish economy that is already under great strain .
With respect to the financial cooperation , Mr Mitchell has just outlined the current situation .
The financial support associated with the customs union agreement of 6 March 1995 , the 375 million special aid in the form of gifts and the 750 million loan from the European Investment Bank are still blocked for political reasons .
The same also applies to balance of payments support , the possibility of which was foreseen at the time .
The only one of the five financial contributions for Turkey that is not blocked at the moment is the claim from Turkey for a contribution from the MEDA programme .
As regards democratic development and human rights , I would again , anticipating the report , note that in our opinion the results of the national elections in Turkey at the end of 1995 are still affecting the situation .
We were all able to observe that the Yilmaz / Çiller government after a very short time had to move over for a government with a very different composition , consisting of the Islamic party of Mr Erbakan and the True Path party of Mrs Çiller .
These political changes have had a slowing effect on the economy and politics in Turkey , particularly on legislative work .
Various intentions expressed by former Turkish governments to translate further democratisation into law have not been carried through .
Forcefully urging for them is therefore appropriate .
During the hunger strikes of the Kurdish prisoners , the Commission also intervened with Mrs Çiller .
Naturally we were all pleased about the solution finally reached , but the lives lost in the meantime must still be deeply regretted .
The political situation in Turkey is complicated , and at present it is difficult to draw far-reaching conclusions about the direction Turkey will take as regards its foreign policy , and its relationship with Europe .
We once again powerfully urge Turkey to stop increasing tension with Greece , by new territorial claims , military provocations and so on .
Territorial claims must be brought before the International Tribunal in The Hague .
I underline what the President-in-Office said about this earlier .
We do still have good relations with Turkey .
It is an important country with a significant responsibility for freedom and stability in the region .
We acknowledge and welcome the European orientation of successive Turkish governments .
The customs union was also meant to be an overture from the European Union in this respect .
The Commission does not want to plead for an isolation policy with respect to Turkey .
But the Commission is equally of the opinion that our relations with Turkey urgently require a new , clear impulse from the Turkish side that will contribute to securing a climate in which perspectives are offered for the solution of a number of important issues I mentioned earlier .
These are problems that aggravate the relationship with Greece and also with the European Union .
With the presidency I hope that matters can be discussed with Mrs Çiller on the fringes of the General Meeting of the United Nations next week in New York .
Mr President , thank you very much . Perhaps the point of order I wanted to raise has partly been dealt with , but I will raise it nevertheless , so that it can be recorded in the Minutes .
It is fortunate that Commissioner Van den Broek spoke after the Council 's representative and solved for me the problem I had while the Council 's representative was speaking , concerning which country we are talking about today .
Because what the Council 's representative had to say made me wonder whether I had wandered into the wrong debate and we were talking about Switzerland , not about Turkey .
But Mr Van den Broek put matters right .
Mr President , I want to thank Mr van den Broek for the statement he made about Turkey in his usual measured tones .
However , I must say I am shocked at the statement from Mr Mitchell .
While he was speaking I did not know whether to laugh or cry .
I could not believe we are serious in this House about asking the Council to take on our foreign policy after hearing that statement about one of the countries with whom we are supposed to be dealing in foreign policy .
Mr Mitchell , I must say that I was concerned when you opened your statement by saying you understood we wanted Cyprus and Turkey to be taken together .
You have missed the point entirely .
Cyprus is an integral component of our political relationship with Turkey because Turkish forces are occupying the northern third of Cyprus .
They have 35 , 000 soldiers in the north of Cyprus and it was the Turkish Foreign Minister in the Turkish Grand National Assembly who recently admitted that she had released 65 million Turkish lire to pay for the transporting to Cyprus of Turkish Grey Wolf fascists who - as we have seen on video - took part in the murder of the two Greek Cypriots in the buffer zone .
So , how can Cyprus not be considered as part of our relations with Turkey ?
Of course it is an integral part !
We support the territorial sovereignty and integrity of the island of Cyprus , and Turkey is occupying one-third of it .
Cyprus , we must remember , is an applicant state for European Union accession which has had a positive avis from the Commission .
So , of course we want to consider what has happened in Cyprus as an integral part of our political relationship with Turkey .
I must say to you that we are not talking about Turkish Cypriots .
Forty-five Turkish Cypriot organizations have condemned the murders which took place in the buffer zone in the summer .
These people were brought from Turkey specifically because not enough anger and hatred exists amongst Turkish Cypriots to do what the Grey Wolf went to Cyprus to do .
That has to be an integral part of our discussion this afternoon .
Before we passed the customs union in December of last year , there were many promises , as everyone in this House remembers .
Commitments were given and declarations made by representatives of the Turkish Government that they were going to improve democracy and human rights , that they were going to do something more positive about a solution to the Cyprus problem , that they were going to deal with their own people 's human rights .
And we were told it was all because they wanted to do it for the people of Turkey , not because the European Union was forcing it on them .
And we also heard they were going to deal with the Kurdish problem .
Clear promises made .
Well the Turks , the Kurds , the Cypriots have had nothing .
Nothing except oppression , intimidation and blatant denial of their human rights in the nine or ten months since that customs union was passed .
In fact , the relationship has not only not improved , it has got worse in all the areas I have just mentioned .
We have all received a constant stream of faxes , pamphlets , videos and eye-witness accounts of the everyday occurrences in Turkey and most recently in Cyprus .
What do we get from the Turkish Government and the states that support it ?
Endless faxes bewailing the fact that Turkey is misunderstood and mis-represented .
And I must say that is rather what I thought I heard coming from the Council today .
I know from Turkish citizens , from Kurdish refugees and Turkish Cypriots - many thousands of whom live in my constituency in North London - that they do not understand why Turkish authorities treat them the way they do and why Turkey cannot see that recognizing minority rights , respecting the dignity of their own citizens and removing the occupation forces from Cyprus would be good for Turkey .
Not bad , but good !
The recitals of our resolution make clear the grim reading of what has happened over recent months .
Oppression , murder , intimidation are not European values .
Good intentions , expectations and promises have all been devalued by the actions of the Turkish authorities .
Conciliatory resolutions and double standards have no place in our relations with Turkey .
Words and promises must , frankly , be translated into political will and clear action .
My group will therefore be making every effort to freeze all financial commitments to Turkey .
We call on every political group in this House to support this approach and expect the Commission and the Council to respect our view and to act accordingly .
Only in this way will we get real change in the relationship with Turkey .
( Applause )
Mr President , I also thank the Commission and the Council for their statements , although I share with Mrs Green the concern that the Council , in particular , seems to have ignored the events of recent months .
The Socialist Group do not have a monopoly of anguish or a monopoly of anger about the events , particularly in Cyprus , which have given everybody cause for concern during the summer months .
We must have the best information about what really took place before events descend into further chaos .
It is a very serious situation and one in which the Council ought to have taken a much closer interest .
In Turkey itself , as I have said , recent months have seen a decline in standards .
This time last year we were preparing to approve the customs union .
Many of us did so with great hope .
We believed that we could encourage Turkey on a new path to develop the pluralism and the democracy which that country , of an Islamic tradition but of a secular , political context , seemed to be moving towards .
We are profoundly concerned at recent developments : the arrests of MPs , whatever their backgrounds ; the treatment of political prisoners ; the way in which the government , particularly the most recent government , has been repressing certain media ; and at the way in which it is dealing with its own external policy .
On election , Mr Erbakan 's first visits were not to the European Union or to the United States , traditional colleagues and friends of Turkey , but to countries far away , countries of an Islamic tradition understandably , but none of them were democracies .
When Mr Erbakan visited Iran many of us felt very apprehensive .
I have been there recently myself .
It is not a democracy .
It is anything but ; it is a tyranny run by religious extremists .
These are the neighbours with which Turkey is seeking a new relationship .
We would like to have a relationship of a much more constructive nature between the European Union and Turkey .
We are looking now to see great changes in their internal approach and in their external approach .
I was in the Grand National Assembly last year when I heard a debate about the customs union .
I heard Mr Erbakan speak very forcibly against the customs union .
This is the Prime Minister of Turkey today .
So , in our resolution tomorrow we are not so much addressing ourselves to the people of Turkey or to the Turkish establishment as to the person currently in charge , Mr Erbakan himself , not only as regards the internal situation in his country but also as regards Cyprus .
But Turkey is a country of great value to Europe .
It is a country with which we trade profitably and a country we wish to encourage .
The EPP has considered this matter very deeply and I hope we will be supporting the compromise resolution ; but I draw attention , in particular , to the need to have a constructive attitude towards the customs union while remembering that conditions were laid down in our debates last year and in the customs union itself .
These conditions should be applied .
Therefore , the EPP takes the view that we should begin the process of freezing the financial arrangements with Turkey and that we should stop the MEDA programme in all respects forthwith , except for those matters dealing with human rights , democratization and the development of civil society .
Mr President , the crisis in Kurdistan and the growing dispute with Turkey are just two aspects of the same destabilizing and complex situation that embraces , in the eastern Mediterranean , the Middle East and the Gulf .
This is a situation of concern to Europe which feels powerless - and rightly so - as has been apparent in both cases .
Turkey is the key element in this area as demonstrated in different ways by its growing dispute with Greece over Cyprus and the Aegean , the agreement with Israel , the military presence in Kurdistan and the attitude it had adopted to the Iraq crisis .
Turkey exercises a powerful influence over the region , and we must therefore be concerned about its increasingly aggressive stance towards Greece , as well as with the ambivalent nature of a government that vacillates between Erbakan 's silences and pro-Islamic displays and Çiller 's explicit and sometimes excessive wait-and-see approach . Though Turkey may be near us , this government is very far away , and we have justifiable doubts as to its ability to act in the interests of Turkey itself .
What should be done at this juncture ?
We think that we should oppose the halt on the Customs Union because , although an understandable response to these attitudes that are unacceptable and excessive at both an internal and an external level , it could drive Turkey away and isolate it , aggravating the domestic situation and distancing it from Europe to which it has long sought to move nearer .
But we are against continuing with a dialogue which seems to be bearing no fruit and damaging the authority of the European Union .
What is therefore required , as Commissioner van den Broek himself appears to want , is a dialogue founded on very different , rigorous , demanding and strong bases to show that while Europe can understand the crises , it will not be made a fool of .
Mr President , the situation in Turkey is a tragic one .
For nearly two years , Turkey has been experiencing an extremely complex political situation .
There have been ministerial reshuffles , resulting in a government crisis , then legislative elections followed by interminable negotiations and the installation , last March , of a coalition government which was itself replaced last July by a government of Islamic obedience .
And , above all , there was the treason of Mrs Çiller , who is now a hostage of the government .
More than ever , the internal situation is encountering difficulties and criticisms relating to the efforts at democratization , respect for human rights , the Kurdish question and the situation in Cyprus .
Finally , this Monday , Turkey was found guilty by the European Court of Justice of burning a Kurdish village in the south-east , in 1992 .
This is the first time that the Court in Strasbourg has disavowed the military operations carried out by Ankara in Turkish Kurdistan .
The investiture of Mr Erbakan has totally changed the foreign policy hitherto pursued by Turkey .
Having been considered an inalienable ally of the United States , Turkey has in fact defied instructions from the White House by signing a gas supply agreement with Iran .
Turkey intends to play the part of a regional superpower , aspiring to greater freedom to shape its own destiny .
If it is going to do that , it will finally have to respect the rules of international organizations which it has joined and the agreements it has signed , especially the European Convention on Human Rights , failing which , Mr President , and here I endorse the words of my socialist colleague , the European Union will have to accept the consequences of the customs union agreement and the financial protocol , and freeze them for as long as it takes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the supposed giant looks huge from afar .
The closer you get , the smaller he gets .
When the Customs Union was adopted the European Parliament was playing that part , and that was the prelude to a play in three acts .
Act one : the European Parliament as a giant .
It set out three conditions : democratization , release of the Kurdish deputies , an end to the war and a political solution to the Kurdish question .
An end to a war that drove millions of people into flight , destroyed 3000 villages and cost countless people their lives .
Act two : the vote on Customs Union approaches .
The European Parliament 's demands become softer .
The conditions become weaker .
Expressions of opinion die away .
Shortly before the vote Mrs Çiller is presented as a guarantor of democracy and a guarantor of a secular Turkey .
The argument gains ground that he who wants to put a stop to fundamentalism , to Erbakan , must be for Çiller , must support Çiller , must vote for Customs Union !
Act three : Customs Union is approved and what happens ?
It does not take long at all for the alleged guarantor of democratic reforms to turn into the king-maker of this same Mr Erbakan .
It is most disturbing to find the Council continuing to believe in Mrs Çiller as a trustworthy guarantor .
Of democratization not a trace , of the release of Kurdish deputies not a word .
The entire leadership of the HEP party in prison and on trial last Thursday .
Twelve political prisoners dead from hunger strike .
Mr Mitchell , the state of emergency was not suspended , it was recently extended .
The war is escalating and continuing .
A buffer zone is to be set up and in Cyprus the conflict is becoming ever more violent and brutal .
We cannot accept the Council 's strategy of : ' Continue as you were !
You have carte blanche ' .
This Parliament agreed to Customs Union and now bears a special responsibility .
Responsibility means : fighting for a peaceful Turkey , for peaceful coexistence and for a democratic Turkey .
For people to tell us now to close our eyes , ears and mouths to reality is a cynical policy geared primarily to the interests of the European Union and not to the interests of democracy and human rights in Turkey .
But that unfortunately has become a tradition !
Mr President , I am speaking today on my own behalf , and I would like to start by saying that there is something deeply troubling to me about the attitude of our Parliament , and of the European Union in general , towards Turkey .
Just a few months ago , our Parliament ratified the customs union agreements . As we said at the time , those agreements made no provision for any accompanying serious political programme , any specific timetable for the reforms that our Parliament hoped would be implemented in Turkey , especially as regards justice , the prison system and the Kurdish question .
Since the agreement was signed , Turkey has had two government crises in succession , and the Islamic party has come to power for the first time , a situation which has not resulted in civil war or in a wave of counter-reforms .
Admittedly , the problems still exist , and the way of approaching them has not changed since the agreement came into force .
Nor has the PKK , for its part , renounced the use of violence .
From an economic standpoint , we already know that it is the European Union which is the major beneficiary of these agreements .
What is clear , in fact , is that the Union does not have and does not want any real policy towards Turkey , because it does not want to pay the price of such a policy - entertaining a serious prospect of full Turkish membership of the European Union and the provision of the resources that would allow that accession to take place .
We must put an end to this hypocrisy .
We must state clearly what we want , and pay the price of it .
Only then will our requirements regarding the functioning of democracy and respect for human rights in Turkey have any real meaning .
When the customs union was being dealt with in Parliament last year , things appeared to be progressing favourably in Turkey .
A number of points in the constitution had been changed in a democratic sense , a number of political prisoners were released , and it was expected that the customs union would further stimulate developments .
Now , however , we see that the situation in Turkey has developed in a very disappointing manner .
The resolutions at hand contain shocking facts in this respect .
It is apparent that the capacity of the Union , by offering economic benefits , to promote changes in a country in which Western democratic values have barely taken root must not be overestimated .
The question for us therefore is whether or not Turkey can now be turned in the right direction with economic leverage .
With respect to Iran , the Council has always defended the policy of critical dialogue .
We still have some doubts on this .
But if good reason should exist , with respect to Turkey a similar sort of critical policy may have to be chosen for the time being , indeed for Middle East policy as a whole , not least for finding a solution to the Kurdish question .
There is every reason for indignation about what is happening in Turkey , but we do not believe that so soon after a change in power in the country our relations with Turkey would be served by economic measures .
We await the evaluation report from the Commission with great interest .
Mr President , ten months ago a majority made up of socialists , Christian democrats , liberals and RPR Members voted in favour of customs union with Turkey .
Many of you claimed at the time that the ratification of this agreement would prevent the Turks from rushing into the arms of Islam .
A fortnight later , the Islamic party won the legislative elections .
Today they are in power , and all Mr Mitchell 's fine words make no difference to that .
The agreement on customs union , far from resulting in a reduction of Islamic influence , is going to help increase it .
Not only will this free-trade agreement expose our industry to competition from an underpaid workforce , but it will also destabilize Turkish society , accelerating the rural exodus which is casting millions of uprooted people adrift in the metropolitan areas of Istanbul and Ankara .
Well , it is among these rootless masses that the Islamic party is prospering .
I say nothing of the living conditions of the Kurdish minority in Turkey : they seem to create less emotion than those prevailing in Iraq .
But this agreement , ladies and gentlemen , has a more serious implication .
As laid down in Article 28 of the Treaty of Ankara , it represents a decisive step towards the integration of 65 million Turks into Europe , 65 million more to add to the millions that are already here .
Finally , let me remind you , the Turkish government had promised to find solutions to the Cypriot problem .
Well , the Turks , who for more than twenty years have been occupying one third of the territory of Cyprus , a European state , are now killing Cypriots on that island .
I believe that our governments would do well to revoke this ill-starred agreement .
At all events , for once , I shall be adding my voice to that of Mrs Green - just this once - and I say : ' not another penny for Turkey ! ' .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , let me begin my statement by apologizing to the President of Parliament .
Mr President , I confess myself guilty of laughing loudly during the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council .
In this one case I plead mitigating circumstances , for the presidency of the Council really did provoke this loud laughter .
But in future I promise to stifle my laughter even if the presidency of the Council insists on giving us details about the undertakings given by Mrs Çiller .
Mr President , a year ago we agreed in this Parliament , and held passionate debates on it , that we want closer relations with Turkey and that we would also agree to customs union provided certain conditions were met .
These conditions are , let me repeat , human rights , democratic reforms , a solution to the Cyprus problem and also to the Kurdish question .
None of these conditions had been met by the end of December 1995 but nevertheless some of us believed the assurances given by the presidency of the Council , by the Commission and above all by the Turkish Government .
I am still keeping a letter that Mrs Çiller sent me and the other 626 Members of this Parliament in which she asks us to help her so that she can achieve all this .
I have kept the letter because it is not every day that I receive letters from prime ministers .
Rereading this letter today could make one laugh again till the tears come , for no promises have been kept .
It is not just that the situation in Turkey in each of these four areas has worsened , but Mrs Çiller has misused our help in order to actually bring into power the very person she wanted to keep out .
Now the President-in-Office of the Council comes along and tells us that Mrs Çiller has agreed , that she would like to think about what the presidency of the Council said to her .
Surely that cannot be taken seriously any more , Mr President-in-Office !
You forgot to tell us what Mrs André said a while ago , namely that the European Court of Human Rights condemned Turkey a few days ago .
You did not say a word about Turkey 's intention to set up a security zone in northern Iraq .
After all , the European Union ought to adopt a position on that .
All I can say , ladies and gentlemen , is that we really must show Turkey that we are serious about what we said and the only possibility I think that remains today is to freeze all funds for Turkey .
Mr President , if there were a prize for cocking a snook at the European Union , one country in all the world would deserve to win it outright : the Turkey of that unnatural couple , Erbakan and Çiller .
No other country has ever dared so coarsely and provocatively to ridicule its own promises , disregard its commitments , make fools of governments on both sides of the Atlantic in so short a time , show such shamelessness in violating human rights inside and outside its own domain , and use even dark methods - including murder - to promote its own shady interests .
And no other country has been so rapidly shown up , with its multi-faceted aggressiveness , to be anything but the paragon of stability that the Council envisaged and unfortunately still seems to , but instead , the troublemaker of the international community !
Not even a year has passed since our Parliament , succumbing to appeals by the governments , agreed to Customs Union .
The main argument was to help Mrs Çiller as the pro-Western buttress against the danger represented by the Islamicist Mr Erbakan .

And today , Mrs Çiller is one of Mr Erbakan 's ministers , and Mr Erbakan is questioning the value of Custom 's Union , while Mrs Çiller is questioning the European Union 's declared policy on the accession of Cyprus .
Turkey had promised democratization and the Commission believed it .
Respect for human rights and a political resolution of the Kurdish problem .
And today , Leyla Zana , winner of our Sakharov prize , is in prison with other parliamentarians , while in the meantime dozens of detainees who protested about the inhuman living conditions have died .
The governments also pressed for approval of the MEDA regulation , but our Parliament insisted that the prerequisites for implementation of the regulation should be respect for human rights , the cessation of Turkey 's provocations against its neighbours , and its cooperation in solving the Cyprus problem .
And instead of all that , the Erbakan-Çiller pair increased persecution inside the country , as recent reports have stressed , and Turkey became a hundred times more provocative towards Greece .
Besides its illegitimate claim on Imia - which required American intervention to avoid a conflagration in the Aegean - it is now claiming a hundred rocky islets belonging to Greece and instead of a political resolution of the Kurdish problem it is now trying to invade Kurdish Iraq !
The most tragic peak of this shamelessness is this : instead of taking part in a constructive dialogue to find a fair , viable and safe solution to the martyred Cyprus , it is sending ' Grey Wolf ' fascists to the northern part of the island occupied by its troops .
I will not describe the result .
The whole civilized world looked on in horror at the television screens showing the bestial way in which they carried out their mission , killing two young Cypriots .
I will only ask you to note the honours Denktash reserved for the murderers .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office and the Commissioner for making statements to us .
Although it is not my wont to defend the Council and particularly to defend the President-in-Office , who is a member of the opposition party in my own country , I think that some of the comments from the Members here do not do justice to the House , and I would say that the Minister is doing a good job in very difficult circumstances .
I speak here today as somebody who voted against the customs union with Turkey last year because I did not believe the line that I was being given .
I did not believe that Turkey would change overnight because we had a customs union .
I did not believe that the human rights situation in Turkey would improve because we had a customs union , and likewise I did not believe that the island of Cyprus would be reunited because Turkey joined a customs union .
Mrs Green made a very valid point about 35 , 000 Turkish troops in the northern part of Cyprus .
I come from an island country , in which we have 35 , 000 troops also from another country in part of that island .
I understand the difficulties that creates .
What is required here is cool heads , dialogue , reconciliation and a respect for the equality of each group to have their own viewpoint , to put forward their own beliefs and to put forward their own ideas for the future .
Nothing will be achieved if we take with one hand and give with another .
I think we are wrong now , after our bad decision last year , to be trying to stop the customs union , but I think also we should be more forceful in trying to bring Turkey closer to the democratic family , and supporting one of the Member States , Greece , in its ongoing conflict with Turkey , through dialogue and peaceful means .
Mr President , nine months ago this Parliament voted for the customs union .
We gave Turkey an incentive to promote democracy and human rights .
This support had a clearly conditional character .
Further progress in these areas was required by us , and it was promised by the prime minister at that time , Mrs Çiller .
Commissioner Van den Broek , who has spoken justifiably serious words , promises a report .
Mr President , I do not need such a report to be able to observe that the Turkish Government has absolutely failed to keep its promises , and that instead of the promised changes there is a deterioration in the situation .
Democratisation has been put on ice .
The DEP members of parliament are still locked up .
The human rights situation has not improved at all .
A constantly more aggressive policy is being used against the Kurds , and in Cyprus there is talk of a hardening of the Turkish position with the bloody consequences on the island .
Turkey no longer deserves the benefit of the doubt .
That is why I support the compromise resolution , though my group does not .
The Turkish Government is rightly being asked for a clear explanation of the situation , and it must know that the continuance of the current policy cannot be accepted .
That is why the funds in the financial protocol must be placed in the reserve , and the MEDA funds for Turkey must be blocked , though perhaps not the funds which are to support the democratisation process .
I have submitted an amendment to the same effect for the draft budget of the Union .
Next week voting on this will take place in the Foreign Affairs Committee .
I call on Members to back up their words with action .
Mr President , listening to the debate , one could suppose that Mr Mitchell and the Council collectively are suffering from a serious defect of vision and hearing , and that is why Mr Mitchell spoke as he did about the situation in Turkey .

It seems , however , that such is not the case .
Mr Mitchell and the Council are guilty of disgraceful hypocrisy , overpowering opportunism in favour of unclean interests served by Turkey in this critical area of the Middle East , the Mediterranean .
That is why he ignored everything reported by the other speakers , everything we all know about what is going on , what is happening in Turkey .
I will not repeat it all .
Mr President , a time must come , and let this debate be the reason for it , when we bring an end to the situation of tolerance , support and encouragement for this factor that is destabilizing , provocative , and can create problems and even threaten peace in the Balkans , the Mediterranean , the Aegean and beyond .
From that point of view , Mr President , I want to stress the responsibilities borne by the Council , the Commission , the Union 's Member States and especially some of the largest of them , and over and above these , the responsibility borne by the American administration which , in the name of what serves the dominance of the new order of things , in other words the dominance of American imperialism , is encouraging and arming Turkey 's hand with both boldness and weapons , and pandering to its militaristic economic regime which has nothing to do with the interests of the Turkish people and those of Turkey in general .
It will be a contribution if we approve this resolution - even paragraph 5 of it , which specifies and calls for specific measures : the freezing of funds for Turkey from Customs Union , from the MEDA programme - as a first step in adopting some specific decisions .
And that , Mr President , would also contribute to the credibility of our Parliament , it would encourage the democratic forces of the Turkish people who are struggling against this regime , and it would contribute towards stability and peace in that dangerous part of the world , which could spark off more general conflagrations .
Mr President , unfortunately , I have not been able to obtain the motion for a resolution .
I have just come from the distribution service , where they still do not have the joint motion .
I think it is rather awkward to have to make a speech without a copy of the text .
But let me move on - I have had to guess at what the motion will contain .
When we delivered our opinion on the Customs Union with Turkey , I was one of those who voted against .
I did not believe that a customs union would begin a process of democracy and respect for human rights in Turkey , and time has unfortunately proved that I was correct .
In general terms , I am in favour of stepping up trade links , and also with Turkey , but until there is respect for human rights , we must in my view suspend the Customs Union and freeze the aid schemes .
This may help the Turkish Government to realize that the situation with the Kurdish minority in eastern Turkey cannot be resolved militarily .
The Kurdish MPs belonging to the DEP are still being held in prison , including the recipient of the Sakharov Prize , Leyla Zana .
Most recently , the events on Cyprus are a further appalling example of the Turkish regime 's lack of respect for the UN and its resolutions .
Only today , I received a fax from Amnesty International concerning the suspected torture of a young law student , and one could go on mentioning cases endlessly .
We must at long last set an example , otherwise no one will take our fine words on democracy and respect for human rights seriously .
Mr President , I thank Mr Van den Broek for his interesting report , but the statements by the President-in-Office of the Council were disappointing and they show either that the Council did not have a full picture of the situation , or that it lacks the political will to exert pressure on Turkey .
That duty has therefore fallen on the shoulders of the European Parliament , which has become the real custodian of the principles of democracy , human rights and the protection of law and order .
The situation in Turkey has deteriorated dramatically since the beginning of the year , despite the implementation of Customs Union .
The persecution of citizens for their political notions , beliefs and for their religion has escalated .
Recently , Turkey was condemned by the Human Rights Commission of the Council of Europe for its behaviour towards the Kurds .
The Kurdish problem is still being dealt with by the use of military force .
However , Turkey does not restrict its autarchic and aggressive policy only to the interior of the country . That mentality also governs its international relations and its foreign policy .
It is characteristic that Turkey does not have good relations with any of its neighbours .
More particularly , Turkey 's aggressive policy is directed against my own country , Greece , and against Cyprus , a country with which the European Union has special relations .
Turkey 's provocativeness in the Aegean is in direct dispute of European territory and frontiers , and is a threat to peace in the area .
In Cyprus , Turkey is continuing its illegal occupation of parts of the Republic of Cyprus and refuses to comply with international decisions for a peaceful , fair and viable solution of the problem .
The recent tragic events in August , when two Greek Cypriot demonstrators who were protesting peaceably against the occupation were murdered by the occupying forces , are being used by the Turkish side to promote the view that the two communities in Cyprus cannot co-exist , and so frustrate efforts to unify the island .
Ladies and gentlemen , I was an eyewitness to the facts and I assure you that it was a premeditated act by the occupying army , aided by extremist paramilitary groups brought in specially for the purpose at the expense of the Turkish government to carry out those barbaric acts .
We must grasp the fact that we are dealing with a country which operates outside the law , a country whose ruling class sets no store by the concepts of justice , respect for human rights and democracy .
So principles which are for us fundamental values of our civilization , have no such content in Turkey .
For that reason , I believe the time has come to send a powerful political message to Turkey .
At this stage the most effective thing we can do is to freeze all funding for Turkey from the Community budget .
That at least is Europe 's duty and its responsibility , and it must take the initiative .
Mr President , a 16-year old Turkish girl was detained in Turkey for 19 days .
During that time she suffered electric shock treatment to her body and genitals , beating and hanging by the arms for long periods .
This horrific episode took place in November 1995 , just days before our Parliament voted through the customs union with Turkey .
We were told then that the Turkish authorities condemned state torture and that they were making serious efforts to respect fundamental human rights and democracy .
Yet , on 7 March 1996 , Yasar Kemal , Turkey 's most renowned living writer , was given a 20-month suspended sentence for ' initiating hatred ' in an essay entitled ' Dark Cloud over Turkey ' .
And then we were assured by Mrs Çiller only nine months ago that Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law had been changed .
But most of those who have had retrials are still in prison and instead the authorities have been using Article 312 of the penal code under which Yasar Kemal was tried .
People suspected of offences under the Anti-Terror Law can still be detained for 15 days without access to lawyers or to family .
In the south-east it can be 30 days ; often it is longer .
Extrajudicial killings are taking place , not only in the troubled south-east but also in Istanbul and in Ankara .
Since 1991 87 people - I hope the Council representative is taking these figures in - have been killed during raids on houses in these cities .
In April 1995 the justice minister admitted that ' unfortunately , these extrajudicial executions are carried out in every field of life ' .
So , as has been amply demonstrated by colleagues in this House , far from having improved , the human rights situation in Turkey remains critical and - I would say , as many other speakers have said - has deteriorated .
As at least one speaker has said , Leyla Zana , the current Sakharov Prize holder , is still in prison .
Let us not forget that Turkey is a signatory of the Council of Europe 's Convention on Human Rights .
I regret to say that I feel that the Commission 's and Council 's silence on human rights in Turkey has been deafening over the past few months .
Last August we had the interim report from the Commission , but the final version is still awaited by this Parliament .
It seems to me that there is a lack of political will in both the Commission and the Council to tackle the Turkish Government on their human rights record .
I would urge their representatives to remedy this as soon as possible .
Let them convince us , not least the Council , that they have some principles and they are not always guided by expediency .
Mr President , we are today to implement and bring into effect the Customs Union between Europe and Turkey , an agreement which the House approved last December when Turkey seem on course for a youthful democracy that had left behind the religious and extremist barriers that had hitherto been the hallmark of most of that country 's governments .
Now , however , the relationship with Cyprus , along with the events that have taken place and other violent actions by the Turks compel us to reconsider the agreement which , although economic , is bound to have social repercussions .
I shall therefore repeat what I said at the time .
We are today offering Turkey , via the customs agreement , the bases for dialogue with Europe and , therefore , the opportunity to look optimistically to the future .
Turkey has no alternative , other than to revert back to its sorry past .
The European Union must always safeguard the interests of its Member States and Greece first and foremost .
The Turkish nation and people - to whom we wish at any rate to show willing - have great opportunities and responsibilities for the future of Europe and the Mediterranean in particular .
We are in favour of the customs agreement but this could be the last opportunity this Parliament gives Turkish democracy to show that it really is a democracy .
Mr President , today 's debate is a painful and sad experience for the three parties involved : Parliament , Council and Commission .
All three were misled , deceived by the commitments which the Turks entered into at the time of parliamentary ratification of the customs union .
Nine months later , there is no escaping the fact that none of those commitments has been met in the field of human rights .
The situation has deteriorated constantly since the customs union came into force .
The Commission will no doubt confirm this shortly when it submits to us its report on the human rights situation in Turkey , as it formally undertook to do at the time of the ratification of the customs union .
There is no sign as yet of any progress , any hope of improvement .
No doubt a simple reminder will no longer be sufficient to persuade Turkey to comply with its commitments .
Strictly speaking , we could have accepted the present situation - deplorable though it is - as a starting point , allowing Turkey the benefit of mitigating circumstances , but only on condition that we demand that improvements should be set in train and - a very important point - that those improvements should be capable of proper evaluation by independent bodies .
This requires , first and foremost , that Turkey should itself take the initiative in renouncing , henceforth , the practice of concealment and the opportunity for it unfortunately provided by certain provisions - especially Article 11 - of the European Convention against Torture .
In a word , it is important that , as a sign of goodwill and in order finally to prove its good intentions , Turkey should now agree to ensure the greatest possible transparency in this matter , renouncing on its own initiative the opportunity to shelter behind that article in order to prevent these indescribable practices from being brought to light .
This is not just a question of putting Turkey on trial .
As far as we are concerned , there is a duty of mea culpa .
By a large majority , this Parliament , together with the Council and the Commission , committed a sin of naïvety last December .
Some , reluctant to believe that they were being led up the garden path , will have understood too late .
Unfortunately , it has since been demonstrated and confirmed that geopolitical ideas , strategic considerations , the fear of Islamic fundamentalism - in short , realpolitik - cannot be used as a pretext for abandoning respect for the basic principles and values of our civilization , which in any case were solemnly accepted by the guilty country .
Our credibility is at stake .
Mr President , today 's debate is turning more and more into a debate about the way the European Union sees itself .
Is this Union a common organization for gaining new markets in third countries ?
If that is the case we obviously have a pretty successful Turkish policy .
Or is it also and above all the endeavour to create a more deep-reaching common European system of values , not only in the Member States of the Union but outside too ?
If that is the yardstick then - and I believe the Council and the Commission should admit that - we are standing before the ruins of a totally failed Turkish policy .
Our expectation that Turkey , if it could somehow or other be brought into a closer relationship with the Union , would presumably move in the direction of a democratic constitutional state , has been disappointed .
Anyone who has eyes to see must acknowledge that .
We all remember , as many other speakers have said , that at the time Mrs Çiller tried to obtain agreement to the customs union by arguing that this was the only way to check fundamentalism .
Today this same Mrs Çiller is playing the part of breakfast-time foreign policy director to Mr Erbakan , who won the elections .
And it is presumably she who will then have to defend the possible wishes for a revision of the customs union , as announced by Mr Erbakan , before the Union .
An enviable role for this most changeable lady !
And it was this alleged guarantor of democratic progress who , as has been said , then gave 65 million Turkish lire from a secret government fund to the infamous Grey Wolf fascists to finance their punitive expedition to Cyprus , where they killed two innocent and unarmed demonstrators .
In Turkey they continue to torture , murder , close down newspapers , raze Kurdish villages to the ground .
The opposition , and not just the Kurdish opposition , is blocked , people are imprisoned on the flimsiest of pretexts .
The old and the new rulers bear equal responsibility for that .
I do not believe that we can regard them as honest partners although we still wish to accompany and if necessary escort Turkey along the road towards becoming a democratic constitutional state .
We must say that we cannot work with these partners and that on the contrary , without wanting to interfere in Turkish politics , we have to strengthen those forces that represent an alternative , that genuinely offer a guarantee that there is democracy in Turkey .
Consequently : no funds to go to this government and its projects , but funding when it is a question of supporting democratic projects , civilian projects .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 13 December last year Parliament debated and voted on the customs union .
In the debate I declared that I very clearly recognised the political dimension of the customs union , and that there were problems , principally concerning Cyprus , the Kurdish question , human rights and rising fundamentalism .
These are all matters which undermine the fundamentals of a democratic constitutional state .
Taking everything into account , I allowed myself to be very hesitantly convinced to vote for the customs union with Turkey , thereby joining those wishing to take the risk for strengthened cooperation .
Today we feel betrayed and can do nothing but express strong criticism of the situation in Turkey .
The agreements undertaken by Mrs Çiller have not been fulfilled .
The situation regarding democracy , human rights , the Cyprus question and the problem of the Kurds has deteriorated and not improved .
So there are many reasons to be concerned about the situation in Turkey .
Therefore , I am personally in favour of freezing all financial resources , particularly when one thinks of the current events in Cyprus .
Instead of working for a peaceful solution , a pack of grey wolves was released that committed murder .
I therefore share the indignation that is being expressed in this House .
I believe we are clearly dealing with a provocation on the Turkish side .
Turkey has taken up a very hard position here , and in this context we are worried about the customs union .
Commissioner Van de Broek has indicated that the report on the customs union will be presented next month .
In any case I would like to remind of my intervention of nine months ago concerning the situation of the textile and clothing sector , one of the most sensitive sectors in the working of the customs union .
Commissioner , I have received letters from people in positions of responsibility in this sector stating that great attempts have been made by Turkey to slow the imports of textile products from the European Union .
My question is : can you guarantee us within one month that the customs union can function normally and as well as you have presented it today ?
The doubts are very grave .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the time I actively supported the signing of the Customs Union Agreement between the European Union and Turkey .
Then , and still now , it was my conviction that this Agreement would be - and it will be - apart from the economic aspects , an instrument exerting political pressure , helping and partly obliging Turkey to look for a political solution to the problem of Cyprus , for making advances in the area of democracy and human rights , for going down the road towards finding a political solution to the Kurdish problem .
But I think that we now have very few hopes , given what the compulsory annual report by the Commission tells us of political progress in Turkey in relation to the three points I have referred to .
But still , the recent and terrible events justify our concerns about political developments in Turkey and we should not forget that we should be most demanding of those countries which are still our allies and economic partners .
Even recognising the fact that this report has not been well drafted , with inappropriate and extremist considerations and proposals in political terms , I think that this resolution is timely and would be a serious parliamentary initiative aimed at the Turkish government . It would also show the Council and the Commission - especially the Council , after what we heard today - that the European Parliament is always aware of the need for the Treaty with Turkey to be observed in full - I insist on the words ' in full ' - in particular in terms of the various aspects such as political obligations that must be observed as well as the economic side of things .
That is our duty .
Mr President , Parliament 's four conditions for acceptance of a customs union with Turkey were as follows : demands for greater protection of human rights , the peaceful resolution of the Kurdish question , constitutional reforms and democratisation , and the resolution of the Cyprus question .
Many of Parliament 's Members voted against a customs union as Parliament 's conditions were in no way met .
We regarded it as unrealistic to believe that the demands would be met once the customs union became fact .
I regret to say that we were right .
Rather than improve , the situation has in fact deteriorated .
According to the newspaper ' Turkey Watch ' , which monitors the current situation in Turkey , none of Parliament 's demands have been met and the situation has worsened still further .
Torture is still practised at police stations , people disappear while being transported by the police and there has been police brutality in connection with demonstrations .
The armed operations in the south-east have continued .
Villages have been cleared of inhabitants and burned down .
The number of refugees in the country today is estimated to be three million .
Despite some promising statements from the new prime minister there has been no follow-up with regard to the Kurdish question .
The Kurdish party HADEP was not permitted to conduct an election campaign in rural areas .
The government has not taken up the opportunity for a ceasefire proposed by the Kurds in order to reach a peaceful settlement .
Certain changes were made as regards anti-terrorism legislation but these have not been followed up with other legislation .
The now notorious Article 8 which governs freedom of expression , or to be more precise the lack of it , is still being applied through other articles of the criminal code .
Some writers may have been released but others have been prosecuted .
Political prisoners , including members of parliament , are still in Turkish prisons , among them Leyla Zana .
Nor has there been any progress on the Cyprus question - rather the opposite .
Recently two young unarmed Cypriots were murdered by Turkish soldiers and paramilitary troops .
Parliament must condemn the killing of Anastasios Isaak and Solomos Solomos and demand that those responsible are brought to justice .
The European Parliament must obviously call for a peaceful solution to the Cyprus question in accordance with the UN Security Council resolution .
The continued violations of human rights in Turkey are undermining the customs union agreement and stand in sharp contrast to the special rules on financial aid .
The Commission must therefore immediately stop all loans under the MEDA programme for Turkey , except of course for those parts which support democracy and human rights .
Turkey is committing a serious infringement of international law by its establishment of a security zone in northern Iraq .
Recent developments show that democracy cannot be achieved through leniency .
The EU has the economic and political instruments at its disposal to persuade Turkey to move towards democracy .
It is high time for the European Union to use these instruments .
Mr President , we agreed to the customs union with Turkey even though we saw many problems , which have still not been resolved today .
We can quarrel here about the reliability and political statements of Mrs Çiller - at present she has enough to do coping with her own problems - but the fact is that the situation has worsened since the Erbakan government and after Prime Minister Yilmaz , who started out well in my opinion .
The human rights situation has become considerably more difficult , as Mr Moorhouse pointed out .
The new government gives cause for serious doubt about its resolve to make any reliable attempts to improve the human rights situation in Europe .
Our NATO partner Turkey is moving in a new direction and Mr Erbakan does not want to be a hindrance in Europe but would prefer to be a leading power in the Islamic world .
In fact 23 % of the world population does support Islam and the Islamic faith can be found in more than 100 states .
The conflicts with Greece in Cyprus and with the Kurds have become exacerbated and it is our duty not to fan the flames any further in this difficult situation .
Nor has the internal political and economic situation in Turkey itself improved - inflation , unemployment , the problems with the PKK - and we quite simply have to ask ourselves , however much sympathy we have for what our Greek colleagues have said today , how we want to shape our relations with Turkey in future .
That is the question .
We cannot dodge that question .
Do we want to leave Turkey to make its own way or reject it ?
That cannot be in our interests .
There cannot be stability and peace in the region without Turkey , only with Turkey .
Nor can it be in the interests of our Greek friends to see Turkey as a factor of instability in an Islamic world , facing away from Europe .
Should we revoke the customs union ?
Constantly and emphatically call for an improvement in human rights and exert pressure : yes !
Put the customs union in question : no !
I am convinced that today 's debate and the proposed freezing of funds from the MEDA programme could perhaps be the consequences following from Mr Van den Broek 's report on human rights , but not the premise of his report , which he was not due to submit until the end of September from the outset .
We were already aware of that in early 1996 .
Since Mr Van den Broek has always kept Parliament well and comprehensively informed , I do not understand paragraph 6 of the joint motion for a resolution and can only recommend that Parliament votes against it on this question .
We must do our utmost to ensure that even with an Islamic government Turkey keeps the European option open and does not turn away from us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what Mr Langen implied is dangerous .
We have held a debate once before , at the end of last year , in which everything centred round the consideration that we here in the European Parliament , that the European Union should take care to ensure that our policy does not lead to destabilization in Turkey and therefore to destabilization in the region .
To put it differently : what was decided then was a mistake and it is a mistake today , because so long as Turkey gets what it wants without having to give anything in return it will have no reason to change it policy .
That is the real problem we are discussing today .
That is why I must tell you , Mr President-in-Office , that if Mrs Çiller promised you , as you said , to think about the demands made by the European Union regarding democratization and human rights , then I say , forget it .
As Mr Kone & # x010D ; ny very rightly said , Mrs Çiller is by far the most unreliable figure in international politics .
Just imagine if the rapporteur of this House on the fight against racism and xenophobia , Arie Oostlander , proposed Le Pen as President of Parliament next week .
Then you too would say : either he has gone crazy or he is immoral .
But that is more or less how Mrs Çiller is behaving , for she has not only deceived the European Parliament .
The worst thing is that she has deceived her own people in Turkey .
For many people elected Tansu Çiller in the hope of preventing the move towards Islam in Turkey .
This kind of person cannot be the European Parliament 's interlocutor .
And nor can Mr Van den Broek be the European Parliament 's interlocutor .
Mr Van den Broek and the President-inOffice of the Council have put forward what I call a Machiavellian policy .
Everything that is in the interests of the European Union is good , cost what it may , even at the cost of democracy within Turkey .
We cannot endorse that .
We cannot have the roles divided up in this way : you practice politics à la Metternich and let the windbags in the European Parliament be responsible for human rights .
When will you finally visit a prison ?
When will you go to Kurdistan , Mr President-in-Office , to see for yourself what is happening in that country ?
We hear nothing said about that ; as long as you just go on negotiating in your government palace , Turkey will look like a democracy to you .
I know that .
I too have been in the government palace .
It is a lovely place .
But I also know the other side of Turkey , the side of torture and contempt and violations of human rights .
You must inform yourself about that too , and if you do so you will come to new conclusions .
It is time for us to stop supporting Tansu Çiller , nor can we having anything to do with Erbakan .
After all , he himself said that he wants nothing to do with us .
It is up to us finally to begin supporting the democratic forces in Turkey , for if Turkey really were democratic , if this country really did respect democratic and human rights , then of course it would be a welcome partner of the European Parliament .
I am fed up with everyone who criticizes this Erbakan government being presented as an enemy of Turkey .
This applies specifically to our Greek colleagues , who come from a country that respects and practises democracy .
I believe that if we do not ostracize those who trample on human rights and support those who fight for people 's freedom , for their freedom to express an opinion , their free democratic political rights and their right to selfdetermination , then we will be violating our own principles and trampling on them .
That is why there is no other choice : freeze the funding until Turkey remembers that only democratic , constitutional states can be our partners .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I in turn would like to begin my remarks by restating a conviction and a fact .
Turkey is a great country , of special importance on the world chessboard , a powerful country , a country which is allied to Europe .
It must remain so , and we must do everything we can to ensure that it remains so .
It was this geopolitical reality which , at the time , explained a number of our decisions , and which also explains the evolution of our relations with that country .
It is that same reality , today , which justifies , explains and highlights our disappointments and our serious anxieties .
Finally , it is this established fact which justifies our firmness regarding the future , the firmness which the socialists and all the other groups are calling for in this debate .
I have some personal knowledge of Turkey because I was a member of the joint Europe-Turkey committee for five years from 1989 to 1994 , and I was able at that time to measure the change in the state of mind of our opposite numbers .
At the start , they were asking for only one thing , membership , whereas at the end they were responding to our questions and queries with verbal aggression and harsh accusations .
It must be said that Islam had progressed in the meantime , and that the USSR had disintegrated , giving Turkey dreams of a dominant position in that region .
It was in this climate of opinion that a year ago , in late 1995 , on the eve of the Turkish legislative elections , a fantastic propaganda machine was started up to ask us to accept customs union .
Diplomatic approaches , pressure on cabinet ministers , telephone calls , endless promises about human rights and democracy for the Kurds and even peace in Cyprus , and finally the clincher : unless customs union was voted in , Islam and the fundamentalists would come to power .
So we voted for customs union , as did many others , with a heavy heart .
We voted , we made a choice , and we were wrong , not to say wronged .
Political repression within Turkey is more severe than ever .
The prisons are full and people have died , no effort has been made on behalf of the Kurds , there has been additional , murderous provocation in Cyprus and , to crown all these disappointments , on the day after the elections the secular right was torn apart and Mrs Çiller called upon us in December to help her fight the fundamentalism which has installed an admitted supporter of Islam , Mr Erbakan , as Prime Minister .
It is clear that , today , the political conditions on the basis of which the European Parliament gave its agreement no longer exist .
They must therefore be called into question , and Europe must freeze all the appropriations under the financial protocol and all those within the framework of the MEDA programme .
I should add that the Commission should also study the conditions under which the customs union itself can be questioned .
As I see it today , Mr President , and I am coming to the end , this is the one and only way still open to us to force Turkey to honour its commitment .
It is , ultimately , our one and only way of helping Turkey to remain a great , secular , democratic , peaceful and allied country on the borders of Europe .
' So , even if I saw with my own eyes that the state has burned a village , I would not believe it ' .
I hope that that statement by Mrs Çiller will have lost , even for her , its validity after the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights last Monday , which states explicitly that the Turkish Government burns villages and in doing so violates the European Convention on Human Rights and its Protocol No 1 .
It is important to point to this verdict , because it is a sign that Turkish links with Europe in the long run can be fruitful also for the democratic situation in Europe .
But that demands action , and what I regret in the Council statements is that there is an unwillingness for any action whatsoever , apart from the simple continuation of the customs union .
Then the Council becomes co-responsible for a deterioration of the human rights situation in Turkey , as we can see it today .
There is deterioration , there is no progress , there is systematic torture , there are disappearances and extrajudicial killings and they are tolerated and permitted in a state , to quote an Amnesty International report ' that disposes of all the institutions to establish a stricter rule of law and to improve significantly the human rights situation ' .
That is the problem .
When we voted in favour of the customs union last year we did not believe that we would establish full human rights immediately but we were led to believe by Mrs Çiller and a majority of the members of the Grand National Assembly that the Turkish political system at least partially accepted that responsibility and was ready to improve the situation .
We were misled : the reform of Article 8 - Mr Moorhouse , has been rather explicit on that one - did not lead to a real reform of the freedom of expression .
There are no signs of improvement in any area of human rights , only indications of deterioration .
After the debates in December and after the promises made by the Turks we did not get what we were entitled to expect .
Are we now obliged to give Mr Erbakan and Mrs Çiller what they expect ?
I do not think so .
My Group is determined to continue to block the appropriations for Turkey deriving from the Financial Protocol of the Customs Union Agreement in the 1997 budget .
Turkey has to improve its record first .
We have a more difficult proposal and that is to try to block the MEDA money meant for Turkey but by putting into the reserve sufficient MEDA resources we can do that .
Only if there is serious progress towards human rights should we be ready to unblock the money .
That may still be a long way off but we should exercise our rights in order to remain credible , and that is what I object to in the Council statements !
Mr President , last December the European Parliament approved the customs union with Turkey .
I respected the arguments of Members who assumed that approval of the customs union would strengthen the democratic forces in Turkey and lead to positive change .
In rejecting customs union I had some residual doubts whether I was doing the right thing .
Today we know that not only was no progress achieved in Turkey in relation to the development of democracy or respect for human rights and international law , but that it is more than clear that the situation has regressed and worsened , both in Turkey and in Cyprus , for which Turkey bears the responsibility .
This summer people quite frequently spoke and wrote erroneously about inter-community discussions in Cyprus .
But the fact is that there were no discussions between Greek and Turkish Cypriots and that Turks murdered two unarmed Greek Cypriots who demonstrated along with others against the 22-year occupation of 37 % of the island .
Some Members have pointed to an aspect of particular importance to this Parliament in its relations with Turkey , and I will repeat it : according to statements by the Turkish Grand National Assembly , the fascist Grey Wolf youth organization received 65 million Turkish lire from the treasury in order to go to Cyprus .
Members of the Grey Wolf organization then killed a Cypriot called Isaak .
The Turkish officer who shot the Cypriot called Solomos - and this really is worse than cynical and is really terrible - was appointed minister of agriculture of the self-styled Northern Cypriot state three days later by Mr Denktash , as a kind of reward .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is time we made it unequivocally clear that the European Parliament , the European Union feels it has been deceived , that we make it clear that we do not want good relations with a country that tramples on human rights and international law and that we therefore freeze the financial resources for Turkey .
Mr President , when we voted on the Customs Union with Turkey at the turn of the year , a good many people were in doubt as regards the right thing to do , but the wish to cooperate and to engage in a dialogue with Turkey won the day - not least because we could already see reforms as a result of earlier pressure from the European Parliament , and the prospect of more was held out to us .
Where the Council of Ministers resigned itself , Parliament exploited the situation for the benefit of democracy and human rights .
Since then , however , there have been steps backwards which we cannot ignore .
Elected members of the Turkish National Assembly are still in prison , and other people have been imprisoned because they are calling for a peaceful dialogue between Turks and Kurds .
Legal action has just been taken against staff at a rehabilitation centre for torture victims , because they would not supply the names of these victims to the authorities .
Mr Blak and I were present in Ankara at the trial of a Danish citizen of Kurdish origin , Kemal Koc , who was imprisoned for something he did in Denmark which is legal there and which the Danish authorities do not wish to investigate .
There is concern at the role the Turkish ambassador in Denmark has played in this and many other cases .
On Cyprus , we also have reason to believe that the Turkish Government is involved in stirring up feelings .
We therefore do not wish to release the funds which have been allocated to Turkey under the Customs Union , ECU 375 million over five years , or to use funds from the MEDA programme in favour of Turkey , not because there is no need to support a large number of people in Turkey , but because the Turkish Government itself is spending billions to wage war against people on its own territory , and we have to draw attention to this state of affairs .
Mr President , the position adopted by the President-in-Office of the Council on the state of human rights and democracy in Turkey is cynical , and in any case insults the intelligence of this Parliament 's Members .
Institutions are tested at times of crisis . There are times when an institution is called upon to change its views because it has been misled .
When a majority in Parliament voted for Customs Union , it did so on the basis of information which has since been given the lie .
The pessimists were proved right .
The declaration we are to vote upon is not as stern as I would have liked . However , there is no way other than to vote for it , at least , because we must not forget that the European Parliament is the natural protector of human values , and its declarations should therefore be correspondingly strict .
Turkey 's attitude towards the European Union is provocative and is encouraged both by the stance of some European governments and by our own tolerance .
In this Chamber , we have heard an unexpected pharisaism , namely that we should be careful lest , by any chance , since Greece is a Member of the European Union , it might be considered that a stern attitude towards Turkey is motivated by philhellenic partiality .
And it is added : ' we understand our Greek colleagues ' .
To say that , is a disgrace !
Greece is part of Europe too , but in any case it cannot be used to excuse leniency towards a regime founded on violence against persons and disregard for international law .
And let us not forget : our own insistence on respect for human rights is a source of comfort for democrats in Turkey itself , who are groaning under a regime of violence , and for the Turkish Cypriots who are suffering in the areas illegally occupied by Turkey .
Mr President , with reference to Mr Langen 's speech , in which he mentioned the fact that Greek colleagues have asked for the credits to be frozen , I want it to be noted that every one of those who have spoken today called for the freezing of Turkey 's credits , for the reasons they gave .
Mr President , I also want it to be noted that this effort to present Turkey and the Cyprus tragedy as an issue between Greece and Turkey , must stop .
These problems concern the whole of the civilized world and the European Union in particular , and that is how they should be addressed .
I have just learned that the French interpreter has translated that I would not sign the compromise resolution .
The opposite is the case .
I have not only signed it , I will also be voting for it .
So , I just wanted to make it clear to all colleagues .
I will vote against Turkey .
Mr President , I have listened to the debate with great interest and will certainly take into account the various points which have been made .
There are a couple of factual points I should like to deal with briefly .
First , I did deal with the question of northern Iraq in the earlier debate on Iraq .
I just wanted to put that straight .
In relation to my comments on taking both motions together : that was a procedural comment .
I had been informed that the motions would be taken separately and I wanted to be sure that that was the House 's understanding .
I was only told immediately before the debate that that was the case .
At the outset I should like to thank Brian Crowley for his magnanimous comments .
I have taken very careful note of the views expressed by Members here today .
We will report these views to the Council and take them into account in our deliberations .
I will also ensure that the Tánaiste , Dick Spring is fully briefed on this debate before his meeting with Mrs Çiller next week , which will be the second in a matter of weeks .
I made very clear in my statement the Council 's determination to pursue the concerns , which we fully share with Parliament , regarding the human rights situation in Turkey .
We are continuing to press the Turkish authorities to fulfil the assurances they have given to the Union and the undertakings they have entered into under international law .
We are strongly urging an approach to the Kurdish situation which will ensure freedom of expression on the politically acceptable approach to the Kurdish problem .
If a Turkish representative had been present here today , I wonder whether he would have criticized the Council for the implications of what we did say in our statement .
The Council 's strategy is not - as has been described - business as usual .
What we are trying to do is use the channels available to us to press for and encourage the kind of changes we are all seeking .
We have also adopted a firm declaration setting out the principles which should govern our relations with Turkey .
We will continue to press for a constructive response to this declaration .
Finally , on Cyprus , I would recall that the Council has condemned the recent brutal killings of civilians on the island and we have strongly deplored the disproportionate use of force by the security forces in the north of Cyprus , as I said earlier .
And , as I also said , these tragic incidents highlight the urgent need to intensify efforts to promote a solution under the UN aegis .
The European Union is playing a full , active and committed part in support of those efforts .
I thank Members for their contributions , which clearly underline the seriousness of the situation , and which , I believe , have demonstrated considerable universal feeling in Parliament .
I know that in any case we will be shortly be talking to each other again .
I repeat the promise that we hope to make the report available in the course of next month , so that at the next sitting in Strasbourg , if the agenda allows , discussions can take place on the report of the Commission on the customs union and human rights .
This means that by then the discussions with Mrs Çiller will have taken place in New York , the results of which can be taken up in the debate .
As a closing remark , with full recognition of the seriousness of the situation that I have tried to express in my first intervention , I would still like to point out how very complicated the political development is that has taken place in Turkey , and which is actually perpetuated by the formation of the new government .
This development puts us in a paradoxical position , whereby all those who retrospectively doubt the correctness of the approval of the customs union at the time - which by the way I do understand - find themselves with the dilemma that the breaking off , suspension or withdrawal of the customs union is exactly what the current Islamic Government leader Prime Minister Erbakan would most like to see , though not what Mrs Çiller would like to happen .
The European Union will therefore have to determine its policy , while attempting to contribute to stability in Turkey and not further radicalisation .
This is a very difficult task , but I believe that when determining policy the voices from Parliament must clearly be listened to , and against this background I appreciate this debate .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Child abuse
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
by Mr Ligabue , Mr Pasty and Mrs Todini , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Council ( B4-0839 / 96-0-0154 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0683 / 96-0-0155 / 96 ) on measures to protect under-age children who are victims of violence in the European Union ; -by Mrs Hermange , Mrs Todini , Mrs Colli Comelli , Mr Crowley , Mr Andrews and Mr Mezzaroma , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Commission ( B4-0841 / 96-0-0180 / 96 ) on action against paedophile networks ; -by Mr Monfils and Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Council ( B4-0842 / 96-0-0181 / 96 ) on the traffic in children ; -by Mr Monfils and Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Commission ( B4-0846 / 96-0-0187 / 96 ) on sexual exploitation of children and the campaign against paedophile networks in Europe ; -by Mrs Roth , Mrs Aelvoet and Mrs van Dijk , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission ( B4-0843 / 96-0-0182 / 96 ) on combatting paedophilia , child prostitution and child abduction ; -by Mrs Van Lancker , Mr de Coene and Mr Willockx , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council ( B4-0844 / 96-0-0183 / 96 ) on European cooperation in the fight against paedophilia and child pornography ; -by Mrs Dury , Mr Schulz , Mr Desama , Mr de Coene , Mr Rothley , Mr Cot and Ms Oddy , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission ( B4-0850 / 96-0-0193 / 96 ) on acts of violence against underage children ; -by Mrs Pailler , Mrs Sornosa Martinéz , Mr Vinci and Mr Alavanos , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Commission ( B4-0845 / 96-0-0185 / 96 ) on child abuse ; -by Mrs Colombo Svevo , Mrs Banotti , Mrs Pack , Mr Chanterie , Mr Martens , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , Mr Deprez , Mr Herman , Mrs Thyssen , Mr Grosch , Mrs Bennasar Tous , Mrs Mouskouri and Mr Tindemans , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission ( B4-0847 / 96-0-0188 / 96 ) on acts of violence against minors ; -by Mr Pradier , on behalf of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission ( B4-0848 / 96-0-0189 / 96 ) on protection of under-age victims of violence in the EU ; -by Mrs Seiller , on behalf of the Europe of Nations Group , to the Commission ( B4-0849 / 96-0-0190 / 96 ) on violence against children and paedophile and pornographic networks .
Mr President , my group , the UPE , particularly welcomes the fact that we are able to have this debate in the House .
Recent developments have been extremely grave , with Europe and the whole world able only to look on - and I am referring here to the acts of violence against and sexual abuse of children .
For a long time now my group has held study days devoted to this problem , first of all in Carcassonne and then in Dublin , and these resulted in the adoption of a number of texts .
A motion for a resolution was adopted and an oral question tabled in July along with the relevant motion for a resolution .
What is more , many of our group representatives have tabled amendments to the budget to introduce new spending lines for measures to help minors who are the victims of violence ; these budgetary lines are separate from the budgetary lines used for policies to support the family or disadvantaged groups .
They were proposed by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
Our amendments will be discussed during the coming weeks and it is our hope that all of the groups will be able to meet us half way in our campaign .
I wish to state once again the main points of our joint resolution .
They are : the provision of appropriate instruments to study and prevent violence against minors , interpreted in a general way and whatever its form ; the implementation of joint and global measures bringing in both the Member States and the applicant states ; the appropriateness of taking into account in any cooperation agreement with non-member states the need to combat international activities such as the international trafficking in minors , migrant prostitution and sex tourism .
I again stress the need to provide for budgetary lines that are adequate and specific to cover the problem .
Joint action by the Member States should be put into effect under the third pillar - cooperation between the judiciary and between police forces - in the context above all of the Schengen agreement and the Europol convention .
In that connection , I wish to inform the House that I intend tomorrow to table an oral amendment to paragraph 5.2 of the motion for a resolution , considering the possibility of implementing in the next Europol convention the creation of specific databases common to all the Member States containing information on individuals guilty of paedophile acts .
We need then to harmonize domestic legislation on offences and penalties .
We need also to pay particular attention to all of the new technologies such as the Internet , through which young people , and minors in particular , are able to be contacted .
Finally , we are calling for the introduction of a ' blue telephone ' line at European level and , above all , we are asking the Intergovernmental Conference to introduce into the future revised Treaty a chapter on the human rights of minors .
Europe 's development depends above all on social and cultural development , failing which there will never be European unity !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that the subject we are concerned with today will rightly be given so much time and attention is related to the terrible practices - particularly in Belgium - that have so graphically emerged .
These practices have plunged not only the families of the victims into mourning and a state of shock , but also the whole country .
A whole series of girls & # x02BC ; names have been imprinted on all our minds for good .
It could have been anyone & # x02BC ; s children .
The intensity of the feeling is of course mainly attributable to the fact that most of the victims were children .
In rich , so-called developed societies which no longer seem able to offer their innocent , defenceless children safety and protection , this defies belief .
Belgium is certainly not alone where the problem of commercialised paedophile networks is concerned , but the extent to which the network was able to develop over so many years is spectacular , just as other cases in Belgium have taken on spectacular forms .
In this respect I would like to distance myself a little from a certain tenor in the joint resolution which actually places a great deal of emphasis on international cooperation , namely Europol .
Everything will be solved then .
Everything will be better then . However , the case in Belgium clearly demonstrates that houses need to be put in order in one 's own country first .
What we have here is great inefficiency on the part of the judiciary , with clear elements of corruption and clear links to the political level .
If this is not tackled - and I do see a number of initiatives for this at present - any international cooperation is all for nothing .
Let us not turn affairs round , but rather , and particularly in Belgium , recognise that matters must be sorted out in our own countries .
Secondly , I would like to point out that today a particularly harrowing report has been published in La Libération on the problem of violence against children , and more broadly sexual violence , abuse and murder , from which it appears there has been an increase in violence of 18 % in one year .
This can largely be attributed to better information , but the main problem is the corruption , social degradation and social poverty which contribute to certain forms of violence .
In this context , when we talk about violence against children , we must look at it from a wider perspective , though this does not mean that special attention should not be devoted to sexual violence against children , including commercialised paedophilia .
Along with many others , we would strongly urge for attention to be given to the training of magistrates and police officers to enable them to better cope with this sort of phenomenon , and that the battle against illegal sex tourism should be joined , as well as the fight against the trafficking of persons in general as - and one cannot deny it - it is not only children who are caught up in these networks , there are also young adults .
There is much more to this .
Finally , as a Fleming , I must say from my heart how shameful I find it that certain Flemish politicians are not above standing on the coffins of misused and murdered children and proclaiming that this concerns wrongs of Wallonia .
It is clear that this is a Belgian problem , with a crisis of the constitutional state of Belgium , and one must make no federal distinctions as if there was no Flemish hormone mafia or no Superchannel .
Mr President , I was going to start my speech by saying that emotion , sadness and remembrance have not been forgotten , and I should add that they must not be .
Let us not forget the emotion of last week , because perhaps that emotion should be the mainspring of our actions .
The socialist group has indicated its agreement with the joint motion for a resolution , and I should like to add at this point , unambiguously , that what we want is the communitization of cooperation within the framework of the campaign against the trafficking in human beings , in women and children .
I would like to say unambiguously that Europol must play its part and must include this campaign among its objectives .
And I would like to say unambiguously that , if any State does not want to join Europol , then the others should do so and go ahead without it .
The socialist group is unanimous in this and unanimous in repeating it forcefully to the Council and the Commission .
However , with regard to this motion for a resolution , I would also like to add a few points .
First , we believe that an effort must be made in terms of research and reflection .
In fact , there is very little expert knowledge in this field , because the subject was long regarded as taboo and difficult .
It needs to be examined with care , because we are talking about a system , and because we have to combat that system : this is not just a matter of individual perversions and abominations .
We believe , too , that it is necessary to harmonize the definitions of rape in our various legislations ; that we need to harmonize the concept of an offence associated with the exploitation of children and young adults ; that we need to tighten our legislation by abolishing , in some of our countries , the principle of double incrimination , especially in connection with sex tourism ; and , finally , that we need to amend our legislation to flush out instances of concealed trafficking in children , either in the form of adoption or in the form of sham marriages .
And , finally , we must combat child pornography , in other words the trivialization of the sexual exploitation of children .
What the motion for a resolution does not contain is any reference to the principle of combatting money laundering .
Is it widely known that the Spartacus network , some of whose leaders have been convicted , is pursuing its activities because they are primarily geared to making profits ?
Well , if that is its strength , it must also be its weakness .
I believe we should also give thought to combatting the laundering of money , and to the penalties to be imposed on banks , even if European banks are involved .
In conclusion , let us also think about the victims , providing victims with someone to whom they can talk .
Let us think about the gathering of evidence , which needs to be more human , which needs to be facilitated in every possible way in order to make it more effective .
Mr President , I must say that the only hope I have in this whole business - which , it is true , has been a shock - is that the shock may prove to be a salutary one and that , apart from the appropriate words , which are certainly useful and necessary , we shall be able , with the assistance of the Commission and the Council , to take all the steps required .
Madam Commissioner , will the Commission make the measures to be adopted against pornography involving children global , so that they can also be applied to other vulnerable sectors of the population like women ?
Is there going to be further study of the issues underlying the crimes of sexual trafficking and pornography , involving both children and women , to look into what motivates them and call for international cooperation ?
I would like a clear and convincing answer which will dispel any doubts about the possibility of taking effective action to prevent the proliferation of this crime .
We can never forget who is at the receiving end of sexual violence and we must discover the causes and find ways of eliminating it .
Finally , is there an intention to draw up provisions which include the basic legal foundations for equality and nondiscrimination against boys , girls and women in the Treaty of Union ?
Mr President , colleagues , you will recall that in our debate in July I made a prophetic request for a central data base on which details of all missing children would be recorded and my proposal has proved to be , as I have said , prophetically tragic .
It is impossible to get accurate statistics for the number of children who are missing in the European Union .
Children go missing for a variety of reasons : some are parentally abducted ; some are runaways , often from violent and abusive homes ; some from problems at school , as minor as a school report .
Some children , however , are criminally abducted and are never found .
Some other children disappear because they have had fatal accidents and they are never found either .
What is clear is that the law in all our countries has not kept up with the increasingly horrific crimes against children and the sophistication and evil of those who prey on children .
Paedophiles and evil people have made enthusiastic and skilful use of the Internet for their purposes .
Unfortunately , national agencies , both police and voluntary , have not had the same success .
I told you in July that in the United States they have on record the National Institute for Missing and Exploited Children over 367 , 000 children .
We still have not even the slightest idea of how many are missing here in Europe .
Confronting these problems will require a radical reform of Member States ' laws to protect our children more effectively .
I hope we will do this following the ratification of the Europol Treaty .
Can the President-in-Office assure us that , in the new Treaty following the IGC , the rights of children will be given the just , legal weight they deserve ?
Events in Belgium have focused international attention on the many loopholes which exist , both nationally and internationally , in our laws .
If we can respond clearly and effectively to the challenge presented to us , I believe we will provide a fitting memorial to the little girls who were so brutally murdered in Belgium .
We must also hang our heads in shame for the sexual abuse of children carried out by tourists in developing countries .
Most of the clients of the sexually abused children come from Western countries and , because these children are far away , we have succeeded in ignoring what is being done to them .
Extra-territorial legislation to convict those who travel abroad to abuse children is absolutely vital .
A European register of convicted paedophiles may cause concern on the basis of infringement of civil liberties , but I do not believe it is impossible to take into consideration both the protection of children and the protection of individual civil liberties .
We need a system whereby those who have been convicted of paedophile offences are registered both nationally and internationally , with access only available to legal officers or those considering offering employment with privileged access to children .
This register would simply give information to those seeking to employ people in the form of a ' yes ' or ' no ' about a previous conviction .
For too long assistance to the public has been provided only by voluntary networks .
They have done an exceptionally fine job with very few resources and many of them were initiated by parents who have experienced the anguish of losing their children and , in many cases , finding their children had been murdered .
Since my appointment as Mediator for Abducted Children , I have learned a great deal and much of what I have learned has sickened me .
Mr President , a few weeks ago , in Brussels , we were expressing our outrage against the crimes perpetrated against children in one of our Member States .
Today , we are engaging in a substantive debate on the sexual exploitation of children , because it is urgent that we should react .
After all , how many children will have to be raped , kidnapped , even murdered before we finally come up with the solutions we need ?
Even so , combatting these appalling activities is , sadly , not so easy .
First , it seems that forms of abuse directed at children are actually on the increase .
The figures are horrifying .
Secondly , ill-treated children are not always able to react , and it is sometimes very difficult to break this law of silence , this law of impunity , which is so common when these abuses are carried out by close relatives .
Then again , these paedophile networks , which are constantly growing and are one of the causes behind the crimes we are denouncing , are able to disguise their activities and get round the best organized checks .
So what is to be done ?
In our joint motion for a resolution we mentioned ways of fighting this problem .
For my part , I would have preferred them to be rather more specific with regard to the action to be taken , especially in this programme we are so anxious to see .
When the time comes , we will need to provide it with appropriate financial resources , and the forthcoming budgetary debate should enable us to be more specific about this plan .
In this respect , I would like to have the Commission 's position .
That would be a significant step .
Nevertheless , apart from the action to be instituted - I am thinking in particular of the part Europol should play in establishing a common database - we must not lose sight of the fact that globalization is having undesirable effects which must be taken into account .
It has allowed the development of what is literally a traffic in children , using the sex tourism networks .
As far as the Internet is concerned , we know that it offers an ideal cover for the encouragement of paedophilia .
That is why our call for protection for children must be universal .
We must ensure that children 's rights are respected everywhere , starting by setting an example .
Moreover , we must remember that the sexual exploitation of children , dreadful as it is , is only one of the many forms of aggression to which children are subjected nowadays .
Too often , in our societies , childhood goes hand in hand with violence .
The news stories we see every day have become an inescapable fact of society .
In public places , in schools , and sadly in some families too , blows are taking the place of dialogue , tenderness and affection .
So , ladies and gentlemen , let us mobilize to push back these walls of shame .
Mr President , the fight against the scourge of paedophilia and the sexual exploitation of children must be carried on at all levels - local , national , European and international .
Each level of authority and effectiveness is important , and must supplement the others .
And it is true that no level must be allowed to delegate its responsibilities .
Little has been said about the local level .
I am going to emphasize it , even so , because I believe we must also take into account the way life is organized within society , at the level of the basic units - families , districts , cities - where children 's interests are not a high enough priority .
Too many children are left to themselves , left alone , come home alone from school , spend time alone at home , and are easy prey .
As regards law enforcement and the police , judicial cooperation and other aspects , I endorse all the highly relevant remarks made by other Members .
On the prevention side , however , I want to raise a question which is not an easy one .
We talk about living in an information society .
It is a matter of urgency , then , to initiate at national , European and international level a process of ethical reflection on information societies .
We should also ask ourselves about the status of sexuality in this information society , because if there is a supply to be eliminated , that is because there is a demand .
Why is there such a demand for perverted sexual practices ?
We need to ask ourselves about the way in which sexuality is handled in advertising .
Moreover , should all sexual practices be regarded as on the same level , and do they all have the same right to display themselves in every different way ?
Sexuality is an extraordinary form of human energy , which is beneficial , and which is wonderful when it is associated with affectivity - when there is a profound relationship between two people .
But when it is constantly the focus of the media society , as something disconnected from love and life , is there not a probable risk of every conceivable kind of aberration , including the sexual exploitation of children ?
Mr President , could we be assured that the Minister will also take on board the question regarding an amendment to the Treaty protecting the rights of children ?
I feel that we are spancelled in terms of our legal powers unless we have Treaty legitimacy .
Mr President , as I said in my contribution , we are aware of the views expressed by the Parliamentarians here , and this is a matter which is currently under consideration in the IGC .
I have been asked by some Members , and by people outside this House , if we should not extend the Treaty provisions to include a provision for citizenship for children .
The advice I have received on that particular Treaty provision is that the reference to all persons who have citizenship of a Member State covers everybody , including children , but I would be very happy to ensure that it is examined again .
As far as I am concerned , if additional wording would tighten up the provisions in the Treaty and assist us in our campaign , you would certainly be pushing an open door with me .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the sexual exploitation of children is the most repulsive kind of child abuse .
The terrible events of the last few months in Belgium coincided with the first world congress against the sexual exploitation of children for commercial purposes .
This has meant that for the first time the issue has become a proper part of the political agenda .
I attended the congress on the sexual exploitation of children for commercial purposes , which was held in Stockholm at the end of August .
The declaration which was adopted stresses not only the need for further national measures but also the need to support international cooperation .
The congress adopted a comprehensive approach , dealing with preventive measures , the work of the judicial authorities , as well as the need to rehabilitate the children who are victims and paedophiles themselves .
The declaration emphasises the necessity of establishing close cooperation between governments , international organisations and other sections of society .
The plan of action which was also elaborated is intended to highlight those international commitments which already exist .
This must be followed up with practical measures .
We agreed that all countries should now draw up a strategy for national implementation of the plan of action and report on results in the year 2000 .
Obviously , the Commission should play an active part in measures to combat the sexual abuse of children .
We have already initiated an analysis of the Stockholm conference 's plan of action , in order to ensure that it is also carried out at European level .
In the first instance , of course , the effort must be made at national level .
I dearly hope that all the attention which is now being devoted to the problems means that the battle against all forms of sexual exploitation will be given priority .
National efforts are not sufficient , however .
The problem is often a cross-border one .
There is therefore a need for joint solutions , as regards both the smuggling of children and that of young women .
The groups involved are well organised , with networks covering many countries .
They earn a great deal of money from their activities .
Intensive cooperation is required in order to stop them , at European and other levels .
On behalf of the Commission , may I say how pleased I am that the different political groups in this House have now passed a joint resolution .
Within the framework for cooperation within the fields of justice and home affairs there are excellent opportunities for strong EU cooperation in this area .
It is heartening to see that several new proposals have already been introduced as a result of the recent events .
They are intended primarily to strengthen police and judicial cooperation .
This also shows how valuable third pillar cooperation is .
The current Intergovernmental Conference also provides a unique opportunity to make cooperation on justice and home affairs even more effective .
In this connection I should like to endorse what my Irish colleague said , namely that our Treaty also provides ways of placing the situation of children centre stage in a totally different way than we have to date .
Trafficking in children for sexual purposes is a criminal act .
Europol must therefore be given a decisive role in our work against it .
I believe there are possibilities of establishing a database , a register to deal with both trafficking in children for sexual purposes and trafficking in women .
This means that we must make every effort to have Europol ratified .
In this regard I believe that everyone has an important role to play , we must all work together .
As far as I know no government has as yet started the process leading to ratification of Europol , which is so terribly important if we are to get any further .
The Commission also wholeheartedly supports the Irish presidency 's initiative to extend the EDU mandate without further ado to include all forms of trafficking in human beings .
I hope that this will be a joint action , in order that it can come into effect immediately .
This would mean that EDU could begin work straight away on issues affecting trafficking in women and children for sexual purposes ; this would be of considerable value .
The issue of an extended EDU mandate will , as I understand , be discussed at the informal meeting of ministers and I truly hope that there will be a unanimous recommendation .
I can assure you that the Commission will play an active part in the battle against the sexual exploitation of children .
Together with my fellow Commissioners I am currently busy drawing up an overview of all the action currently being undertaken in the Commission .
I should like to say a few words about some of the most important activities on our agenda .
As you know , I myself , together with the Austrian government , organised a conference in Vienna in June this year .
The principal theme was the smuggling of women but the conference also looked at the issue of young women who are minors and young girls .
This work gave rise to a number of conclusions and concrete recommendations , one of which stressed the need to adopt a multidisciplinary approach .
Another important conclusion was that close cooperation must be established with voluntary organisations , which can be described as having been active in the field longest .
On the basis of the Vienna recommendations we are now engaged in the preparation of a communication which will be presented to both the Council and the European Parliament .
In it we identify a number of areas where measures should be taken .
As regards activities in respect of children and families in general the Commission 's scope for action is to a very large extent limited to no more than research and information .
In September 1989 the Council of Ministers responsible for family issues adopted an agreement on family policy .
In the document in question we stressed the importance of the family for children 's upbringing and it was established that the Community has a legitimate interest in monitoring the effect of economic , social and demographic factors on family development .
Within the framework of the Commission 's budget item for social policy , B3-4100 , the Commission finances the European Observatory for national family policy .
The Observatory 's annual reports contain sections on families living under great stress and also cover the issue of child abuse and violence within families .
The annual reports describe how Member States deal with these issues and they are distributed to a large number of key people in all Member States .
A working party comprising senior officials from the Member States with responsibility for family issues meets twice a year under the auspices of the Commission .
The aim of these meetings is to exchange ideas and thoughts on family issues and to discuss what can be done to protect children .
Various models of how child abuse can be stopped have been presented , some at the group 's most recent meeting in June this year .
Over the years the Commission has also helped a large number of voluntary organisations with work to change attitudes .
It has been especially important to increase public consciousness of the need to protect minors .
We have also financed research efforts and disseminate publications which describe the situation in the different Member States .
The Commission is also very active internationally , not least as regards development work and human rights .
We support numerous projects and activities aimed at strengthening and protecting children 's rights .
Examples include the conditions in which street children live and support for voluntary organisations in developing countries which , for instance , combat child prostitution .
In April the Commission made a proposal for a decision on a multi-year programme to support and develop European tourism .
The proposal paid particular attention to the issue of sex tourism .
We point out , inter alia , the need for a code of conduct for the tourist industry and the fact that it is essential that the industry cleans up its own act in this regard .
The proposal also mentions various kinds of concrete support measures to achieve this .
My fellow Commissioner , Christos Papoutsis , has also announced further initiatives before this Assembly to combat sex tourism involving children .
The Commission is now preparing a communication to Parliament and the Council of Ministers on the extent to which recommendations are to be formulated .
It will be addressed primarily to the Member States and cover measures in several important areas .
We mention , for example , prevention , support for voluntary organisations , the international exchange of information and measures to ensure that the tourist industry cleans up its act .
Today 's new means of communication bring with them new kinds of problems .
I am thinking in particular about the dissemination of child pornography and the fact that paedophiles use these new media to seek contact with one another .
It has also become easier for minors to obtain access to files containing pornographic or other offensive pictorial material .
In this area too we must take measures .
I wish I could say that the Commission had found solutions to these problems but it is an exceptionally sensitive area and I understand that it is not clear that legislation is the most effective path to take .
Prohibitions can be difficult to enforce but I do not want to exclude any options .
When radio and TV first appeared we succeeded very quickly in extending the legislation and regulations applicable to the printed word .
The Internet is certainly a completely different kind of medium but I hope that we will succeed in extending existing rules to cover it too .
The aim is that those who put this kind of information onto the Internet should be called to account for their abominable actions .
The Commission is at present elaborating a green paper on the new audiovisual media .
Within the framework of this work we will shortly be preparing a special document on the protection of integrity and the protection of minors .
At the informal meeting of ministers with responsibility for culture and communications in Bologna in April the Commission was also charged with drafting a summary of all the problems involving the Internet .
The Commission was asked in particular to investigate the need for European or other international statutory regulation of the Internet .
Finally , Mr President , the Union will naturally continue its efforts to ensure that the UN 's Convention on the Rights of the Child is ratified .
It has already been ratified by the parliaments of 187 states , among them all the Member States of the EU and the countries of Eastern and Central Europe .
However , ratification alone will not help ; it is also a question of the convention being implemented by means of practical policies which work .
At national level the need for further legislation or the updating of existing legislation must be investigated .
The Commission has noted with satisfaction that certain EU Member States have introduced what might be called extra-territorial legislation , making it possible also to bring to justice those who exploit children in other countries .
For my part , I hope that all the EU Member States will introduce this kind of legislation .
The battle against all forms of sexual abuse must thus be continued .
This should be done at national level , at European level and at international level .
The Commission is determined to play a part in this work in every way that it can .
Thus will we demonstrate that the rights of both children and women are also human rights .
Mr President , the Irish presidency has today announced that the mandate of Europol is to be expanded and will also cover trafficking in children .
This is good news .
But we must immediately add that the Europol Convention is still a long way from being ratified by the Member States .
We therefore wonder how much longer it will take before Europol itself can finally get off the starting blocks .
Apparently we are all enthusiastically agreed about this .
The question is if we are also enthusiastically agreed about other aspects .
Cooperation between the judiciary and police is today an exclusive competence of governments . This does not immediately result in fast and efficient results .
People do not understand why it is so difficult to work together on a European basis in fighting crime , when crime itself has been organised internationally for so long and takes no notice whatsoever of national borders .
What are we waiting for to bring cooperation between the judiciary and police up to Union level , to give the Commission powers , and the European Parliament democratic control ?
People in Europe are prepared to shoulder their responsibility .
Internet users trace child pornography .
In the Netherlands , for example , Internet users have set up a special reporting point for this purpose .
Parliament also calls for the putting in place of measures to prevent the distribution of child pornography via the Internet and the latest media .
But specialists point out to us that this is a particularly questionable affair .
That is why the setting up and supporting of reporting points is such an obvious measure .
This sort of neighbourhood watch on Internet does appear to result in efficient social control . We could begin to create a Europe of the people , using the sincere commitment of the people .
Finally , child pornography and prostitution exist because some individuals have a perverse nature .
But it also exists because Mafia and criminal organisations can make huge profits from it .
Today they are working in child pornography , tomorrow in drug trafficking , then trafficking in women or weapons .
They have only one code , that of money .
To fight them we must penetrate the core of their existence , and the abolition of banking secrecy would be an excellent resource for this .
Mr President , a Europol official recently admitted that the trafficking in and exploitation of human beings is becoming the most profitable form of trade for international organized crime and that this is taking over from or at any rate matching profits from drug-trafficking because it is proving to be more profitable and less dangerous .
That is a consequence of the fact that while attention to and awareness of drugs is now very developed in all countries , the trafficking in and exploitation of human beings remains shrouded in silence , complicity and indifference .
I think that should be our starting-point .
This is a trend that will not be defeated unless there is a very great effort and political focus .
I would remind the House that this Parliament drew up a report at time when there was no inkling of this and we cannot wait for other tragedies before reaching conclusions and putting into effect the main lines of the report , as Mrs Gradin was correct to point out today .
The attention needing to be paid to this phenomenon must consist in specific proposals , funding and controls .
We shall not even scratch the surface unless a integrated scheme of measures is adopted , at local and international level , in the various sectors of education , prevention and prosecution , with the different institutional players .
We should be under no illusion that simple or miracle solutions will be able to be found here .
The structure of the report which the House approved on the trade in human beings should be taken up as a whole , even if it needs to be gauged and studied in terms of the specific issue of children .
My third point is that the network affording protection needs to be more robust than the criminal network .
That seems self-evident but it is not in fact easy to put into effect .
We are therefore waiting for the communication from the Commission , and I would thank Mrs Gradin for playing such an active part in the work on these issues , at a time when we were not aware , when few honourable Members thought that this was a problem on such a vast scale .
But if we are to make this a robust network we need , first of all , to make the third pillar more secure .
We shall not be able to defeat this phenomenon unless we have the courage to take robust action , to introduce reinforced coordination between the police and the organs of the judiciary .
I realize that we cannot leave it all to Europol but , since Europol has responsibility for preventing the theft of cars or trafficking in fissile materials , we cannot accept that it should not tackle the trade in human beings which is a growing problem .
Finally , we have resolutely to tackle the crux of the legislation .
The network will be a robust one if we are able to preserve core values .
What is at the root of this treatment of human beings as if they were a mere commodity ?
It is not enough to continue to proclaim rights if we are unable to enjoy them on a daily basis .
I believe that this is something that we , as a Parliament , should be thinking about .
Mr President we are talking about children being fondled , abused , raped , scarred for life ; children disappearing , murdered , never to be seen again !
It is sad indeed that it took the tragedy of the Dutroux affair for this House to debate this problem today and to understand that a million children are caught up in the sex trade each year worldwide , several thousand of them in our continent .
Apart from the figures , though , we are talking here about people and children .
Children have to be recognized not as consumer goods but as genuine citizens .
This is why I support all those honourable Members who have said that the first step must be to take action at the legal level , making good the shortcomings of our legislative systems and harmonizing them in the area of child protection and paedophilia ; and that the Intergovernmental Conference must create a legal basis to enable us to pursue a Community policy against the trade in human beings .
Until such time as that happens , it is also important for the European Observatory to be equipped with substantial human and financial resources to enable it to play a real part in the application of the legislation .
But quite apart from this , as I have said , this affects all of us .
It is right that this House should adopt a new philosophical approach to these problems .
Our continent must show the necessary determination to raise children 's rights to the status of one of the fundamental values of our European civilizations .
In order to do this , as you have said , we must pursue an appropriate policy on the family .
Today , at a time when some of our colleagues are accepting men and women without papers and becoming involved , perhaps , in a political operation , how can we avoid the thought that , the more the values of our continent are undermined , the less willing we will be to accept those men and women who turn to us in despair for help - material or moral help ?
This Europe , ladies and gentlemen , is not the Europe of dealers , it is the Europe of men and women , the Europe which our fellow citizens are calling on us every day to construct .
The Europe of greater humanity , greater dignity .
As such , it necessarily requires a genuine family policy , one which creates a moral , affective , legal and material environment in which every family and every individual can blossom .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Gradin for her communication , but I really must stress that what we are asking for is not just studies but , obviously , action .
We are considering a motion for a resolution which , for once in a way , seems to me relatively precise .
As Mrs Todini has recalled , I tabled an amendment to the budget for the appropriation of the necessary credits - about ECU 5 million - to set up a European Union action programme to combat sex crime against children .
Furthermore , in both the resolution and the amendment , a number of specific recommendations for action were made .
Consequently , we are expecting there to be a debate on this , and we are expecting the competent bodies of the European Union , starting with the Commission , to tell us clearly whether they agree to release the credits that are essential to action of this kind .
We also expect them to say what type of action they are planning to take .
This seems to me to be essential .
I would like to stress a number of activities which seem to me to be useful .
I believe all my colleagues have done so .
I might perhaps add one point which is not included in either the resolution or the amendment : irrespective of everything that has been said , we should also be on the alert to deal with the traffic in organs , surely an equally appalling and perhaps even more secretive practice , which takes place clandestinely and sometimes reaches right to the borders of the European Union .
This is an instance where it is possible to adopt a number of directives on controls , so as to prevent any danger of unexpected events in this area .
Of course , we are going to vote in favour of the resolution .
I hope that the amendment to the budget - in its current form or slightly amended - will be adopted by the end of the year .
We shall then have the weapons to meet the challenge we confront , and I feel that it would be a great thing for the European Union to show that it is not a heartless machine but that it can , lastingly , make a specific extra contribution to the action of the Member States in a field which directly affects the citizen and which focuses our concerns on the dignity and integrity of mankind .
Mr President , we have heard today of the importance of Europe in the world , and of European Culture .
But we have a sickness at the core .
All over Europe we face a violent and obscene abuse of children .
How have our values become so degraded that even children can be sold for sex ?
Is it the limitless pursuit of selfishness and profit that has eroded our values ?
Is there a free market even in the abuse of children ?
We seem paralysed in the face of this obscenity .
Some of our political , religious , juridical and police institutions have been implicated in corrupt collusion with this evil .
Others have not acted appropriately .
How can we create confidence in our legal and police institutions to identify and prevent the flow of paedophilia ?
I was terribly shocked in my own country when I began to read in a serious Sunday newspaper recently an alleged transcript of a criminal and pornographic nature .
I found that I could not continue to read .
I am at a loss to understand how such transcripts of a criminal nature can be published .
I have asked our Minister for Justice for an explanation , as I understand the person in question has walked free .
I would now ask the Council to consider such cases in its delegations of justice ministers in Dublin at the end of this month .
I would like a further response from Council today .
I appreciate the response already given by the Council and Commission , but we need to have this criminal traffic in children and in the portrayal of children in a violent , abusive and obscene manner stopped .
Can we be assured that the legal sanctions against these crimes will operate openly and effectively ?
It is not only on the Internet that these things circulate .
We in the European Parliament are very much for freedom of speech and freedom of information but we are even more concerned to protect children against criminal and violent abuse .
We must find ways in each case , as it arises , to accommodate both these principles .
Finally , the Council representative has alluded to the fact that the right of citizenship is also applicable to children and minors , and is therefore a basis for common action .
Can Council confirm that this is so and , if not , what proposals does it have to include children in Maastricht Two as a matter of urgency , so that there is a basis for common action ?
Mr President , I regret to have to say that today , in my opinion , on some benches we are witnessing political hypocrisy .
Firstly , the problem with the approach to the paedophile network of Dutroux was of an internal Belgian nature .
The judicial system in Belgium is racked by a lack of resources , by political appointments and political interference in the magistrature , and above all by an unimaginably lax policy .
I can well understand that the politicians of the Belgian governing parties would like to shift the debate onto European cooperation , but that is not the question which should be raised , and it would result merely in concealing their own guilt and incompetence in this matter .
Secondly , I read in the resolutions signed by my Flemish and Walloon colleagues that there must be a crackdown on trafficking in children , and I even read that the socialists talk of , and I quote : " the severest possible penalties ' .
These are words from parties who , for example , still consider Professor Etienne Vermeersch as a moral beacon , although this man considers the public condemnation of paedophilia as , and I quote , " excessively exaggerated ' and in no way excludes the possibility that , and I quote again , " certain forms of paedophilia , both moral and criminal , must be cleared ' .
These are also words of parties who for decades have undermined criminal policy in my country , and today still urge against custodial sentences .
These same politicians have defended the politically appointed judge of the Court of Justice , Melchior Wathelet , even though in 1992 this man ordered the release of Dutroux before he had served even half of a sentence for what were called " monstrous ' indecency offences with minors , ignoring the appeals of the Procureur Général not to release Dutroux .
If this Parliament were serious , it would at least demand the resignation of Melchior Wathelet from the Court of Justice , who is politically responsible for the terrible fate of innocent children .
But as this is not the case , I would be so bold as to doubt the willingness for a severe approach . That is not possible if we as politicians do not set an example .
If we do not do this , we unfortunately reduce ourselves to an empty rhetoric producer .
Mr President , current events have put the fate and exploitation of children in the limelight and people become very worked up about it , until the next shocking pictures flood into our information society .
Resolutions are drawn up and statements disseminated , but are we really helping the victims ?
As early as 1991 , in the report on the situation of children in the European Union , I called for a child action programme and for concrete measures against sex tourism and child abuse .
Meanwhile five committees are working on the subject .
But it took the terrible events in Belgium to rouse the public and focus the necessary attention on this subject .
The non-governmental organizations and government representatives at the conferences in Stockholm and Vienna have now drawn up new action plans and we must call for further work to be done at Union level and for the necessary budget appropriations to be made available .
That is the conclusion drawn by the Committee on Women 's Rights yesterday from its activities .
Of course child abuse somehow implies that normal use of children and also women exists too .
Those who have long been dealing with the subject in the Committee on Women 's Rights and the non-governmental organizations have known the gruesome pictures for a long time .
I do not believe anyone here can imagine what the victims really had to suffer .
Scenes are photographed with home video cameras , they are fed into the Internet and paedophile networks earn millions from these dreadful things .
The more brutal the scene , the more money can be made out of it .
We have to move ahead rapidly with the initiatives Mrs Gradin has now taken and which the Irish presidency of the Council has followed up .
We must ensure that car theft in the Union is not considered more important than children and to this end I call for rapid , for mega-rapid action , otherwise we are mega-out .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the tragic events in the Dutroux case , which has stunned my country , have just slapped us in the face with a reality which is hard to bear because , in point of fact , we are not just dealing with isolated acts of paedophilia .
What the Dutroux case shows is that there is a form of organized crime targeting children and young people : Dutroux is not alone , and there are many like him , unknown to us as yet , who are also not acting alone .
This was an organized gang which was hunting down girls , little girls , drugging them , abusing them , filming them and then getting rid of them .
This same organized gang then distributed revolting audiovisual products through secret channels which we have not yet unravelled and about which we have yet to learn the complete truth .
And there are other organized gangs , too , in Europe and in South-East Asia , supplying the sex tourists from our own countries with the children they abuse and the facilities to satisfy their desires .
That is why this sickness has to be fought today with the same means that we use to combat organized crime .
I should like to emphasize six points which seem to me essential .
There is an urgent need to create a specialized , centralized register of abducted or lost children .
Such a register has existed in the United States since 1984 , up to which time - as still happens here - there was not even any systematic identification of abducted children , and no inquiry was begun until 24 hours had elapsed , long enough for all traces to have vanished .
There is an urgent need to give Europol , the convention on which must be ratified by all our countries , the necessary mandate and means to identify the channels used for the trade in human beings and to dismantle them .
There is an urgent need to legislate , in all the Member States , to combat sex tourism and the trade in videos intended for paedophiles , making it a crime merely to possess such videos .
There is an urgent need , too , to legislate at international and national level to ensure that the modern communication networks are not used to support rings of perverts or organized criminals .
Because they have been useful in our own country , as experience has shown , there is also a need to assist the NGOs specializing in the tracing of vanished children or combatting the sexual exploitation of children .
Finally , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a need to consider the penalties .
The bestiality of the activities of the Dutroux gang and the frequency of reoffending among paedophiles must make us think about our scale of values and about increasing the penalties .
We need more guarantees for our children , and less clemency for sex criminals and child murderers .
Mr President , I want to welcome the cross-party support for this debate , initiated by our group and spearheaded by Mrs Todini , on the complex and disturbing issue of violence against children .
The question we have to ask is : what can Europe do to provide an effective response to the need to protect our children from violence , abductions , paedophile rings , Internet abuse and other exploitation ?
These issues cannot be addressed in a piecemeal manner .
Our European institutions must be courageous and provide leadership on the rights and needs of our children and young people .
I call upon the Council today to amend the Treaty to include a specific , legally sound reference to children and to citizens ' rights for them .
Sympathetic utterances are not enough .
We need a clear commitment today from your presidency that before the end of December you will have put the necessary proposal on the inclusion of a special chapter on the rights of children and adolescents in the Treaty to the Intergovernmental Conference .
Inclusion in the Treaty needs to be followed up with responsibility for the wide range of children 's issues being coordinated by a single Commissioner and unit within the Commission .
I would ask the Commission to provide an outline of proposals it intends to submit on halting Internet abuse .
Some months ago I asked the Commission to undertake a pilot initiative on this .
What role does it see for Europol ?
Indeed , why has Ireland not ratified the Europol Convention and why are we not fully participating in it ?
How can the Member States , including Ireland , contribute more to the fight against all forms of violence against children ?
In conclusion , I appeal to the Minister , in his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council to take his courage in his hands and to actively seek the support of all the other Member States in including children specifically , clearly and as a top priority in the Treaty .
Mr President , it is time that this House took a serious and resolute parliamentary initiative to tackle at an early stage the problem of paedophilia and the exploitation of minors .
We very much appreciated the fact that the Commission is preparing further communications and further studies on the trade in women and children for sexual purposes , but only on condition that they are an immediate preliminary to detailed and specific measures to combat this - if not , they will remain solely and exclusively words heaped on other words .
We already have , in my view , a quantity of data , analyses and studies sufficient enough to provide an in-depth understanding of this phenomenon .
We know that at least 15 million children throughout the world are involved in prostitution ; we know that many travel agencies do more than good business , in complete freedom and openly , with sex tourism ; we are aware of the incredible number of minors who have disappeared or been kidnapped and the veritable trade in newborn babies ; we are also aware , despite all of that , of the very limited structures for prevention , aid and psychological help for minors .
We are also aware , above all , of the dreadful crimes - most recently those that occurred in Belgium - which are more telling than many statistics and to which our response can no longer take the form merely of written reports .
For that very reason , we need , in addition to a public campaign of condemnation and increased awareness , to call for a Community fund specifically for the protection of children , in particular minors who have been the victims of violence .
Let me say in conclusion that this will certainly not be an unproductive investment : let us therefore take account of it when debating the budget !
Mr President , child abuse and violence against minors is , unfortunately , not a new phenomenon .
Unfortunately children are abused , abducted or subjected to other violent crimes every day in our Member States too .
The fact that we are holding a debate on this today follows on from the events of last week but also from the Stockholm conference .
This has given the conference more weight .
All the participants agreed that Stockholm would not have gained so much publicity if the terrible events in Belgium had not come to light shortly beforehand .
Many people have realised that sex tourism and sexual abuse of children is not just something that happens in holiday destinations several hours away by plane but that it has come very close and that it also concerns every one of us here to some extent , for here too children are abused every day .
One positive aspect is that the Stockholm conference and its action programme will not be forgotten as quickly as conferences. often are .
Several Members of this Parliament will also continue working assiduously ensure that the action plan is implemented .
For this we not only need to make money available but also to continue working on measures to prevent , combat , rehabilitate and inform .
I welcome the fact that both the Commission and the Council intend to give real consideration to this question on 26 and 27 September at the informal meeting of ministers of justice and of the interior .
But above all , we must insist that the 1989 UN Convention on the rights of children is ratified , implemented and respected immediately , in my country Germany too , for about 30 % of our population is under-age .
That is why it is hard to understand why this population group does not have its place in the Treaty as a separate group .
I hope this will be borne in mind at the conference on the revision of the Treaty .
Thank you , Mr President , for allowing us to denounce today , from this Parliament , what the editorials in the major European publications are currently asking : what is going on in the heart of a society that it can produce so many aberrations and crimes against children and adolescents ?
The Stockholm Congress also denounced the spectacular growth of a new tourist diversion which highlights the moral poverty of a generation which has made pleasure , obtained at any price , the supreme aim in life .
Millions of boys and girls are forced into prostitution to satisfy the whims of American , Japanese , European , Australian and many other citizens .
Just a few hours ago this Assembly was the scene of a debate on the role of public and private television , both certainly larded with TV trash which leaves young people without moral reference points .
The Internet offers paradise lost and pornography at knock-down prices through the new technologies .
The panorama is desolate .
We cannot contribute to the consolidation of a scandalously superficial and grossly consumerist society , where everything is sacrificed to the laws of a crude and highly profitable market , but which makes victims of children and women .
The European institutions must review their effectiveness and see what can be done to protect the dignity and well-being of children .
We ask for coordination between the states on criminal legislation against the production and marketing of pornographic material in which minors take part .
Austria - as you said , Madam Commissioner - was the first country to react , tripling the sentences for these crimes , including a two-year prison sentence for clients of child prostitution , and introducing the absolute right of compensation for the victims into the criminal law .
So , Mr President , I support Mrs Banotti 's call to create a central European register of children who have been kidnapped or disappeared .
I also ask for ratification of the Europol Convention which will give it powers over trafficking , sexual exploitation , abuse and trade in abandoned children .
And finally , Mrs Gradin , I would like to ask you , together with the President-in-Office of the Council and this Assembly , to do something very specific : support the creation of a European network of non-governmental organizations fighting crime and the sexual exploitation of minors and giving strong support to the families of the victims by filling the gaps which unfortunately the state organizations are often unable to cover .
Mr President , I believe that everything has already been said about this matter but I should just like to recall that when we had a debate about the white slave trade it was quite clearly demonstrated that such traffic involved young adolescents who were abducted and taken off to prostitution centres from European Union Member States and that this traffic did not only hail from third countries .
The recent dramatic events in Belgium show , in my opinion , two things : first of all , the deterioration of moral values in this Christian , humanist and supposedly civilized Europe , a deterioration which could lead to Europe 's destruction from within .
Secondly , it shows that we are up against new forms of organized crime apart from those we already knew of .
No-one and no country can now believe that it is immune from the effects of all of this .
We all agree about the fact that we must find solutions and the fact that we must act rapidly ; there are two measures which seem to me to be vital here : first of all , as other Members have already said , harmonize criminal legislation .
European criminal codes are excessively concerned by conventional crimes and are very inflexible in dealing with new crimes ; this prevents proper justice from being meted out .
On the other hand , finally , Mr President , I think that this is one of the areas where Europol could play a very important , not to say fundamental , role - provided there is the political will to give Europol such responsibilities .
Mr President , the Dutroux case has not only brought to light the existence of an international paedophile ring and revealed complicity between certain political and legal circles in Belgium and the criminals .
The deaths of Julie , Melissa , Ann and Efje have also shown the inertia of the authorities in dealing with crime .
There is nothing surprising about this .
What more can you expect from a country which sacrifices its children to the ideology of so-called human rights , an ideology which has led Belgium to do away with the death penalty for child murderers ?
If the multiple offender Dutroux had received his just punishment , Julie , Melissa , Anne and Efje would still be alive .
They paid with their lives for the insane irresponsibility of those who argue in favour of a murderer 's right to life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the increase in incidents of abuse and violence against minors and adolescents that has come to light of late , the world trade in minors and the increase in paedophilia in all countries are causes of great concern .
We need to take concrete measures , setting under way a campaign to increase public awareness about these issues with the help of the mass media , so that the European Institutions are able to set in place a system of prevention , involving the specialist public and private services in each Member State .
We need to set up specialist centres responsible for protecting children and adolescents at risk , so as to prevent and identify all forms of sexual abuse , and we need also to provide them with all the necessary medical , psychological and legal assistance .
We need to increase cooperation and the exchange of information between the Member States with the help of Europol whose objectives of fighting international crime include the trade in human beings .
The Council of Ministers should , finally , work towards the adoption of an agenda which has the effect of an invitation to the national parliaments to adopt recommendation R91 / 11 , adopted by the Council of Ministers on 9 September 1991 , calling upon parliaments to debate as soon as possible measures on sexual abuse , abduction for libidinous purposes , rape , pornography , prostitution and the traffic in children and adolescents in terms of criminal law and harmonizing national legislation in such a way that the problem is finally resolved .
Mr President , Mrs Seillier said that we must fight crime against children on three levels : the international , the national and the local .
She is correct and I certainly noted her comments during this debate .
In my speech earlier , I spoke mainly of the international response but we must all , as individual Member States , also develop our own initiatives .
This is reinforced by the report of the Stockholm Conference which said that the primary task of combatting the commercial sexual exploitation of children rests with the state and families .
The civil society also has an essential role to play in protecting children from commercial sexual exploitation .
It is imperative to build a strong partnership between governments , international organizations and all sectors of society to counter such exploitation .
That is what the Stockholm Conference said .
I also feel strongly , as I said at the beginning , that the European Union must also act and clearly give leadership at the outset in tackling this problem .
One such initiative would be to suppress the transfer of information regarding such activities on the Internet .
I raised this possibility some months ago when I spoke at the Council of Europe Regional Conference in preparation for the Stockholm Conference and was met with some derision by one particular Sunday columnist in a newspaper in my own country .
I am glad to see that authorities in some countries are working closely with network suppliers , who have a major responsibility in this area , with a view to applying a self-regulating code initially .
It may well be necessary to proceed to legislation at a later stage .
I understand that this is something that is under consideration and may , in fact , be nearing the stage of cooperation in my own country .
This has been done in some countries already and it is important that we all look at the possibility of doing it .
Similarly , we could all legislate in our own Member States to outlaw sex tourism , as has been said during the debate .
I have already outlined the presidency proposals for EU action .
I listened intently to Commissioner Gradin 's speech and I look forward to hearing the Commission 's proposal regarding the Internet controls and sex tourism .
I commend her for her actions in pursuing this matter over a period of time .
One Member made reference to an article in a Sunday newspaper in Ireland , which I also read and found equally horrific .
The article stated that the person to whom the Member referred was not prosecuted and , I understand , is , in fact , dead .
But I am sure that the Member will get a response from the Minister for Justice , to whom she has written .
Will legal sanctions be applied openly ?
Well I certainly expect and hope they would be .
Laws should be applied openly .
Both Ms Ahern and Mr Andrews asked about citizenship .
If necessary we will consider new Treaty bases but the Intergovernmental Conference will need to take advice on this matter .
I cannot give an assurance across the floor of the House .
I will ask the legal service of the Council to look at this matter and to advise us and , if it is practicable , it is certainly something we can consider putting forward .
In relation to the ratification of the Europol Convention , it has only been possible to do this recently because the Convention was delayed by one of the Member States .
A number of Members have implied - perhaps unintentionally - that this matter has only been raised as a result of the Belgian case .
That is not so .
The Belgian case has certainly made it more urgent , more acute and has brought it home more to the minds of citizens .
But a number of people have raised this matter .
Mrs Banotti has been raising this and related issues for some time and I replied to a question from her in the debate here in the House in July .
Similarly , as I mentioned earlier , I spoke on this subject at a Council of Europe meeting some months ago , following a presentation that I made to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe of a series of articles on paedophilia and sex tourism in The Irish Times .
Following the presentation of those articles to him he asked me to be the keynote speaker at that conference .
That took place long before the Belgian case .
I might also mention the Stockholm Conference was planned long before that case .
But the Belgian case has brought home to all of us just how serious this problem is .
I repeat what I said earlier .
This is not a Belgian problem , it is a problem for all Member States and for countries which are not members of the European Union .
We must face up to that responsibility .
There is rarely an occasion when the three institutions - the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council of Ministers - agree on the seriousness of a problem .
We do now .
But we must translate that into action and I hope the action of the President-in-Office of the Justice and Home Affairs Council and Commissioner Gradin will meet the need .
They certainly have shown that they are going in the right direction .
Mrs Bennasar Tous asked a question regarding European NGO networks .
I am not in a position to reply to that here but if she would write to me about this in detail I will let her have a specific reply .
I am delighted to be in a position to reply to this debate .
Sadly we have to have this debate but it is timely that the European Parliament has raised this important issue which is of concern to every citizen of the Union .
Mr President , I myself have a question which I think I should answer , and it concerns how the Commission generally supports voluntary organisations and how we work together with networks .
I can report that before the conference in Stockholm the Commission provided money to enable voluntary organisations to play an active role and prepare for the conference .
However , we have also supported projects where , for example , women 's organisations have worked against child prostitution or to free children from the ' prisons ' in which they have ended up .
As a result of the conferences held and the activities we have been involved in regarding the enforced prostitution of women a network has been formed through which women can cooperate .
The network consists in part of women 's organisations and in part of women from countries which send women to work in various ' establishments ' , that is to say bars and the like , in our countries .
This is a way of establishing a successful network .
I believe that it is extremely important that we stand by voluntary organisations because for many people with problems it is easier to turn to a women 's organisation than to a police station .
I have received seven motions for resolutions to wind up this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Guarantees covered by the general budget
The next item is the report ( A4-0254 / 96 ) by Mr Tomlinson , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the report from the Commission on guarantees covered by the general budget - situation at 30 June 1995 ( COM ( 95 ) 0625 - C4-0064 / 96 ) .
Mr President , this is one of the times when you feel glad you won a seat in the European Parliament so that you can engage in political dialogue with your colleagues .
After 9 o 'clock perhaps we should meet in a telephone box !
It would be more comfortable .
However , this is an extremely important report .
It is a report on a Commission report in relation to loans and the guarantees on those loans .
Loans granted by the Community , whether by the Commission through its borrowings and lendings or by the European Investment Bank need a guarantee .
It has always been to Parliament that institutions have had to look .
Guarantees used to be totally and exclusively by means of a token entry against the budget .
It was pressure from this Parliament that led to the change and led to the introduction of a Guarantee Fund .
It was part of our arguments to protect the Community budget , particularly its non-obligatory expenditure from the risk of being called to pay default on loans .
We won that fund but the Guarantee Fund mechanism , as is shown by the Commission report , is not entirely adequate .
The Committee on Budgets report therefore concerns the report from the Commission on the guarantees covered by the general budget as at 30 June 1995 and it is the ninth report of its kind .
There is a very complicated explanatory memorandum but the explanatory memorandum is just that : it explains all the circumstances .
It explains not only the structure of the Commission report but also the various operations entered into the budget .
It describes the borrowing and lending operations and it describes the European Investment Bank operations .
Anybody who reads about the extent to which we are engaged in covering that lending by guarantees will see something of the economic impact of the European Union in developments not only inside but particularly outside the Community : the developments which are taking place in the Mediterranean , Latin America and Asia ; the developments that are taking place in those countries covered by the PHARE arrangements ; the lending and borrowing that is particularly related to the CIS countries ; our involvement in countries as diverse and as far apart politically as Israel on the one hand and Algeria on the other .
So there is a very detailed explanation of the type of loans we are guaranteeing , the extent of those guarantees and the amount of economic activity in which we are therefore involved .
The motion for a resolution notes that at the European Summit in Cannes there was a conclusion that there needed to be an extension of the lending and borrowing activities of the Community to third countries .
There was a very clear statement from us that we support this proposal in principle .
We , however , have to go on from there and make some critical comments .
If it is true that the Heads of State and Government both value the programme and want it extended , they have to face up to the financial and economic consequences of that political commitment .
We cannot have a European Union in which heads of government sit down in Cannes or anywhere else , make the promise and then fail to produce the mechanisms to fulfil that promise .
At the present time there is a broad expression of support for more borrowing and lending activities but an unwillingness to change the mechanism for providing the resources that are necessary to the Guarantee Fund .
Therefore , if the Commission reads the resolution when it has to react to it in detail , it will see that there are a number of specific criticisms .
There is the specific criticism about the Guarantee Fund mechanism .
There is the declaration that the mechanism needs to be changed but cannot be changed unilaterally by the Commission .
It has to involve the budget authority in those discussions .
Failure to do so is , in fact , going to result in a strangulation of our capacity to guarantee the very programmes that heads of state and government were committing themselves to at the Cannes summit .
There are a number of specific statements - not criticisms because we regard ourselves as working in partnership with the Commission - of either regret or concern and they are covered in the early part of the resolution .
As I say in paragraph 3 we think the report is only a descriptive assessment without a proper analytical approach .
We hope the Commission will look at our comments very seriously , take them on board and will produce a better report next time and , in doing that , will recognize what we say in the report that it must look at the whole question of reporting to Parliament , particularly where our guarantees are at risk .
We must find a method of overcoming some of the problems of confidentiality but as it is Parliament which is the provider of the mechanism and Parliament that insisted on the Guarantee Fund mechanism , there has to be both the willingness to get better systems to replenish the fund on the one hand and advise Parliament on the other about the times when the funds that are in the Guarantee Fund are placed at risk by possible defalcation .
I commend the report .
It is in reaction to the Commission .
We hope that given the constructively critical way in which we have approached the Commission report this time , it will react to it equally constructively and give us a basis on which we can work collaboratively in the future .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the fine report he has produced .
The Commission report on the budget guarantee is also a very good report , which looks in detail at the situation of the countries for which loans are provided .
Therefore , we can have nothing but praise for the report in itself .
The report raises questions about the reform of the Guarantee Fund , which brings about a number of large risks .
Economically weak countries or countries that are politically unstable have particular difficulties in repaying their loans .
Over a period this results in a great strain on the budget of the Union .
So , the PPE Group believes it is necessary to create new background conditions for the Guarantee Fund .
These conditions would have to cover a number of aspects .
Firstly , with the granting of financial assistance , cooperation with the Commission and informing of Parliament will have to be greatly improved .
Secondly , with the allocation of financial help to third countries the Article 235 is still applied , wrongly in my opinion .
This should be replaced because the Budget Committee should have a right of codecision on such an important question , as is not actually the case now .
Finally , the role of the Budget Committee must once again be revised .
The European Parliament must not be kept outside the decision-making process .
Parliament does not have enough of a say in the guarantee risk for the budget . This is unacceptable as well as presenting a very risky situation from a financial perspective .
The PPE Group would therefore ask the Commission to create new conditions for the Guarantee Fund .
It would be a good idea to present a report to this Parliament before 1997 , as we are aware that in 1997 all loans to third countries are to be examined .
This is a very good time to remove any faults in the present system , to provide us with a really good system , though we must admit that , thanks to the efforts of people like Mr Tomlinson in this Parliament , it has already been somewhat improved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council is calling for an increase in lending and borrowing activities .
That is well and good .
But what it is not doing is to pay sufficient attention to guarantees .
In view of the expected defaults of several million ecu over the next few years , the Council 's proposal to reduce the amounts paid into the Guarantee Fund is irresponsible in budgetary terms .
The only real answer would be to revise the Financial Perspectives .
But since this has obviously been given the red light , the Council will have to have to take responsibility for any increase in the guarantee risk borne by the EU budget over the next few years , which would create incalculable risks for the financing of the EU 's internal and external policy .
For this reason alone , we urgently need more transparency in relation to the granting of loans and to payment defaults .
There must be no right of confidentiality about what the tax-payer has to pay for .
Over and above this , we must support the request to the Commission to evaluate the Guarantee Fund more flexibly , taking more account of the concrete risks involved in the loans granted .
I myself have spent two days trying to understand the complex mechanisms that John Tomlinson lists in his report and to work out what it is all about .
I believe that the Tomlinson report makes it clear that we are facing not just a technical problem but a real threat to the EU budget unless clear changes are now made .
In this spirit , I would ask the Commission and the Council to submit proposals to this House .
We have done the necessary with Mr Tomlinson 's report , which we support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first let me thank the rapporteur , Mr Tomlinson , for the excellent work he has presented to us here and for the views he expressed and which , I must say , the European Commission largely accepts .
The purpose of the six-monthly report on guarantees is to inform the budget authority about developments in the granting of loans and loan guarantees that affect the Union 's budget .
This report presents the annual development of risk up to the year 2002 on the basis of the activities decided upon or proposed by the Commission .
As for the consonance Mr Tomlinson referred to between the guarantee mechanism and the granting of loans outside the Union , let me remind you that the mechanism of the Guarantee Fund and the reserve for guarantees was created , as you yourself said , Mr Tomlinson , in line with a proposal from the European Parliament 's , to bring discipline to the policy of granting loans outside the Union .
Consequently , it is pleasing and I think we all could and should welcome the fact that this discipline is prevailing in the operation of the mechanism in question .
Besides , experience has shown that until now the mechanism has helped to combine financial discipline with the maintenance of an appropriate level of lending , amounting to approximately 2.3 billion ECU per year .
However , the Commission has ascertained that the possibilities of the mechanism would not allow the implementation of a more ambitious lending policy , as recommended by the Cannes and Madrid Councils , nor would it easily permit a resumption of macro-economic contribution .
For that reason , in July 1995 the Commission informed the budget authority in a special statement , that the six-monthly report on guarantees is not the appropriate means to assess the operation of the system and to submit new proposals .
Besides , together with the European Investment Bank , the Commission examined the possibility of amending the present details relating to the grant of guarantees by the Union 's budget for EIB loans outside the Union .
In September 1995 we submitted a report to the Council , a copy of which was sent to the chairman and rapporteur of the Committee on Budgets , in which we propose reducing the total guarantee proportion to 75 % for EIB loans outside the Union .
Recently , indeed , in agreement with the EIB , the Commission submitted a new report with new amendments .
That report concludes that a reduction of the total guarantee proportion to 50 % is compatible with maintenance of the highest level of solvency available so far for the EIB .
Besides , the Commission and the EIB consider that risk could be shared between the Union and the Bank in one category of programmes .
In such a case , that sharing would result in exemption of the Community budget from what we call ' commercial risk ' .
The Commission 's proposal will have the indirect result of reconciling the financial discipline imposed by the guarantee mechanism with an appreciable increase in the total amount of loans , in the sense implied by the conclusions of the Cannes and Madrid European Councils .
The Commission will take serious note of the positions expressed by the European Parliament , and what I can promise is that the Commission will so far as possible keep the chairman and rapporteur of the Committee on Budgets informed about related developments , within the framework of flexibility and trust that inspires relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission .
Mr President , I thank Commissioner Papoutsis for his response .
Just as a matter of historical accuracy for the records in our own House : I appreciate that Commissioners have to take advice on these matters but when he says that this was ' in line with a proposal from the European Parliament ' then the author of the text ought to be told that is not strictly accurate .
The proposal for a guarantee fund was an insistence of the European Parliament .
That was followed .
Unfortunately , as regards the rate at which we said the fund has to be replenished , the advice was not followed and that is why we have the financial difficulties that my report refers to .
But I am very grateful to the Commissioner for the rest of his reply .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Approximation of taxes and excise duties
The next item is the report ( A4-0253 / 96 ) by Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission report to the Council and European Parliament on the rates of duty laid down in Council Directive 92 / 79 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on cigarettes , Council Directive 92 / 80 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes , Council Directive 92 / 84 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of the rates of excise duty on alcohol and alcoholic beverages and Council Directive 92 / 82 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of the rates of excise duties on mineral oils ( COM ( 95 ) 0285 - C4-0430 / 95 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report on the approximation of excise duties in the European Union is in three parts .
I am introducing the report as a whole , as chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Mrs Karla Peijs drafted the section on taxes on cigarettes and manufactured tobacco , Mr Miller the section on excise duty on alcohol and Mr Cox the section on excise duties on mineral oils .

There is one crucial criterion for approximating the duties on these products in the European Union : serious distortions or obstacles to intra-Community trade .
Insufficient harmonization means distortion of competition and the sealing off of markets .
The former leads to protectionism and hinders the free movement of goods .
The latter leads to price discrimination between markets and negates the principle of one market for one product .
But harmonization , let me emphasize , is not a value in itself .
It is not a matter of artificially creating the same conditions throughout Europe .
Often enough that is not necessary and it can even be harmful .
Rather , the European market is based on the competition between systems .
So our aim must not be absolute harmonization but an approximation of excise duty rates .
However , this must be done at a level sufficient to remove the existing distortions .
We are striving to ensure that the differences between excise duty rates in the various Member States at least do not widen .
But there is also a cultural dimension to the harmonization of excise duties .
I think it is quite crucial that we give adequate consideration to the cultural variety in the European Union .
This is particularly important in regard to excise duties on alcohol .
In some Member States , for example , the wine consumption is particularly high .
Others , however , consume more beer , as in Bavaria , or whisky , as in Scotland .
As national cultural components , tastes , customs , life style and social attitudes should not and must not be influenced by tax harmonization .
To show what that means , let me give an example , which may also serve as a criticism of some existing views : it is widely held that alcoholic beverages are in direct competition with one another .
I have always doubted that and once discussed it with a Scottish colleague .
I said to him that surely with the best will in the world he could not say there was any direct competition between whisky and wine because when we have lunch or supper together we drink wine and would surely not drink whisky with a meal !
To which he replied : ' In Scotland we do that every day . ' That shows how different people 's habits are .
These different habits are also reflected in different rates of duty and to now try to bring all this into line in the European Community would certainly be a serious mistake .
A number of other aspects have a part to play in this report . For instance the products concerned here also have harmful effects .
They include nicotine addiction , environmental pollution from mineral oils and alcoholism .
The excise duty rates have an effect on this .
Another important point is the value of excise duties as a source of national revenue .
I do not have time to go into this any further .
But I am sure my co-rapporteurs will be saying the necessary on the subject .
In my view harmonization of excise duties can only succeed if the structure of the rates of duty is also harmonized .
This must be accompanied by additional measures to improve the cooperation between the authorities of the European Union Member States .
Mr President , I am acutely aware that over the years the issue of excise duty has divided this Parliament , not on political lines , but on geographical lines .
The debate has ranged between the wine-producing regions and the non-wine-producing regions .
When I undertook to do this report I tried to avoid the old arguments and to approach the subject from a different perspective .
I believe that excise duty should not be seen purely as a revenue-raising exercise , but also as an employment-creation instrument .
However , above all this , the overriding priority should be to bring about the implementation of an equitable tax system where there is no distortion of competition between alcoholic beverages .
The Single European Act set out the principle of harmonization of indirect taxation within the European Union .
We have consistently failed to achieve that goal , and that has led to serious distortion in cross-border trade and a rise in smuggling and fraud .
This problem has to be examined and the appropriate steps taken to rectify it .
We also have a new threat on the horizon .
There is a disease now in Britain worse than BSE - it is called alcoholic lemonade .
It is spreading to the continental mainland .
These drinks are targeted solely at young people .
So you must make sure that these types of cocktail are subject to the highest possible rate of excise duty .
In this report there are also provisions for small brewers and small distillers to have a reduced excise duty rate .
This , hopefully , will aid employment , especially in the rural areas where many of these small distillers and small brewers are located and where , knowing many of the rural areas , unemployment is higher .
So hopefully this will be taken on board by the Commission .
I would also like to draw the Commission 's attention to compromise Amendment No 23 , which highlights the difference between the rates of excise duty on wine , beer and spirits and says it should not be increased .
If we accept that there is competition between alcoholic beverages - and I know that the Commission does accept this principle , because it formed the basis of its argument to the World Trade Organization when it took on the case of the Japanese liquor tax - we must not allow one country unilaterally to increase excise duty on one beverage , thereby benefiting the other beverages .
This linkage amendment is therefore important to all sectors of the drinks industry .
I now touch on the thorny question of the zero rate for wine .
The reason for our opposition to this has been , right from the very start , that there should be no specific figures in the report .
A zero rate is a specific figure .
The time for specific rates , for specific figures , will be when the Commission produces its follow-up report to this one .
Until then we should stick to the guiding principles which we adopted at the very start in the committee and there should be no specific figures .
Finally , we cannot discuss this issue of excise duty without bringing in the question of health .
It would be irresponsible not to take account of alcoholic consumption within the Member States and of the social , economic and health costs .
It is therefore highlighted in this report , and I hope it is taken seriously on board .
As has been touched on already , in my home country of Scotland to toast one with a glass of whisky we say ' Slàinte mhaith ' .
Can I say ' Slàinte mhaith ' to yourself , and good health !
Mr President , Parliament has done its best with a report on excise duties from the Commission in which , remarkably , no concrete proposal is to be found .
This is strange for a Commission that claims to be so fond of its right of initiative .
Parliament has had to work hard to have a reasonably consistent report presented to this House .
We would note that the same discrepancies that manifest themselves on this point in Council and Commission are dividing Parliament .
I will briefly present these discrepancies in the form of questions .
Firstly , are there distortions in the system which compel change ?
This question concerns the working of the internal market , the requirement of harmonisation , the payment of taxes , the so-called cascade effect , and so on .
If the Commission & # x02BC ; s answer to this question is " yes ' , it must come up with a clear proposal .
Secondly , are we talking about an automatic trigger effect ?
This is the effect which can occur if one of the constituent price elements is changed . If the total taxation sum then comes under 57 % of the selling price of the most popular price class , the tax on all other price classes must be correspondingly increased .
This can artificially distort competitive relationships .
Emotions run high with the third question .
This question concerns the issue of hand rolled tobacco .
Is a self-made cigarette more unhealthy than an ordinary cigarette ?
" Yes ' , said Mr Metten , " no ' , said the rapporteur . That will not get us anywhere .
We have therefore asked the Commission to provide a definite answer , based on an investigation which is apparently under way , and take measures if necessary .
A fourth question relates to the problem of fraud .
The Commission report underestimates the problem in an almost incredible way .
The least that may be expected from the Commission is an acknowledgement of the problem and attempts to estimate the scale in a realistic manner : according to the industry it is at least 5 % of all sales involved , at least 32 billion cigarettes , so 1.3 billion packets of 25 cigarettes .
Excise duty fraud has in this way fatally affected almost entire lines of business with the 100 % guarantee position .
The Commission is working on a new regulation , and maybe the Commissioner can say something about it .
For that matter , I wish the Commission just as pleasant a time as Parliament has had with this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in considering all the products affected by excise duty , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development wanted to favour European agricultural producers , and I was happy to note that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has adopted many of our conclusions .
Whether we are talking about tobacco , alcoholic beverages or mineral oils , I would remind you that excise duty is governed by three principles : structure , rates and circulation .
As regards wine and alcoholic beverages , the conclusions of the Committee on Agriculture are simple : no change should be made , either to the ' Structure ' directive or to the ' Rates ' directive .
Wine must remain at a minimum rate of excise duty , a zero rate , and must be taxed by volume .
Some of my colleagues , I know , would have preferred taxation based on alcoholic strength and a positive excise duty on wine .
Personally , I opposed this .
After all , to treat wine as any other industrial beverage is to disregard the specific features of wine production .
Wine is an agricultural product , made once a year .
The only notable change introduced by the Commission concerns the ' Circulation ' directive .
The present administrative system is far too cumbersome and too costly for the wine growers , the regional cooperatives and the local dealers .
This is where the real obstacle to the completion of the single market lies .
It is necessary that the Commission should , at an early date , propose an amendment to this ' Circulation ' directive , since it is unacceptable that it should be obligatory to go through an approved operator in order to be able to collect a tax of zero ecus .
Regarding tobacco , the Committee on Agriculture felt that something of a fiscal pause was desirable , but above all it opposes any change in the method of calculating excise duties .
On reading certain amendments , it is notable that some are designed to favour industrial importers of light tobacco .
The disappearance of European tobacco production would result in very serious desertification of less favoured rural areas .
With regard to mineral oils , our committee wanted the use of biofuels to be encouraged , for two reasons : use of agricultural land and the environment , and air quality .
At the present time , many beef cattle farmers are thinking of ploughing up pastureland to produce cereals or other crops .
The area under cereal , oil and protein plants in the European Union and some Member States , including France , is in danger of being extensively exceeded .
The biofuel solution , then , is one possible way of achieving control of European production of arable crops .
Mr President , I am the co-rapporteur for the excise report on mineral oils .
On this area I think it is worth pointing out that the excise tax on mineral oils is tried and tested in all of our fiscal regimes .
It probably has a better chance of success in addressing wider policy issues , like transport environment or economic policy questions , than for example the CO2 tax , which has not really managed to take off and generate the appropriate consensus .
This Parliament , in the current draft of the report if not amended , is prepared to contemplate substantial increases in motor fuel excises , especially for environmental reasons ; and believes that such a tax regime should never have a lower rate of tax on a fuel that is more polluting .
We are calling for a comprehensive tax base with regard to mineral oils , and if there are exclusions such as aviation gas or kerosene or natural gas , the Commission should justify these and explain their effect in terms of the operation of the internal market .
A fear that we express : if these duties increase and they are to be the counterpart , taking the White Paper on employment growth and competitiveness , of reducing direct taxes on labour , how do we make the interconnection ?
We wonder how the Commission would propose to try to induce the Council , with its Article 99 privileges , to do that , and not simply to take more tax and ignore the labour taxation .
On tobacco I wish to support compromise Amendment No 20 , on the need to look at the automatic trigger .
On alcohol , I wish to support compromise Amendment No 23 , the so-called linkage amendment explained by our colleague Mr Miller , to ensure the distortion should not get greater .
To my colleague and friend the chairman of the Committee , I should warn him that if he goes out to dine with Scotsmen he should not take their yarns about drinking whisky rather than wine too seriously .
But perhaps he was the victim of a few too many glasses of zero-taxed wine himself !
Mr President , alcohol is part of our social culture .
It has its role in gastronomy and in human relations .
However , it has considerable negative effects on public health , on the incidence of accidents , violence and social costs .
The World Health Organisation therefore has a programme to reduce alcohol consumption in Europe .
The European ministers of health back this programme .
It is therefore remarkable that the report attacks high taxes on alcohol .
Sweden pursues a restrictive policy on alcohol , which includes high taxes , especially on spirits .
Sweden therefore has the lowest per capita alcohol consumption of the entire Union .
High prices for spirits reduce drinking .
Now it is being said that high taxes distort the market .
This is not true .
Taxation is just as high on Swedish spirits as on those we import and we import all wine from Member States under the same conditions .
You do not distort the market by drinking less alcohol .
The report also makes a number of false statements .
It claims for example that there is too little research into alcohol in the Member States .
However , there are few subjects in the world which have been so thoroughly researched as the relationship between people and alcohol .
The World Health Organisation report entitled ' Alcohol Policy and the Public Good ' , for example , is based on over 700 scientific studies .
This report also lays to rest many myths concerning alcohol .
For instance , it is not true that wine is replacing spirits .
Per capita consumption of wine in France , Germany and Spain is extremely high , but consumption of spirits is also significantly higher than in Sweden , and they have a correspondingly high frequency of alcohol-related illness .
I believe the background to the attack on Nordic alcohol taxes is a very cynical one .
Consumption of alcohol has fallen significantly since 1980 in , for example , France , Spain , Germany and Italy .
Awareness of the risks associated with alcohol , of the health issues and of course road safety has contributed to this reduced consumption .
Alcohol producers thus naturally want to increase their markets in countries where consumption remains low .
Lower taxes on alcohol may lead to more drinking and thus increase markets .
Sweden for its part is not prepared to give up its policy on alcohol .
After all , this is also a tax issue which requires unanimity in the Council of Ministers .
Of course we Swedes believe that each country should find its own special and appropriate combination of information , social policy and , where necessary , taxation , in accordance with its own circumstances and traditions .
Each and every one may have its own model .
We are not trying to export the Swedish model but we should all understand that as far as alcohol is concerned , health and safety must come before market interests .
This Parliament too , Mr President , should act in the spirit of the World Health Organisation .
Mr President , it was very exciting to sit on the committee during this work , because the issue in question is a very significant one , both from the point of view of economic policy and in many other respects .
I hope that the Commission will come to Parliament next year with a more detailed proposal for altering the excise system .
The Green Group is entirely in favour of using product taxation to pursue broader objectives , such as public health and environmental protection .
We consider it quite appropriate for taxation of mineral oils , for example , to be used as an instrument of environmental policy , while taxation of alcohol and tobacco of course can promote health .
Our chairman , Mr von Wogau , has just spoken very warmly about the differences among cultures and the various traditions in respect of alcohol .
I have to admit that I have sometimes had the pleasure of drinking wines brought to Parliament by our chairman from his own region and I have to say that I like wine .
Despite that , I consider that there are no objective grounds for completely exempting one type of alcohol from excise .
The Greens would prefer alcohol to be taxed according to its alcohol content .
This would be an excellent principle on the internal market .
In the case of tobacco there is the strange exception to which Mrs Peijs referred , namely that hand-rolling tobacco is taxed much more lightly .
There is no reason for this , and we have tabled an amendment of our own on this subject too .
Among mineral oils , there is the case of aviation fuel , kerosene .
Why should it be exempt from excise ?
There are no grounds for this .
Finally , Mr President , while we are trying to meet the convergence criteria , ought not states still to get their tax revenue from somewhere ?
In my opinion excise is a very appropriate source , also from the point of view of maintaining balance in the public finances .
Mr President , I am not speaking for my group because my group is divided in the same way that Mr Miller mentioned , that is between wine and whisky .
So there will be another speaker later on wine .
The committee 's results were not very clear .
It was a controversial set of votes with sometimes just one or two votes in it and then an accusation that the voting procedure was not correct and request for a repeat vote .
So , the committee was also divided .
I am only going to speak about the whisky situation .
I represent the Highlands and Islands of Scotland and have a huge responsibility in representing the bulk of Scotch whisky in the world although others represent constituencies where whisky is produced .
In my 20 years in this Parliament I have seen whisky being treated unfairly time after time , the first time being the absurd proposal by a previous Commission that whisky labels should contain instructions as to use followed by last date for human consumption .
It did not seem to realise that whisky just gets better and better .
Then , there was the recent problem of the cost of storage .
Whisky was to be called a dangerous chemical .
We moderated that slightly because bonds are usually out in fields and are guarded like Fort Knox .
But this recent example is the most unfair treatment .
Wine , as has been said , has the privilege of a zero rate and other forms of alcohol are taxed at different rates .
Mr von Wogau seems to think that there is no competition .
I do not know how much drinking is done in Scotland but I would assure him that if he concentrated not so much on the dinner but the after-dinner drink there is certainly competition between whisky and wine .
I say that there is price-driven tax-distorted competition between different categories of drinks and a zero rate amounts to distorted competition .
The only fair way is to impose excise rates for alcoholic drinks according to alcohol content .
That is what the Commission used to believe .
It used to have an original position of harmonization and it has moved away from that .
I must also say that the places with whisky distilleries in my area are places where there are no alternative jobs and where remote glens and islands depend economically entirely on that industry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I must thank the rapporteur for his efforts , and also my colleague Philippe Martin for his report on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Excise duties are taxes designed to achieve political objectives .
Some of us would like the rates of excise duty to be raised or lowered in order to assist this or that category of economic operator .
Personally , as a member of the Committee on Agriculture , I do not want to take sides in favour of any particular undertaking , but I do want to defend European agriculture as a whole .
Regarding excise duties in the sector of tobaccos and cigarettes , I personally favour preserving the existing status quo , and I would remind the House that some European agricultural regions depend on tobacco production .
Certainly we must not favour the importers and processors of imported Virginia tobacco at the expense of European producers of dark tobacco .
With regard to the excise duty on wine , spirits and alcoholic beverages , I must remind the House that wine is an agricultural product , not an industrial one , and that consequently the zero rating principle must be maintained , along with the principle of taxation by volume and not by strength , as certain lobbyists for the beer and whisky industries would prefer .
As regards mineral oils , the Committee on Agriculture has unanimously adopted the following text , and I quote : ' In view of the ecological benefits and the use of agricultural land for the manufacture of biofuels , calls on the Commission to study a system of taxation that would encourage the use of biofuels . '
At a time when there is talk of reducing agricultural aid , when some farmers , and especially livestock breeders , want to plough up their pastureland in view of the present depressed state of veal and beef production , and when we are in danger of exceeding the European limit , it is necessary to encourage the use of biofuels incorporating agricultural products .
In France , for example , in view of the disastrous beef and veal situation , it is now estimated that we could exceed the limit by 300 000 hectares .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , I ask you , through your vote , to develop a system of indirect taxation that benefits European agriculture as a whole .
Our international agreements allow it , and we must have the political will to do it .
This report provides an occasion for Parliament to provide its view on the harmonisation of excise duties , without having to go into details on the various rates .
I would note that we have not made optimal use of the possibility .
The most important functions of excise duties , raising taxes and controlling behaviour , only appear to a limited extent .
That is a pity .
I will keep myself to the former .
The question now is this : are excise duties a good way of providing more income which would make it possible for governments to reduce tax on labour ?
The Commission statement on the informal Ecofin council of Verona made it clear that over the last 15 years tax on labour has increased by 20 % and tax on capital has fallen by 10 % .
A reversal of this trend should be our first objective .
But capital in particular is mobile and elusive .
Can excise duties contribute to this reversal ?
I should think they can .
Paragraph 4 on the upward harmonisation of tobacco prices ; paragraph 20b on a considerable increase in the minimum prices for engine fuels ; paragraph 20c on the internalisation of externals costs ; and paragraph 20f on an all-encompassing taxation basis for mineral oils and their competing products all clearly point in the right direction .
But there seems to be a taboo in this Parliament on increasing alcohol prices , and particularly on the introduction of a minimum excise duty on wine .
I understand from my southern colleagues that consuming wine is a necessity of life , particularly for retired people and other less prosperous sections of the population who , with the introduction of a minimum excise duty , would be reduced to beggary .
Coming from the Netherlands , where even mineral water has an excise duty , this does seem to me to be somewhat incredible .
What also bothers me is that this report so clearly bears the vestiges of specific lobby activists .
Apart from the paragraph about the zero rate for wine , I will take the proposals for tax concessions for shag , small distillers and biofuels .
If we want to stimulate the use of certain products by lower taxes , I am aware of more useful and favourable products .
Such gifts for specific lobbies do not add credibility to this Parliament .
Finally , I must unfortunately say that some parts of this report are absurd , for example where the direct sale at distance by small producers and small cooperatives is recommended is actually the method to encourage harmonisation to the lowest level of the Union .
So the best thing we can do tomorrow is to vote with my group against large parts of this report .
As far as I am concerned , we could reduce the contents of this report merely to the paragraphs on the upwards harmonisation and the widening of the tax basis .
Mr President , naturally I do not agree with Mr Martinez that we should not levy any more direct taxes , but that is his problem in France .
In my view there is at this time no need to act with regard to the approximation of excise duties on tobacco , alcohol and mineral oils .
The package of measures to harmonize excise duties put together in Luxembourg in 1992 so that the single market could enter into force on 1 January 1993 is not in need of reform , for the single market is not working badly at all , as incidentally has been confirmed in reports by experts .
Of course there are always people in this House who believe they can carry out health policy by imposing exaggerated excise duties , especially on the consumption of tobacco and alcohol .
Tobacco products are made from the agricultural product called the tobacco plant .
Tens of thousands of jobs in agriculture and industry depend on this branch of production .
We cannot tolerate tobacco-growing and even give it a costly organization of the market within the common agricultural policy , only to penalize the tobacco produced with taxes , and in particular to expose the tobacco made from European raw tobacco in the few medium-sized enterprises that have not yet been swallowed up by the multinationals to a competition with multinationals from third countries it cannot stand up to .
In any case , Mrs Peijs , the cigarette smuggling by the large multi-brands is far more troublesome to us in the single market than the fact that the excise duties are not yet uniform .
For who sells the smugglers the tobacco and the millions of cigarettes tax free ?
That is an additional question .
As for alcohol , I hope the majority in this House will agree with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and in particular with the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and not touch the minimum , zero rate for wine , all the more so because the application of the existing directives is causing no problems , in relation to either structure or rates .
On the contrary , I am sure we would have many more problems if we did not manage to persuade the people in the northern Member States of our Union to enjoy a glass of wine with every meal , which would be good for their health , by reducing the confiscatory excise duties .
Since the days of Hippocrates , the father of medicine , who already realised that austerity and melancholy are responsible for many illnesses , we know that wine , drunk in moderation , is very good for people , whether they are healthy or ill .
There is indeed a need for action here , in relation to reducing the excessively high excise duties in some Member States .
That would be health-promoting !
Mr President , in a period of one minute I can only ask for some attention to be given to the amendment tabled by my group , to slowly but surely close the gap in excise duties on rolling tobacco and factory-made cigarettes .
This has been replaced by a compromise amendment which I personally believe is too weak .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I completely disagree with Mrs Lulling .
The exceptionally low excise level , particularly on tobacco , cannot be justified .
If we accept that rolling tobacco is just as harmful as factory-made cigarettes , rolling tobacco must be taxed in the same way .
The smoker of rolling tobacco is in no way warned of the health risks to which he is being exposed , not by the price , nor by any indication of the tar content .
The argument that it is particularly the less prosperous who use rolling tobacco is not relevant , as their health is just as much at stake .
Finally , it is not my intention to tackle only rolling tobacco .
However , this report does not allow us to formulate concrete proposals on the increase of excise duties on factory-made cigarettes .
I hope that this House , with the discussion of later proposals from the Commission , will be guided more by health considerations than by national interests .
Mr President , the excise duty debate is being undermined by fundamental hypocrisy .
The theoretical purpose is to reduce smoking , alcohol use and car traffic .
But in practice what is involved is politicians and policy-makers seeking maximum revenues to be able to provide their national treasuries with sufficient resources .
Much has already been said about the differences in excise duties between the Member States .
I endorse the opinion that harmonisation of the levy structure is of the greatest importance .
The Member States must first agree about the principles .
Only then can actual rates be sensibly discussed .
One argument is that because of structure differences cigarette manufacturers are served by having their products smuggled .
This increases their turnover and profit margin .
The Member States invite this fraud in a certain sense .
Maybe arrangements could be made with manufacturers to ban these practices .
It continues to surprise citizens that , from a health perspective , the price of cigarettes etc. is greatly increased by excise duties , while at the same time tobacco cultivation continues to enjoy large subsidies .
This makes the idea of bringing the citizen closer to Europe go up in smoke .
Regarding excise duties on alcoholic drinks , some colleagues make an impassioned plea for the zero rate on wine , because this would concern a purely agricultural product .
This would be distinct from beer , grain genever and other products .
That is obviously not true .
On this point there is clearly a distinction to be made between democrats and vinocrats .
The interests of winegrowers are evident , but so equally are those of public health .
I would point out the anomaly of the excise exemption on kerosine for air traffic .
This puts more environmentally-friendly products at a disadvantage .
I believe we must do everything possible to stem the fast increase in air traffic .
The ending of this concealed subsidisation is a first necessary step .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are debating relates to the range of measures for the realisation of the internal market .
Article 99 of the Treaty authorizes us to try and harmonize legislation on excise duties , insofar as that harmonization is needed to bring about the establishment and operation of the internal market .
I believe it is also consonant with the spirit of the Treaty and the character of excise duties that we should strive for a narrow interpretation and application of those definitions .
In all events excise duties constitute an anomaly both in the taxation system and in the operation of the market .
This anomaly , however , is deeply rooted .
For centuries , the taxation authorities in our countries have specified a number of products - formerly salt and spirits , nowadays alcohol , petrol and tobacco - in order to raise certain revenues , taking advantage of the particularly inelastic demand for those products .
Neither considerations of fair taxation , nor those of economic rationale have ever been a feature of excise duties .
They are the product of a desperate - not to say tax-obsessive - desire to increase revenues .
From the above , I think the need emerges not to use the harmonization of laws to extend excise duties to new products , no matter how similar they may seem .
By extending the range of application of an anomaly , we do not create harmonization but a still greater anomaly .
That comment clearly applies to the attempt to extend to wines the taxation applicable to alcoholic drinks .
Our aim - and that is all the Treaty authorizes us to do - is to harmonize existing excise duties , not to create new ones where there have been none before .
We must also not be led astray by the effort to harmonize taxes , into trying by means of taxation to achieve a financial , in other words artificial harmonization of prices .
The cigarette trade takes place under exceptionally oligopolistic conditions .
Instead of reflecting production costs , prices are determined by the strategy of market capture and the elimination of small producers .
France and Germany have radically different taxation systems , but the same price for a packet of Marlborough .
Greece and Italy have the same taxation system , but the price of Marlborough differs by 40 % between the two countries .
We must harmonize taxation systems , but it is not our job to facilitate the manoeuvres of the oligopolies via excise duties , the more so since it has been proved that the imposition of a minimum 57 % tax from today has led to a convergence of the burden of taxation and , according to one view and certain figures , of retail prices as well .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , attempts at fiscal harmonization for alcoholic beverages almost always start from an idea of harmonizing the concept of an alcoholic beverage .
This simplifying idea puts products like beer , vodka and wine on the same level within the term ' alcoholic beverage ' , ultimately proposing similar treatment for all of them in terms of penalizing consumption or in terms of taxation .
I cannot accept that focus .
Wine is an alcoholic product , but it is an alcoholic product of the European Union which has vast socio-economic incidence both on employment - with two million people working in the sector - and on social cohesion , because the wine business is largely concentrated in certain districts with serious social problems , and it generates activities around it which are in some way dependent on wine .
So wine must be treated differently from other alcoholic drinks produced in the European Union - and not only in terms of fiscal policy .
Because make no mistake , there is a one cultural attitude to wine amongst the producer , and to a large extent consumer , countries of this product : we regard it as an agricultural and nutritional product , often of high quality and beneficial to health when consumed in moderation , and I refer to scientific studies ; and another attitude amongst the non-producer countries which , as I said earlier , regard it as an alcoholic drink , full stop .
This means that while we - the former - apply a special zero rate duty to it , others apply taxes which may even triple the price to the consumer in the absence of that taxation .
I therefore think - and I am concluding , Mr President - we should support this report and I congratulate the rapporteur and the co-rapporteurs . The report advocates the maintenance of the zero rate for wine in those countries where it currently exists , because there is no justification based on taxation or fiscal harmonization for countries which account for less than 1 % of wine production and barely 10 % of consumption in the Community to impose an obligatory burden on wine , causing a decrease in consumption in the producer countries and generating economic and social problems in certain rural wine-making areas .
Mr President , I would like to take up part of the Von Wogau report , the part that speaks of the beneficial health effects of alcohol and wine in particular .
It is perfectly true and medically correct that in small quantities alcohol can be useful to certain people in certain situations .
However , it is wrong to conclude from this that for reasons of health one should not drastically limit alcohol consumption .
As total consumption of alcohol is on the increase we know that a significant proportion of the population will experience serious harm .
That harm greatly exceeds the positive effects on health which some may experience .
It is also true that it is not the alcohol as such in wine which is beneficial but the anti-oxidants which exist in all grape juices .
Thus if one wishes to improve people 's health one should tax drinks containing alcohol and subsidise alcohol-free grape juice .
As my colleague Mr Svensson said , there are few substances whose medicinal effects have been studied as thoroughly as alcohol .
The conclusions are completely unanimous .
If consumption in a country increases - irrespective of whether we are talking about beer , wine or spirits - the harm caused also increases .
There is a direct and proportional link between alcohol consumption in a country and the damage caused by alcohol .
Whether you drink wine or spirits makes no difference .
It is the quantity of alcohol that counts .
As for Sweden , it is estimated for example that a 30 percent reduction of the high taxes we impose on wine and spirits would result in an additional 1 800 people dying prematurely .
The conclusion is therefore that Sweden must be permitted for public health reasons to retain its high taxes on alcohol .
Finally , Mr President , as regards the debate as to whether wine is an agricultural product and should therefore be subject to a zero rate of alcohol tax , I should like to point out that our Swedish aquavit is made from potatoes , which are also an agricultural product .
Nevertheless , it would never occur to us to classify aquavit as a foodstuff .
Mr President , unlike Mr Metten I believe that Mr von Wogau has produced an excellent report .
Those who know its history know that you personally , Mr Metten , had problems coordinating the three sections , which is why the chairman of the committee had to take over .
Unfortunately Parliament has nothing to do with the tax questions and nothing to say on them .
The less we say have to say - that is my impression - the more we quarrel on specific questions .
Regional and economic interests are dominating this debate .
Basically the three sectors of mineral oil , tobacco and alcohol taxes do not go together since the regional interests involved are so different that they ought really to be treated separately .
Taxes on alcohol are certainly a source of dispute , but there is one principle that applies in the European Union : the alcohol producer countries generally have lower taxes and the consumer countries generally have higher taxes .
If the British and Irish tax their whisky too high , that is their problem and not the problem of the producer countries that do not want to impose taxes on wine .
Second principle : the relationship between taxes on alcohol and alcoholism is obviously not such that lower taxes lead to a higher rate of alcoholism and high taxes to a lower one .
The example of Finland and Sweden - high tax and high alcoholism rates - prove the opposite .
So there is no direct link .
Third principle : wine surpluses and higher rates do not go together .
If we spend DM 1 500 million a year to get rid of the wine surpluses and then want to restrict consumption , there is a risk that we will go off course .
It has been scientifically proven that wine consumed in moderation , half a litre per person per day according to a long-term US study , is good for the heart and circulation , is therefore beneficial .
Projecting that figure , 250 million adults each drinking half a litre of wine a day would mean a consumption of about 440 million hectolitres in the European Union against a production of 135 million hectolitres .
That would be healthier for the individual and cheaper for the European Union and better for a cooperative community than thinking about higher taxes .
Mr President , in my view the excise duty system with its fixed minimum rates in force since 1 January 1993 has largely proved its worth .
There is much need for amendments , especially to individual regulations , and we could certainly give many examples of that here today in the European Parliament , as we could years ago .
At this time it is certainly important to consider to what extent the internal market can now keep pace with further progress .
Great emphasis was laid in the European Parliament 's report on gearing excise duties to ecological concerns , which is very right and very true .
More could certainly be done in the area of mineral oil taxes as a steering mechanism ; in particular , in my view the studies of the actual tax situations are inadequate .
We must go further here and consider how far the abolition of tax exemptions really can still be a taboo in the present day .
Here I am thinking in particular of the kerosene used in aviation .
I also think that health and environmental aspects rightly play a part in relation to the other excise duties too .
There is broad agreement on the proposals on excise duties on cigarettes and tobacco .
However , the fiscal treatment of tobacco must continue to comply with ecological aims .
In regard to the taxing of alcohol and alcoholic beverages there is certainly no cause to amend the existing regulations .
However , I do consider it essential that we continue to see the connection , Mr President , which is why I call for the same as the previous speaker .
I believe that alcoholic lemonades , the ready-made mixed beverages should also be subject to taxation because these products can encourage young people in particular to consume more alcohol .
Let me conclude with one comment . Everyone regards excise duties as mere bagatelles .
In most Member States , however , they account for more than 10 % of tax revenue .
In this area in particular we find a great deal of suppression of evidence , a great deal of tax evasion , which is why the Commission must combat this tax evasion and aim at further-reaching harmonization .
At a time of budgetary scarcity , there is no room for tax evasion .
For that reason we need the Commission to provide annual reports , so that we can make progress not only with harmonization but also with implementing these taxes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the rapporteur Mr von Wogau and Parliament for their efforts in preparing this opinion on the Commission 's review of the minimum excise duties on alcoholic drinks , tobacco and mineral oils .
At this point , I would also of course like to thank the special rapporteurs , Mrs Peijs , Mr Cox and Mr Miller .


As you remember , the Commission 's review led to a wide-ranging process of consultations about future policy in the sector of excise duties .
That made it possible for Parliament to extend its opinion to subjects that had perhaps not been covered in detail by the review , but which may well have great and particular importance for the future .
Thus , the Commission encouraged Parliament to concentrate its efforts on the identification of more general policy issues it considered would affect the future development of Community policy on excise duties .

On behalf of my colleague Mr Monti - who was unfortunately unable to attend this evening 's debate - and of the Commission , I would like to assure you that we will take serious note of Parliament 's opinion during the preparation of the Commission 's forthcoming review . Parliament will still retain its right to express its opinion about the review , and about any other related proposals .
I gather that the proposal on mineral oils raised no serious doubts in Parliament .
That fact is encouraging , in that it is consonant with our own position concerning the line to be followed in the context of our commitments to ECOFIN , in relation to the submission of new proposals for a general system for the taxation of energy products .
The comments about alcoholic drinks and tobacco clearly showed that the issue is a complex and sensitive one .
The taxation treatment of those products always encounters objections , and is often influenced by various geographical criteria within the Union , which in turn create different political priorities .
Clearly , Parliament 's opinion on those matters will be taken seriously into account in our future work on those sectors , as well as the various views expressed during the consultations .
Parliament 's opinion is an important element of the overall consultation procedure that began last September .
I hope you are aware that at the moment , the European Commission cannot give further details , though I can tell you that your opinion will be taken into account together with other representations and opinions we have already received , throughout our forthcoming work in the excise duty sector .
Granted the need to make progress in the mineral oils sector and the fact that a measure of agreement is perceptible concerning how some substantial progress can be achieved , I anticipate that our proposals on energy products will be given top priority .
When those proposals are complete , the Commission will examine the issue of reviewing and making proposals about alcoholic drinks and tobacco products .
As I have already mentioned , each report and package of proposals will be submitted to Parliament for its opinion .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Third SME programme ( 1997-2000 )
The next item is the report ( A4-0249 / 96 ) by Mrs Thyssen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Decision on a third multiannual programme for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the European Union ( 1997 to 2000 ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0098 - C4-0232 / 96-96 / 0087 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if the European Union and the Member States are really to give priority to employment , it is high time we more strongly focused our attention on small and medium-sized enterprises .
In EMAC we have had the time and the opportunity to comprehensively exchange thoughts .
Whoever is still present here now belongs to the hard core of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee , is aware of the social and economic meaning of the SME , and has read the proposal for a multiannual programme and hopefully also my report .
So it does not seem sensible to go over the whole programme again now .
You know that many colleagues like myself are well-disposed towards the SME , and that in a general sense we are agreed on both the analysis of the SME issue and on the proposals presented to us by the Commission , which are considerably better than earlier proposals .
For example , we see it as a great step forward that from now on in the multiannual programme reference is made to the new SME definition .
I hope that the Commission sticks to its guns and can convince every Member of the Council of the necessity of the clear indication of the target group for the programme .
Because there is some uncertainty in some sectors , I would ask the Commissioner whether he can confirm that persons of the free professions and SMEs in the tourist sector are not excluded from this programme in relation to the horizontal aspects of the SME policy ?
I would also like to underline the conviction that we must also see evidence of the segmentation present in the description of the target group in the evaluation reports .
Only in this way will we be able to ascertain whether everyone , including the smallest enterprises , is benefitting from the programme where necessary .
I would like to say something about committees .
I hear that some Member States are urging for a mixed committee on SMEs and the social economy .
This seems unacceptable to me , not only because the programme for the social economy has yet to begin its experimental stage , but also because this concerns a different world .
I would also like to hear your view on this , Commissioner .
As regards the euro-infocentres we are pleased to hear that the ambitions for the recomposition of the network do not go as far as was initially announced , and we urge for an improvement in quality by means of professionalisation and not by unbridled task expansion .
The specific attention to self-employed women in the multiannual programme is pleasing to us , but we also request this for cooperating spouses who are still waiting for an evaluation of a guideline of 1989 .
Otherwise we have nothing but praise for the proposal , on the condition , of course , that it is to be realised in the direction we indicate in the amendments and , where not possible otherwise , in the notes .
This morning we were rightly reminded that the European citizen does not evaluate our work on the basis of programmes and nice declarations , but on his day to day life .
The plan to better involve the SME organisations with policy is a very attractive idea , but it has no credibility whatsoever as long as the Commission passively looks on at the exclusion practice that UNICE and the trades unions apply in the social dialogue .
Should you not intervene , Commissioner , so that an end is finally brought to this undemocratic spectacle ?
With a nice programme but no cash we have nothing .
The budget for this programme must be repaired as the Commission has proposed , and we would like to hear from the Commission itself what else must perish .
Finally , the execution of the programme will also depend on the proper functioning of DG XXIII .
It cannot work without money , nor without sufficient people .
Thank you in anticipation , Commissioner , for your response .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Research has considered the programme for small and medium-sized enterprises in great detail and put forward a large number of proposals .
During our work we found that the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in framework research programmes for example remains unsatisfactory although 99.8 % of all enterprises in Europe are small and medium-sized , 66 % of all workers are employed in small and medium-sized enterprises and small and mediumsized enterprises account for 65 % of turnover in the European Union .
That is why we have proposed doubling the number of SMEs participating in the framework research programme by the year 2000 and reducing the cost of applications .
That is a most important point , for there is no use calling for research funding if the costs of applying are more or less the same as the funds made available .
Furthermore , we should consider contributing more than 50 % of the costs to SMEs .
It is also important to ensure easy and rapid access to European Union data-bases in the research field , such as the Cordis data-base .
The rapporteur has pointed out how important it is for us to have a single data-base and not a variety , a variety of software or a variety of networks , which in the end are no use to anybody .
The best way to help the small and medium-sized enterprises is by the rational development of the Cordis data-base , which can be accessed via the Internet .
Let me conclude by rapidly giving the view of the Committee on Research on the Green Paper on innovation .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are the motive forces of innovation in our society , and here lies a great potential that should be further supported through this multiannual programme .
Let me warmly thank the rapporteur for her work and hope that our concerns will be taken on board .
Mr President , Commissioners , small is beautiful , especially for Europe 's businesses , especially if the big bonus for us is jobs for Europe 's jobless .
SMEs are on the inside of the fast track on the EU 's menu for beating unemployment , and for that we warmly welcome the Commission 's Third Multiannual Programme for SMEs .
That said , the wallet that funds this programme is pretty thin at ECU 180 m .
This is all the more regrettable given the sturdy proposals of the Commission , welcomed by our good colleague Mrs Thyssen .
She welcomes the Commission 's new definition of an SME , slashing the top figure of 500 employees to 250 .
This is right .
Even within that envelope , distinction must be made between medium , small and micro-enterprise .
We must tailor-make policies for different-sized SMEs , whether for the one-person tailor or the larger clothing firm .
What a pity that the DTI and the CBI in the United Kingdom spurned this sensible change in Europe .
My whole experience of small businesses tells me that SMEs feel squeezed out by big-business representatives .
In this respect I am extremely heartened by the fact that the Dutch practice of tripartite meetings between big business , SMEs and the trade unions is now receiving its British expression in the first tentative meetings between the GMB Union and the Forum of Private Business .
The contagion of cooperation and social partnership has spread to Britain .
The Commission 's sizzling attack on red tape , which inhibits SMEs from penetrating the growing and powerful single European market , is warmly welcomed .
But as our rapporteur astutely points out , the biggest sticky fingers applying red tape are national governments , and nowhere is this more true than the United Kingdom , where Michael Heseltine 's aspiration for a bonfire of red tape has turned into the ashes of a bonfire of Tory vanities .
How embarrassing for the Tories that the FT reveals another instance of British red tape snagging investors financing small businesses .
Central to the real fight to create the proper and stable legal and administrative environment in which SMEs can thrive , grow and breed jobs is to institute a business impact assessment on EU legislation , to weed out the bramble of bad ideas , whilst protecting high environmental and social standards .
Cool too is the British Government and CBI view of another central proposal of the Commission document , to tackle the problem of late payments which so besmirches Europe 's and the UK 's business environment , propelling small firms into insolvency , because the Michael Heseltine view of the acceptability of stringing creditors along still prevails .
Sweden has solved such swindles on small businesses by legislating a statutory right to interest .
Introduced to the UK , £ 20 , 000 million would be made available to SMEs to invest and grow businesses and jobs - jobs for the boys and girls , who are perennially ignored by Britain 's bankrupt government .
I also commend the Commission 's recognition that SMEs need help and a helpful environment in all stages of their development , not just in starting off and growing .
Thus 30 , 000 SMEs a year go under , losing Europe 300 , 000 jobs because of the weaknesses of the legal and administrative environment for transferring successful businesses on the death or abdication of the founding entrepreneur .
Get this right in establishing Europe 's single market , and we are quids in , or should I say euros in ?
This brings me to my concluding point .
Europe is now consumed with the single currency , whose advent I fervently believe will electrify the European economy .
But much needs to be done to understand SMEs , fears of EMU and to help them exploit the benefits the euro will bestow .
An in-depth study by the Commission on highlighting the practical aspects of the EMU for SMEs is essential .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will be able to take on that task , but I warmly welcome this new programme for the future of SMEs in the European Union .
Mr President , I will be seeking to round off the excellent work of my colleague , Mrs Thyssen , with a few further considerations , prompted by the fact that while it is true that many programmes of intervention and support for small and medium-sized enterprises - the issue we are this evening discussing - have been set in place , less satisfactory results have been achieved when it comes to improving the context in which those enterprises operate .
That aspect was also mentioned by my colleague , Mr Harrison .
The fact is that the bureaucratic , administrative and fiscal rules governing employment relationships in all of the Member States were devised against the backdrop of the operating conditions of medium to large-scale enterprises , without any attention being paid to the special features of small-scale enterprises .
For instance , a recent study on the administrative costs imposed by the intra-Community rules on VAT has shown that those costs are in inverse proportion to the size of the enterprise , penalizing in particular the smaller enterprises .
I have furthermore to stress very strongly the fact that , because of the dissimilarities that exist from one state to the next , these problems discriminate against operators , particularly when they try to enter the European market .
As a result , although these are apparently issues of internal relevance to the states , they are important at a European level because they violate the fundamental principle of equality of treatment of economic operators and thwart the proper functioning of the internal market .
That is why it seemed to me to be appropriate to table , on behalf of the European People 's Party , Amendment No 52 which I wish to bring to the attention of the Commissioner also ; its aim is to introduce specific measures designed to encourage the Member States to work effectively towards eliminating those differences .
I think that the Commission will have achieved something very commendable if it moves in that direction and if it considers it appropriate , as seems to me quite apparent , to seek the cooperation of all of the associations in that category , in an effort to collect the most wide-ranging and detailed documentation possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has done some very good work .
It is exceptionally important that the third multiannual programme is set up as a part of the pact for jobs .
It is a case of improving the competitive power of the business community .
A stronger competitive position in turn ensures more growth , and so more jobs .
Moreover , in SMEs job growth is stronger than in large enterprises .
We are delighted that this third multiannual programme is presented together with an evaluation report on the current programme , so a more efficient policy can be presented .
At last something has been done about an improved definition of the SME .
How can you implement a selective policy that is applicable to almost all , namely 99.8 % , of the companies ?
With respect to the measures proposed , the liberals have always clearly stated that a favourable enterprise climate is the most important basic condition for growth and jobs .
This was also pointed out by the Irish Prime Minister and the President-in-Office of the Council this morning .
It is , however , in the first place the Member States which must take up their responsibility here .
It is often national legislation that places the greatest burdens on the common markets .
An example is when , in 1994 , the Commission presented 250 pages of regulations , the Member States wanted to produce a pile forty times greater of 10 , 000 pages .
But the Union also has its task .
We call on the Commission to more carefully evaluate the effect of its legislative proposals on the SME .
The Commission does admit that further improvements in effective reporting are possible .
We must not forget that this is by no means a case of pettiness .
Administrative problems cost the business community more than 150 billion ECU each year .
The pilot project SLIM which concerns more simple legislation for the internal market , and which actually concentrates on four sectors , is investigating the possibility of simplifying legislation .
We look forward to the results of this project , to be announced in November , and to the initiatives the Commission will take in this respect .
Secondly , we cannot accept that the Council of Ministers tarries so long with the approval of the statute of the European Company , the first proposals for which were already formulated by the Commission 21 years ago , namely in 1975 .
A European statue for the business community would result in real savings of an estimated 30 billion ECU .
Thirdly , I believe the Union must encourage the development of access to risk capital .
It is the fast-growing SMEs that invest in high technology which most need venture capital .
I also hope that the European display fair , will give a helping hand to our fast-growers .
Finally , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on her report and I support her amendments , in particular those regarding the free professions in the Council Decision .
I would also like to underline the proposal to devote special attention to women entrepreneurs and to cooperating spouses .
I hope these words do not become empty ones , but are actually put into action by the Commission and by the governments of the Member States .
Mr President , this Commission programme for SMEs , which is a good one and with which this report deals , has demonstrated - and continues to do so - that Parliament is committed to improving the position of SMEs .
The consideration of the report has been constructive , and indeed inventive , at every stage , for which I should like to thank Mrs Thyssen .
For us new Member States , which do not have a long tradition of small enterprises , it has been interesting to see how similar the problems are , despite the differences in the points of departure .
In view of this , it is quite understandable that , for example , in my country people had high hopes of the opportunities which would be created by the Union .
However , the fact is of course that not much direct Union funding has been available , for example , to deal with the main difficult problems , when one bears in mind that at present the worst funding problems of all lie precisely in the fields of obtaining equity capital and venture capital and - in my country at least - excessive cautiousness on the part of the banks when it comes to extending credit .
The Union should concentrate on dealing with these matters by means of its measures .
In itself , membership of the Union has brought us stability .
Economic policy has been relatively successful since accession , so that there has been scope for funding of commercial ventures too .
We for our part could very well demonstrate , by way of example , that payments too could be got moving quickly and in a disciplined manner .
Rules can be laid down on the matter and complied with .
Crossborder payments must of course be put in order immediately .
It does not make sense to delay matters .
We are not forgetting , of course , that EMU will eliminate problems and create opportunities .
EMU should not be blocked by formal obstacles .
Once the known funding obstacles have been eliminated , we must succeed in Europeanization .
Advice centres and networking must be improved .
It is quite clear that international cooperation is important in all fields .
We know very well that the Finnish company Nokia would not be the second largest producer of mobile phones in the world if information had not travelled across borders .
Innovation is thus the starting point for all educational activity .
Entrepreneurship is clearly a positive phenomenon , psychologically too .
It means freedom to realize one 's potential and to reap reward from doing so . This accords with our social-democratic ideals , as it involves the concept of respecting other people 's freedom .
It would be gratifying if active efforts were also made at European level to establish contacts between SME entrepreneurs and trade unions .
It could also be a new source of added value .
The multiannual programme before us is the culmination of years of endeavours on the part of the Council , Commission and Parliament to put the SME on the European agenda .
Parliament has remained consistent through the years , faithful to the entrepreneur who achieves great economic performances with very few members of staff , and often with the risk of losing everything he or she possesses .
At last the Council has come to the conclusion that SMEs are fully occupied with solving an enormous political problem for the Council , namely the problem of unemployment .
It is very clear that the Council is not able to solve this problem itself , not with the Delors & # x02BC ; White Paper or via the European networks .
It is simply not possible for the Council .
Our witnesses are the 17 million unemployed .
No wonder that in recent years the Council has expressed constant praise for SMEs , recorded in resolutions of the Council of Ministers .
So today we should be meeting here to festively end an important European discussion and turn words into action .
But we can safely leave the champagne at home , with or without its zero rate .
The Council has decided that the promotion of jobs in SMEs must be at a bargain price .
The Council does not want to pay the necessary 180 million ECU , but only 120 million ECU , and we are not going to do this the Santer way - doing less .
Even better , we are going to do more for a bargain , so that it only looks like we are doing more .
And en passant the Council is also killing the Elise programme .
It would indeed be a pity if a good and low-cost bureaucracy programme were to continue to exist .
It is clear that the fifteen governments who chose to look forward have not seen ahead , and must now effect all sorts of financial twists and turns to meet the EMU standards they themselves set in 1992 .
And the Dutch Government is at the front of them .
Mr President , the Commission has rightly set up a wide programme , which contains many SME aspects .
And the Commission may rightly count on the support of the Council .
But if the Council has its way in a budgetary sense , we in this Parliament will have to carefully deliberate about the programme .
With less money it will come down to the Commission doing much , but nothing well .
We will then have to set priorities and undoubtedly have to revise the programme .
Mr President , the multiannual SME programme provides a legal and budgetary basis for the Community 's specific SME policy actions .
I support fully this programme .
It recognizes that small and medium-sized companies are the bedrock of a local , national or even European economy .
In the context of improving the business environment of SMEs , it is recommended that there should be a Europeanization of business strategies of SMEs through the provision of information and support services .
I hope that in a practical sense this will mean that there will be an expansion of the European business information centres programme in my own country of Ireland .
They provide an invaluable service in providing small and medium-sized enterprises with information relating to the workings of the European regional , social , agricultural and fisheries funds , as well as advising on the different European co-financing loan schemes and public procurement contracts .
There should be a business information centre in every county in Ireland .
This would go a long way towards bridging the gap that exists in relation to the provision of information on European funds .
One of the real difficulties for SMEs is the marketing of their products in other countries .
Any European scheme which would provide transnational cooperation opportunities and which would add to the work presently being carried out by agencies such as the Trade Board , An Bord Tráchtala , would be a welcome move .
I support the recommendation that excessive bureaucratic administrative and fiscal rules which penalize SMEs should be combatted at every opportunity .
At its simplest , too much form-filling and red tape results in many employers within SMEs being unable to keep their eye on the ball .
In conclusion , the proposed budget of ECU 144m for this scheme represents an increase of 60 % on its predecessor .
However , I would remind Parliament that this funding should be carefully targeted and used in the most practical fashion possible .
No funding should be utilized for any measure that is not directly relevant to the need of SMEs .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the small and medium-sized enterprises which represent more than 99.8 % of all the companies in Europe , and 50 % of which , sadly , collapse in the first three years because an extremely complex taxation , legal and administrative system ; because of difficulties in gaining access to programmes of research ; weaknesses in managerial capacity ; difficulties in obtaining funding at a reasonable cost and because of the existence of barriers which impede access to the markets in goods and services .
Some Member States have made considerable efforts and have approved measures that will help small and medium-sized enterprises . Italy , however , compels courageous entrepreneurs to anticipate taxation on future hypothetical income , to the level of some 72 % .
Consequently , not only does that jeopardize the opportunity for small and medium-sized enterprises to invest in production and innovative technology , it also diminishes their competitiveness on the national and international markets .
Let us help entrepreneurs by providing them with information and assistance so that they , like the big concerns , are able to have access to the aid that the Union makes available .
Mr President , on arriving in this Chamber a little more than two years ago , one of the first conclusions I drew may have seemed obvious but was very effective .
There were in Europe 18 million small and medium-sized enterprises and there are , take note , some 18 million unemployed .
The equation is a very simple one : if it were possible to put every small and medium-sized enterprise in a position to take on just one employee , we should have resolved the number one problem of the European Union , that is the revitalization of the job market .
On paper it is very simple but in fact it is very difficult .
The work completed by Commissioner Papoutsis and DG XXIII a few weeks ago is very important : the new multiannual programme 1997-2000 which , compared with earlier programmes , I believe introduces two major innovations which make it different and more important .
The first is of a political and organizational nature , that is to say it finally accords the small and medium-sized enterprises the role they merit on the European economic stage ; it is no longer a question of size ; the focus is no longer on the big companies alone but also on the small and medium-sized enterprises .
The second aspect is sectoral .
We have noted at last with satisfaction that the new multiannual programme pays particular attention to certain until recently undervalued economic sectors which we know to have great potential : I am referring in particular to trade ; to the craft industries and , to a lesser extent , tourism also .
I believe that in those sectors above all there are enormous opportunities for professional and operational growth , new jobs , in short opportunities which should finally be seized by the market for the small and medium-sized enterprises . This programme specifically offers opportunities that we shall not be neglecting because the European economy needs greater substance and we need to be closer to businessmen .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am particularly pleased to have the opportunity today , to talk about the Commission 's proposal on the new multiannual programme for small and medium enterprises ( SMEs ) .
The Commission 's proposal on the establishment of this third multiannual programme is an integrated package of measures designed to promote and support SMEs .
The programme supplements activities carried out in the framework of other Community policies , and also supplements activities by the Member States .
As the President of the European Commission Mr Santer also pointed out , this programme is an indissoluble part of the confidence pact for employment .

And as both Mr Harrison and Mr Garosci stressed a short while ago , SMEs play a critical part in our strategy to create new jobs .
The last three European Councils , Cannes , Madrid and Florence , confirmed that policy on behalf of SMEs is among the priorities of the European Union .

I particularly welcome the interest Parliament has shown in this proposal of ours , and on that point , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Mrs Thyssen on her excellent work , and to thank Parliament for its support during all these years concerning policy on behalf of SMEs .
I also want to welcome the positive conclusions of the Thyssen report , concerning the quality of the Commission 's proposal .
I agree completely with the rapporteur that the aid we intend to provide for SMEs is an indissoluble part of a policy whose aim is to combat unemployment , and of course to create job opportunities all over Europe .
This programme does indeed provide the legal and financial base for the Community 's special activities on behalf of SMEs .
Let me mention briefly the five priority sectors of the programme , which aim to improve the performance of SMEs .
The first priority is to address the complex administrative environment that impedes the creation and development of SMEs .
Reversal of that attitude requires coordinated and clearly targeted action by the Union 's Member States , and of course by the Union itself .
I undertake the commitment to make every effort to increase the Commission 's contribution towards reducing bureaucracy and improving the relevant legislation , to simplify the administrative environment .
The programme 's second priority is to improve the financial environment of SMEs .
SMEs in Europe are still short of capital .
A short while ago , Mr Moretti made that point very clearly .
SMEs find it difficult to obtain guarantees sufficient to satisfy the banks , and there is also no suitable European capital market .
This new programme aims precisely to promote innovative practices that will improve the financial environment , and to facilitate the access of SMEs to sources of finance .
The third priority is to improve the access of SMEs to the Single Market , and to the opportunities provided by international markets .
The internal market and the increasing level of globalization have begun offering real benefits to businesses , but SMEs still find it difficult to gain access to certain markets .
We want the European Information Centres making up the Commission 's well known network , to constitute centres of first contact , ' first-stop shops ' , which will be able to direct the various inquiries to the appropriate agencies that provide business services .
Our aim is to improve the quality of services offered by the Euro-Info Centres , as Mr Gallagher rightly stressed a while ago .
Besides , the networking and cooperation between SMEs will be promoted by means of improved networks for the location of business partners and cooperation programmes .
At the same time , we will extend the possibilities for connection to new databases , such as the Cordis network mentioned earlier by Mr Ferber .
At any rate , I am particularly glad that the rapporteur Mrs Thyssen agrees with this idea and supports the concept of ' first-stop shops ' .
The fourth priority is to strengthen the competitiveness of SMEs by improving their access to research , innovation and training .
The relatively small number of European companies based on the new technologies shows that there is a great need for a better environment , which will promote this rapidly expanding category of companies .
SMEs also know that they are not investing enough in training .
However , we must not forget that existing training programmes often do not respond to their special needs .
This new programme envisages pilot activities to identify new approaches in these sectors and implement them on a trial basis .
The programme 's last aim - which is particularly important in my opinion - is to promote the entrepreneurial spirit , to create a new enterprise culture by a number of special activities concentrated particularly in the area of the crafts and very small businesses .
Entrepreneurs who have good ideas but insufficient resources , will be able to obtain support - and will receive support - mainly at the critical stage when business activities begin .
This relates especially to women , but also to young entrepreneurs and enterprises owned by people who belong to minority groups , a thing which I know the European Parliament is particularly interested in .
In addition , the programme proposes a range of activities , and the more particular measures will be designed to provide opportunities especially in the less privileged sectors and in less developed regions .
However , these ambitious aims of the programme can only succeed if SMEs themselves participate actively in supporting them .
For that reason , we held discussions with the representatives of European organizations for SMEs and I am glad that the Commission 's proposals received their unanimous support .
Regarding the liberal professions Mrs Thyssen referred to , they are not explicitly excluded from the programme 's field of application , but are covered indirectly in many cases .
We also agree with the need to take into account the special needs of the various types of SMEs , as described and determined by the definition of SMEs presented by the Commission on 3 April 1996 .
As for the issue raised by Mr Ferber concerning the relation between SMEs and the programme for research and technological development , this is particularly important .
That is why we insist that this priority must be included in the new framework for research and technology , and we believe that SMEs will have their own part to play in that programme .
Certainly , however , we must put particular emphasis on the future .
At this point , Mr President , I would once again like to thank the rapporteur and the committees involved in formulating the amendments tabled .
Many of the amendments improve the Commission 's text and can be accepted .
More specifically , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 8 , 10 , 16 , 17 , 20 , 21 , 23 , 35 , 36 , 39 , 40 , 44 and 45 .
We can also accept parts of Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 19 and 42 , 33 and 34 .

Now , as for Amendments Nos 1 , 6 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 18 , 22 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 37 , 38 , 41 , 43 , 47 , 48 , 51 , 52 - about which Mr Secchi asked me about in particular - , 53 , 55 and 56 , we can accept their more general spirit but consider that either they are already covered by the Commission 's proposals at the level of principle , or that they form part of other policies included in the integral programme on behalf of SMEs .
In contrast , the Commission cannot accept the following amendments .
First , Amendment No 7 , because we do not think this is relevant to the multiannual programme and it also conflicts with the principle of subsidiarity .
Secondly , Amendment No 9 , which despite being well founded as a comment , cannot be included in the legal text of the proposal .


The Commission can also not accept Amendment No 24 , which concerns the function of the consultative committee , nor Amendment No 25 , because we consider that the regular information of the institutional bodies envisaged covers the need for information .
As for Amendments Nos 26 and 46 , we consider that the Commission 's initial proposal covers that issue sufficiently well .
Finally , as for Amendments Nos 49 and 50 , we cannot accept the proposed link with the ' HOSPITALITY ' programme , since this would create great confusion for the effective implementation of both programmes .
The Commission can also not accept Amendments Nos 54 , 57 , 58 and 59 .
Mr President , the programme we have presented today embodies an overall package of activities whose approach will enable SMEs to be definitively involved in the challenges of the coming years .
As for the budget , I must stress that its correct implementation depends on the availability of sufficient funding .
I would therefore like to express my satisfaction at the rapporteur 's statement that the sum of 180 million ECU is the very least required for correct implementation of the programme .
And I want to thank Parliament for its support in this respect .
Of course , there will have to be an appropriate accounting system and rational utilization of the sums made available .
In conclusion , I should like to stress that it is important to give full support to the spirit of entrepreneurial initiative in Europe and in that way to create a business environment that can contribute substantively to job creation .
That , however , entails coordinated and continual effort by all those involved in business development , and all those involved in the formulation and outlining of policy on behalf of SMEs , and I refer especially to the European Parliament , the Member States , the business organizations of SMEs , and the European Commission as well .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that only in that way will we convert broad political support for the implementation of effective measures for SMEs , into positive and productive action .
I really believe that if the entire range of activities proposed is implemented consistently in this multiannual programme for SMEs , the results will have positive repercussions all over Europe .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Telecommunications and ONP
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0276 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on interconnection in telecommunications with regard to ensuring universal service and interoperability through application of the principles of Open Network Provision ( ONP ) ( C4-0329 / 96-95 / 0207 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Read ) .
Mr President , this second reading is about interconnections , about encouraging competition and preventing incumbents , those with a strong position , from limiting access by other operators .
Underpinning Parliament 's deliberation on this matter has been the need to make sure that the European telecommunications industry survives and thrives .
I have been conscious as rapporteur of the need to establish fair , transparent and cost-based interconnection terms and in parallel to establish effective regulation to make sure that this happens .
Just as justice delayed is justice denied , so delay in normal commercial negotiations can effectively deny new network operators a significant hold in this crucial market .
It is somewhat more difficult than that because the whole committee has been conscious that new network operators , new entrants , can be very substantial and influential players in their own country or on a global scale .
Most of the amendments once again reflect the concerns that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy exhibited at first reading , but there are some significant changes and Parliament was presented with a very substantially changed position from the Council for our second reading .
I would particularly appreciate the Commissioner 's view on Amendment No 10 , which changes the definition of ' interconnections ' .
I would appreciate the Commissioner 's view , particularly in the context of whether this change , in his view , would serve the goal of opening up the market and would he compare it with the Commission 's original position .
There is an important amendment on number portability and my colleague , Mr Whitehead , from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection will comment on this important consumer and business measure .
I am sure that Parliament will need to comment on future occasions on this crucial issue .
On the question of European regulation and Amendment No 8 , once again I would welcome the Commissioner 's view .
It is not possible , in my view and that of the committee , to envisage the future of interconnections , at least in the immediate future , without regulation .
Once again , the Economic Committee and I are concerned about the latitude given to national regulators in this and other matters .
You will note that Amendment No 8 is carefully phrased to ask the Commission to ' envisage the possibility ' and we are aware of the sensitivity at national and Council level about European regulation .
I would appreciate , too , the Commission 's detailed view on Amendment No 5 about cross-border disputes , which I hope he can comment on , and also the question of universal service which the Environment Committee are rightly concerned about .
I know that this is going to be considered in a future communication and that Parliament will have another opportunity to determine its view of universal service definition and financing but , as in every telecommunications report , this is a crucial issue for this Parliament .
I commend the report to colleagues and hope that it will command cross-party support , but I would appreciate the Commissioner 's views on those matters which I have particularly highlighted before we take a final decision and I make recommendations on support for the various amendments .
Mr President , on behalf of the Members present I should like to say how delighted we are that our colleague Mrs Read is back with us after an illness , fully restored to health and in her customary eloquent style .
She has been identified with this issue longer than I have been a Member of this Parliament , and the whole master structure is now coming together .
We applaud it particularly in the spirit of a liberalized single market in which the new entrant must have fair play against the existing incumbents .
Having said that , however , entry for the newcomer is a necessary but not always a sufficient condition for protecting the consumer , and my few moments must be devoted to the consumer .
When the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection wrote an opinion on Mrs Read 's last report on 12 January 1995 it tried to set out what the conditions of universal service should be .
I would simply remark here that in trying to peg what is said in this report to previous pronouncements from the Commission , we are not trying to hold to a nebulous and rather nervous definition , but rather to seek an indication from Commissioner Bangemann and his colleagues of when a proper and acceptable definition of universal service will come forward .
Secondly , I want to say a word about number portability .
Amendment No 25 which Mrs Read has just mentioned attempts - and Mr van Velzen and others have raised this point - to provide , set against a reasonable fee , for the regulator to establish that there is genuine number portability , and that if there is not , once a user has changed the supplier a telephone call to the old number can be re-routed to the user at a reasonable price .
We would hope that undertaking would be given .
Finally , I hope that tomorrow the House will vote for the environmental protection recommendation which Mrs Read introduced at a late stage as an amendment to the report .
I know there has been opposition to it in some quarters but I believe it is the least we can do in order to satisfy the necessary concerns at points of interconnection that environmental considerations may be set aside in the course of negotiations between the old and new players in this market .
Interconnection is one of the most important conditions for the liberalisation of the telecommunication market , to make it operate well .
A third of the telephone price consists of interconnection money , so at European level this is billions of ecus .
Poorly regulated interconnection also leads to the screening off of markets , the disturbance of competition and it is disadvantageous to the consumer .
It can lead to higher prices , a lower level of service and a less varied supply .
It is therefore necessary that fair rules are put in place , that the procedures and cost structure are transparent , and there is no abuse of power .
It is therefore also necessary for access to networks to be provided to newcomers at acceptable prices .
This is the scope of interconnection .
I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Read , for her expert contribution , for the cooperation and the fact that we can be here together again today .
This brings me to the definition of interconnection .
You have seen that there is an amendment which has reincluded the original definition , because if the telecom services are excluded , as is now the case in the position of the Council , the value of the regulation would be reduced by some 25 to 50 % .
Indeed , the scope would then be greatly limited and it would mean that access to the networks for realistic prices for newcomers would be threatened .
And I think this is essential .
It is the core of liberalisation .
Many telecom companies now have the fear that when moving into services which do not have their own networks , these will then make a claim on the same high discount .
This is a serious misunderstanding .
In Article 7 ( 2 ) of the common position of the Council it is rightly pointed out , and I quote " for the prices for interconnection the principles of transparency are to serve ' , and " cost orientation to be followed ' .
This is the key .
Cost orienteering entails that if you have fewer costs , you cannot make a claim on the same discount .
And that is the essence of why we have brought the case back again .
My group is fully behind what is proposed by Mrs Read : emphasis on common guidelines set up by the Commission for interconnection agreements ; a good dispute-settling procedure ; emphasis on the development of a real , harmonised European telecommunication market .
It has greatly disappointed us that the Council has deviated from this on 6 or 7 essential points .
As an example I would first point to the fact that the extent of harmonisation of the rules by Parliament goes further than is accepted by the Council .
This is most tersely demonstrated in Amendment No 21 .
A second point is that we go further on transparency of costs in the interconnection agreement .
We make greater requirements here .
Thirdly , we want a greater say at a European level .
The role of the Commission must be strengthened here .
It is all very well , with a view to subsidiarity , that we give many possibilities to the national governing bodies , but if the Commission cannot play an important role here , I predict that little will come of a European telecommunications market .
We want a cross-border dispute-settling regulation and we want the retention of numbers , because if you go from one company to the other and you do not take your number , you cause an enormous blockade on liberalisation .
And that is a crucial point .
We want to grow to become a European regulating authority .
I hope that the Commissioner will stand by our side , that he will stand firm with us , because I think this is of vital importance .
Finally , we have urged that there be much regulation in this transitional stage .
But we will have to deregulate , and we have indicated in exactly which fields this must take place .
And I would like to ask the Commissioner this : on 1 February you said that the separate competition rules must come before the telecom .
How far are we now ?
Mr President , interconnection in telecommunications is important , as is the joint coordination and development of telecommunications in the EU and Europe .
National regulatory authorities should have ultimate responsibility for fostering the development of a telecommunications market .
This should be done bearing in mind the interests of users .
We should ensure interconnectivity between different networks .
If this is done in the right way , it is questionable whether any general guidelines from the Commission or an EU-level regulatory authority are needed .
The need for an EU directive on cost calculation and the financing of universal services can also be questioned .
Disputes should in the first instance be resolved among service providers at national level , and a system of comparison should be established jointly by the various national regulatory authorities .
I believe these issues should be borne in mind in respect of the subject we are now debating .
Mr President , I too want to give Mrs Read warm thanks for the job she has done .
This is one of the most important rules we need if we want to obtain a European telecommunications market that works .
The close cooperation with her and with Parliament as a whole will make it easier for us to deal with the Council , for unfortunately we do not agree with the Council on every point .
Of course the Council is also aware of the two main objectives of this directive : firstly , to interconnect all the networks , for that offers the consumer far more choices , and secondly to monitor infrastructure enterprises that dominate the market so that they are forced to open up their infrastructure in a fair and transparent manner .
Similarly , costs must be calculated in such a way as to enable competitors , especially newcomers , to make use of the possibilities offered by the new market .
That is not disputed .
What is as always disputed is the details , and perhaps I should go into the most important amendments because that will clarify our position .
The Commission has always considered it essential to have a European regulatory authority in these areas of telecommunications because this interconnection , the monitoring and other measures that will become necessary in future concern the entire single market and not just one or two countries as may have been the rule in the past .
The Council is being extremely reticent on this question .
Virtually all the countries are afraid to give up any powers or competences and the prospect that Mr van Velzen finds so inviting , namely that the Commission should take this over , is regarded with some horror by the Member States , for as you know the Commission has kept trying to force all the Member States to take action on the question of telecommunications policy .
We keep trying to persuade the dog to go hunting .
That is all very well , but it does not make one very likeable .
That is why I fear we will not make much headway here , but we shall see what the Council eventually decides .
The same applies to resolving cross-frontier disputes in regard to interconnection .
Here we also support Amendments Nos 5 and 27 tabled by Parliament .
I already said in the debate yesterday or the day before that we are in favour of number portability .
That is one of the most important requirements if we are to have open competition between operators .
It is very expensive for the customer to switch numbers , which is why they have to be portable .
With regard to Amendment No 10 to which Mrs Read made particular reference , we can support it too .
It is just that the wording is rather misleading .
But in the event of conciliation we will be able to sort that out , for this amendment refers to ' linking of ... telecommunications services ' whereas we are in fact talking about the linking of the facilities of organizations providing telecom services , which is the wording of the original version and which we would prefer .
I think that is also what Mrs Read means .
The question of universal service also arose in some amendments .
That is not just a problem in this case but a general one .
That is why we have to start by tackling it in a general manner .
First of all we have to define universal service .
That seems fairly easy to me .
Universal service means that every customer , in whatever place , can participate in a public service at the same and appropriate conditions .
That is the definition .
We want to avoid linking this definition to any particular technical possibility .
It must to some degree be dynamic .
In the case of the telephone , it is enough to have the technical possibility to access the network .
In future , however , there will be a whole range of additional telecommunications services , value added services , and in principle universal service must also include access to these services , which is to say we must not make our definition too restrictive .
Regarding financing , as I have often said I am convinced for two reasons that we do not need any extra financing . This interconnection will play a major role through the competition between competitors .
Whether a service provider or network operator reaches only a part of the country or the entire country is an important factor of competition i.e. , as a result of this competition , everybody will try to reach everybody .
Secondly , and that has not yet been sufficiently understood , the cost structure , the calculation of the costs of the infrastructure or the services offered , depends very much on the number of customers reached .
The more customers can be reached , the easier it is to absorb these costs .
In our view these two arguments are the best way to guarantee that no problems will arise .
But because there are always some people who do not believe the Commission - this might be regarded as a character failing , but they still exist - we have offered two possibilities : to finance the setting up of universal services either through a fund or by charging for the issue of a licence , where one could go so far as to make the issue of a licence subject to the obligation to provide a universal service .
We really want to keep that in reserve , and in that respect we have no quarrel with each other .
We still have to clarify this , as we do the questions of cost calculation and so on , to decide whether we need a directive on this or whether we can do it in the form of a kind of annex to this directive ; that is a technical question .
Of course we also need principles on how to achieve this transparency and how to calculate the costs .
That is absolutely clear .
Mr President , I think those were the most important questions to deal with in this short space of time .
Once again I thank Mrs Read and all who took part here .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Protection for occupants of motor vehicles
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0275 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on the protection of occupants of motor vehicles in the event of a frontal impact and amending Directive 70 / 156 / EEC ( C4-0326 / 96-94 / 0323 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Donnelly ) .
Mr President , can I say that this piece of legislation completes our work on crash testing .
We have dealt with the legislation on side-impact at crash testing to make cars safer , or the construction of cars better , for the citizens in the European Union .
This second reading on the legislation for new tests for frontimpact for automobiles in the European Union completes the package of two legislative measures .
The amendments that we have tabled in the second reading , and this has been done to a certain extent in consultation with the European Commission , and indeed with the expert committees that deal with vehicle safety , are largely technical amendments to tidy up the legislation .
While I suspect the Commissioner may have some reservations or place a reserve on some of the figures in the amendments that we have tabled , I think he will largely accept the proposals that we are putting forward .
I do not really want to deal with the technical question this evening .
What I do want to say to the many people , particularly in my own country , who question the validity or the usefulness of the European Union is that what we have been able to do in the European Parliament , with the support of Commissioner Bangemann , and through the measures that have been agreed in the Council of Ministers , is to take measures that will come into force in 1998 and will lead to a substantial reduction in serious accidents and deaths on the roads .
This is a tangible example to explain to the citizens either in the United Kingdom , who as you know are debating the whole issue of Europe yet again , or in other countries in the European Union - and we have elections coming up in Finland and Austria in the very near future for the European Parliament - of how Parliament acting in a sensible way in collaboration with the other institutions of the European Union , can put in place legislation , using our codecision powers , that will make some significant differences .
I just want to give you the figures for the United Kingdom .
Once this legislation is in place in the United Kingdom , it will actually lead to the prevention of 9 , 000 deaths and serious injuries every year .
It will produce an annual saving , as far as accidents are concerned in the United Kingdom , of £ 400 m , a very important saving in terms of the financial cost and , of course , there will be a substantial reduction in the number of fatalities across the European Union , particularly from front-impact accidents .
There will be something like 15 , 000 lives saved across the European Union simply from the piece of legislation that we are dealing with tonight .
So I would like to thank the Members of the House , because this has been very much a cross-party initiative in this House , and Commissioner Bangemann for his political support at a very difficult time when we felt it was going to be rather hard to get the Commission and Council to accept the approach that we were taking .
This is something that we should try to use , and I know Members of the House will try to use it , as an example of how this institution and how the European Union can actually benefit our citizens .
I really hope that when the legislation comes into force , in 1998 , the car manufacturers will ensure that the vehicles that they are building for our citizens in the future fully respect the new laws and therefore protect not only the drivers but their passengers too .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Donnelly has clarified the content of the draft decision and also what can be expected , i.e. , the consequences if what we want to adopt at second reading becomes reality in 1998 .
All that is really left to point out is that we have worked very successfully with members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on this subject and that everyone took part in drafting this document .
Moreover , it became clear that as in the case of side-impact protection , Alan Donnelly , the rapporteur , has once again achieved good common results from his well-informed work with experts from the motor industry , the industries concerned with safety questions and in particular with the Commission .
That is the kind of outcome I would also hope to see in future in regard to many of the questions that are important to the citizens .
One area for improving car safety in future too is that of child seats .
Until now this area has been one of the major weaknesses in relation to cars .
I hope we will approach it in a similar way so that so that through our work in Parliament , with the Commission , with the industry , and of course also with the Council we rapidly achieve results that will make driving even safer and avoid the many road deaths and the many injured children .
If we continue to work as we have done , we will make rapid progress and obtain good results .
Mr President , it really is not just out of politeness that I return the compliment to Alan Donnelly , because as Mr Hoppenstedt rightly said he has carried out his task as rapporteur in exemplary fashion , as also reflected by the fact that nearly all the amendments tabled by the European Parliament found their way into the common position .
We only have one more stage to go ; we have established the details of the certification procedure for using test dummies in a seventh appendix , i.e. , we now have a consistent , logical and practical measure .
It is quite right of Alan Donnelly to say it is a pity that successful examples of this kind of collaboration between the European Parliament and the Commission and Parliament are too little known .
That is a particular problem in his own home country too .
On my last visit to our London delegation I found a very useful brochure , which drew attention to one particular problem by listing all the so-called Euro-myths that keep cropping up in the British press and have absolutely no bearing on reality .
That makes it very difficult for a Member or a Commissioner to make it clear to the citizens of the Union that we sometimes do sensible things here too .
Of course we sometimes also get things wrong , but by and large the Union is of great and positive value to the lives of the citizens , unlike some of the things that are often not done in the Member States .
But such is life , we have to keep on trying and I hope that at some point , through joint action with the industry and perhaps also with the associations that represent the victims of such accidents or that campaign for transport safety in general- for there are such associations , sometimes set up by citizens , in all the Member States - we will be able to make all this clear and that attitudes to the Union will then change .
However , we can only achieve that with the support of our national colleagues .
If national prime ministers behave like modern Robin Hoods and give their citizens the idea that if they march into battle against Brussels and violate all the rules of law they are working in the interests of their citizens , we should not be surprised if these citizens suddenly begin to feel negative about the European Union .
But that is a different problem that has already been discussed during the debate on the state of the Union .
So basically we can all be very satisfied .
Alan Donnelly was also right to point out that in the event that other technical details still need to be regulated , those amendments can still be incorporated either through the institutions or through the Technical Progress Committee .
We have to be aware of that if we adopt the legislation today , but that is quite normal for of course this area of technology will also continue to develop .
So , once again many thanks to Alan Donnelly , and we can all be glad we have managed to achieve this !
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Standardization
The next item is the report ( A4-0248 / 96 ) by Mr Meier , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the broader use of standardization in Community policy ( COM ( 95 ) 0412 - C4-0504 / 95 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , Members of this midnight sitting , standardization is of course not do to just with the familiar example of the electrical socket but extends from the video cassette to hotel classifications or the chip card for using tourist facilities .
When I was dealing with this subject it struck me that the Euro would also represent a very important example of standardization , although of course that is not the issue today .
I would like to thank the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , the Committee on External Economic Relations and the Committee on Transport and Tourism , together with their draftsmen Mr Ferber , Mr Pex and Mr Cornelissen , for their opinions .
We have taken very serious account of their proposals .
That also applies to the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Unfortunately we could not deal with the new amendments tabled in committee .
I am very sorry about that , but they are there and I will be saying a few words about them .
Of course the report cannot discuss all the policy areas in detail .
After all , we have four or five new standards in the European Union every day and this would go far beyond the framework of the report .
But who participates in standardization ?
At national and European level it is business , industry , small and medium-sized enterprises , the consumers and of course the bodies responsible for standardization .
But let us not forget the international level , which goes beyond Europe , and here I would just mention the ISO standards as an example .
This horizontal and vertical structure alone reveals the complexity of the process of establishing standards , for on the one hand people expect standards , on the other hand these standards should not dominate or impose too many requirements .
On the one hand we want adaptation , on the other we do not want too much conformity or uniformity .
Science and research must also play a part and be involved .
But there must also be the widest possible margin for a voluntary approach to establishing standards without any influencing by politicians or authorities .
That shows how complex the standardization process is .
Discussion between the various parties will also ensure that standards are not developed over-hastily or produce results that might prove inadequate .
It is a fact that criticism of the recently decided standards that are being implemented has remained within bounds .
But improvements are still possible .
We must make it possible for all parties concerned to participate and also urge them to commit themselves to this and encourage the necessary training .
Apart from larger industries , this applies in particular to small and medium-sized undertakings , whose representatives we must support .
Of course support always means a certain amount of financial aid .
Consumer representatives should also receive the necessary support .
In this context I would like to say that I have heard that the budget appropriations for standardization activities by consumer representatives are apparently to be cut from ECU 750 000 to ECU 250 000 .
That would surely conflict with what we too have decided here .
In paragraphs 8 , 9 , 10 and 11 we emphasize the need to ensure that small and medium-sized undertakings , which we have already discussed today , are given an opportunity to become involved through training and information measures .
So I would ask for this question to be reviewed , for we do not want to give the impression that the we want to exclude these undertakings from the standardization process .
Of course we are in favour of cooperation between CEN , CENELEC and ETSI , so that we do not have a multi-track system , and of ensuring the internal efficiency of the organizations , to which the CEN optimization programme has indeed already made some contribution .
Another important aspect , as mentioned earlier , is international cooperation with the ISO .
Strong products coming from abroad or from other economic blocs can point the way to future standards .
That means that dominant standards that are developed outside Europe also influence production .
So any group that does not take part in standardization may face economic disadvantages .
Standardization therefore also has an important part to play in improving competition with third countries .
I will now turn briefly to the new amendments , which unfortunately were tabled belatedly and not discussed in committee .
Basically we agree with the content of Amendment No 1 .
However , it calls for account to be taken of the Treaty provisions of Article 130 r ( 2 ) .
Well , that is obvious , given that we all believe in respecting the Treaty and it is simply not possible to list all the provisions of the Treaty again in a single report .
Second comment : of course I am also in favour of the necessary standardization of aeroplane components , but I will try to table an oral amendment so that we do not necessarily have to name the body that is to be set up and made responsible for standardization in Europe at this point .
Of course it is also important to take due account of any relevant environmental aspects , but I do not believe that means handing over any legislative power to the standardization bodies .
I am therefore not in favour of Amendment No 3 .
Thank you for allowing me to exceed my speaking time somewhat !
Mr President , I would like to compliment Mr Meier on his report on an important matter which is barely recognised as important by many .
From the viewpoint of trading policy I deem standards in the field of information technology and telecommunications , the environment , energy and standards in the workplace very important .
In all these fields I consider attuning with the international standardisation bodies such as the ISO and IEC of great importance .
It is also of great importance that the matching of European standards with international standards leads to the breaking down of technical trade barriers worldwide , with new barriers being avoided .
My conclusion is that the expansion of standardisation benefits the integration of Europe .
As already said , I believe there must be more cooperation between European standardisation institutes to put Europe in a favourable position for the establishment of worldwide standards .
It is of great importance to European industry that standardisation is effected in the closest possible harmony with the latest technology .
I consider the establishment of a European mark that indicates conformity with European standards as an appropriate tool of quality policy that can contribute to improving our competitive position .
Standardisation relating to the environment and safety at the workplace can also make an important contribution to the debate about social and environmental dumping within the framework of the organisation of world trade .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , naturally the Committee on Research has considered the communication from the Commission on the broader use of standardization in European policy in great depth .
I just want to make a few basic comments , because many sensible points have already been made .
Firstly , we need a standardization policy that is consistent with competitiveness , growth and employment .
We ought to be able to manage no longer to have 15 or 5 main systems of standards in the European Union but to agree on a common system .
Secondly , we need a common legal basis , which we should take time to think about .
It does not have to happen overnight , but at some point we ought to create a common legal basis for CEN , CENELEC , ETSI and EOTC .
Thirdly , the question of transparency and participation by all groups was raised .
Fourthly , we also need pre-standardization research and should include this in the Fifth Framework Research Programme .
Fifthly , we need to achieve a broad consensus between European standardization bodies to prevent certain Member States , certain dominant industries , from defining European standards to the detriment of the others .
Lastly , we continue to need research measures , in the field of criminology too and to develop our laboratories .
I thank the rapporteur for taking on board so many of the comments we made in the Research Committee and I hope that the completion of the single market will not continue to be hindered by national standards .
Mr President , I would first of all like to welcome the Commissioner 's communication which , I believe , is both perceptive and sensible .
It identified numerous applications for standardization and we , as representatives of the citizens of Europe , are most keenly aware of the value and opportunities that this aspect of the single market standard can give us .
The rapporteur , Mr Meier , rightly develops this theme in his excellent report , emphasizing both the need for such standardization to be voluntary and to be widely encouraged , and especially in the way in which he singles out small and medium-sized enterprises for assistance in meeting those standards whilst not allowing them to be put to a competitive disadvantage because of the financial implications lodged in there .
Clearly we have here a vehicle which could make European products truly pan-European , where a European quality label could become just as reassuring as the British Standards Institution marks which we enjoy in the UK .
Quality guarantees are what consumers deserve and what they need , and standardization could deliver just that .
Only yesterday in this House , Commissioner , I asked you a question about safety standards on camp-sites in Europe .
We all remember the tragedies which seem to occur summer after summer .
All of us who have travelled with our families to camp-sites know how much we take on trust in those sites , sometimes with tragic results .
Standardization of safety measures both in the siting and the equipment of camp-sites could save lives , and I was encouraged by your positive response yesterday .
This is just one example - there will be many more - of sound practice which can enhance the day-to-day lives of all of us .
I am confident that many more will flow from the groundwork that this report gives us .
It certainly deserves our full support and it is in line with the sort of comments that you , Commissioner , have just made to the previous report , which shows that the European Union is an organ and vehicle for good and for positive legislation .
I believe the question of the delegation of legislative powers is indeed a serious one .
I regard the question of the access of all groups concerned as an important one .
I also think that consumer and environmental groups should be involved and I think it would be a mistake to restrict the inclusion of environmental policy in every policy area to standardization .
It is probably right to include civil aviation , but it will not be possible to control industrial dominance by this means alone .
Mr President , I want to end with a remark that is inescapable at this stage in the debate : ' would the last person to leave please turn out the light ' .
Thank you .
Mr President , our communication was designed to draw the attention of Parliament and of course of the general public to the importance of European standards .
I am pleased that Mr Meier 's report and the contributions by Members this evening show that Parliament has understood this communication correctly .
I also hope that the general public will come to a greater and better understanding of the important role played by standardization , as also of our forthcoming proposals on , for instance , the role of standards and market specifications in the field of information technology .
The question raised by Mrs Billingham concerning the relationship between quality and standards will also be discussed in our next communication on the competitiveness of European industry .
So we are taking an in-depth look at these questions and I hope we will be able to make it clear that this is not some esoteric subject of concern only to a few techno-freaks but that it really is important for the consumer , the environment , the industry and therefore of course also for the competitiveness of the European Union .
Mr Meier , I have already discussed the question of the budget allocation with the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , who asked me about my priorities , as he will ask other colleagues too .
I hope that with the support of the rapporteur of the Committee on Budgets we will manage to avoid any cuts in relation to standardization bodies .
If we want to involve groups such as small and medium-sized enterprises , consumers and environmental organizations , we obviously also need some public funding of their activities , for it will be more difficult for these groups to bear the costs than it normally is for industrial undertakings .
It is surprising , and I too found it astonishing , that there is one sector of industry in which there have indeed been very few common standards to date , namely aircraft construction .
Anyone who gives some thought to it will say : aircraft construction is the very first area where standards should be established ; but that is not the case .
That too will surely change with time .
All the excitement there used to be about the competition between national and European standards has also calmed down .
National standardization bodies are cooperating sensibly and I hope that will prove fruitful .
Incidentally , we have regular meetings with CEN , CENELEC and ETSI .
If I may , Mr Meier , I will invite you to the next meeting .
We always meet in pleasant places .
So you can be sure to find yourself in the right environment too .
If Mr Wolf really wants to come , I will consider whether to invite him too , but I will have to think about it first .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12.01 a.m. )
Mr President , I wish to condemn the serious violation of the most basic civil and democratic rights committed by the State police against the movement that I represent in Italy .
This went beyond all limits of decency .
These intimidatory and provocative measures directed against the movement that I represent demonstrate the determination of the State to rise roughshod over all democratic rights .
The State police has never shown such determination in combating organized crime ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Moretti , what you are saying is not a point of order .
You asked to speak on a point of order but you are not speaking on a point of order , which is why I cannot let you continue .
Fight against fraud
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Gradin , before coming to the individual requests I would like to situate this report within a wider framework , even if this may seem presumptuous to the eyes and in the ears of some Members .
This week , and not just this week , we have had detailed discussions on the state of the European Union .
We are conducting a debate on enlargement , a debate on the intergovernmental conference and , often at least with most regrettable undertones , a debate on the future financing of this European Union .
We are conducting a debate with very regrettable undertones in what are called the net contributor countries , and more and more of our citizens are wondering not only : what does this Union cost us , but also : what do we get out of it ?
Will we be prepared to spend money on it in future ?
All these discussions are interlinked .
We have heard that the Union can continue to develop unless only if it is also accepted by the men and women within it , by the 370 million people who live in this European Union , but also by those who want to join it and who must of course also contribute something to it .
Acceptance is not just something intellectual .
The President has pointed out again and again that we must also address the feelings , the general perceptions of the people .
We must win the people over to Europe .
But if we have to hold this debate at a time when money is short and we have to save everywhere , then of course the question that is asked first is : what does all this cost ?
That question is always linked to the questions : are they being careful with our money ?
Are they doing the right thing ?
Are they doing exactly what they should be doing ?
Not only , are we perhaps paying too much , but what is happening to the money ?
Is fraud not occurring throughout Europe ?
After all , we read about it in the papers every day : fraud and corruption , fraud with subsidies and all manner of other unpleasant things ; is this not a European disease ?
Firstly , in my view of course the question is wrong , because unfortunately fraud and corruption are not European inventions but occur at every level .
We know it starts at local level and certainly does not end at European level .
It is a battle we must all fight together , which is why we need the public .
How can we win over the public ?
How can we persuade the citizens to support us in this fight ?
First , we will win them over by informing them properly about what we are already doing , by giving them comprehensible information and making it clear where the responsibilities lie , who performs what functions and who may also be failing to do something .
Mrs Gradin , the Commission has published this report on your measures to combat fraud in every language in the Internet .
I think that is an excellent idea and hope it will be continued .
It creates the kind of publicity that can never be achieved through pieces of paper .
But if we are addressing this broad public , then we need to formulate things much more clearly in the report , for then it will not be written just for a few experts , not just for the Committee on Budgetary Control , not just as a justification vis à vis this Parliament ; then it will be written for 370 million citizens and they have a right to be able to understand what it says .
I will not repeat my requests in detail now , because I kept my report so short in the hope that some of the Members who are unable to be present now may still read it .
It does not take up much time and I have tried to be as clear and simple myself as I expect you to be .
But there are two aspects that I want to emphasize again .
First , it is important that in future the programme of work is recognizably based on the previous year 's programme .
Hence my requests , and I know you support them .
I would be grateful if you would take these aspects together .
That would also mean that the programme of work must make clearly identifiable statements so that it is possible to ascertain just as clearly and definitely whether they have been adhered to .
My other request , which may be a new one , goes as follows : in its report the Commission should not only tell us about the programmes to combat fraud it has already carried out , i.e. , retrospective measures to combat fraud , but also tell us what preventive action it is taking to check whether its own programmes , its own policy of subsidies , are fraud-proof in those areas where it can formulate this policy itself .
I would like you to give your position on that in the report .
We keep hearing , and Mr Liikanen and yourself also said it during the SEM 2000 discussions , that it is important to preclude the likelihood of fraud from the outset rather than just examining the situation after the event to establish that fraud has occurred .
If you gave your position on this , if you accounted not just to us but to the general public in Europe for what you are doing in this respect , that would gain the European Union greater acceptance and credibility and , I hope , not just in financial but also in political terms , which is what we all so urgently need .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report I am presenting to you today on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control has an interesting history .
At your initiative , Mr President , in April this year members of the national parliaments discussed with Members of this House how to ensure better protection of the European tax-payers ' money .
That interparliamentary conference in Brussels was an important and productive experience for all concerned .
Its outcome was the conviction and the resolve to take joint action to protect the Union 's financial interests and to stop passing the buck , as has sometimes happened in the past .
The report by the Committee on Budgetary Control incorporates the results of this conference and makes practical proposals for their implementation , entirely in line with the ten criteria for improving measures to combat fraud which you , Mr President , set out at the end of the conference .
My report lists the points that need to be tackled at Member State level .
It says where the Commission has to take initiatives and make proposals with a view to improving the partnership between the Commission and the Member States .
Some of this can also be found in the Commission 's programme of work , which Mrs Wemheuer has just discussed .
But many of our requests and proposals are , if I may say so , clearer and bolder than those of the Commission .
I am referring here to the suggestions by Mr Bontempi , whose opinion on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs unfortunately did not reach us in time for us to be able to vote on it in committee .
In a situation where we have to economize in every area , where painful cuts have to be made in the European Union 's budget too , is totally intolerable that in a sense we are often tying our own hands in relation to combating fraud .
Please do not get me wrong ! It is not as though nothing had been done in this area in past years .
The rising number of cases discovered in all areas makes it very clear that more efforts are being made , especially by Parliament and the Commission , but to some extent also by the Member States who after all manage some 80 % of Union money .
Our weaknesses are to be found elsewhere .
How can we get hold of the perpetrators ?
How can we take them to court and what are the penalties ?
That is the crucial question we have to answer .
On that depend deterrence and effective prevention .
Only in a minority of cases are those responsible for fraud actually brought to account .
There will no real change here unless we in the Union review and adjust the entire arsenal of administrative , legal and judicial measures .
In this area we need to harmonize the penalties in the Member States and coordinate the definition of criminal offences so that we have the same jurisdiction everywhere .
We need precise rules on the cooperation between investigating authorities and courts , indeed where possible we need bodies responsible for this , like the Guardia di Finanza in Italy , and judicial bodies or departments .
All this must be interlinked otherwise any gap can become a loophole for organized crime .
In this context , we should also consider the possibility of setting up a European body able to initiate criminal prosecutions against offences detrimental to the Union 's financial interests , especially in cases where Union officials have taken bribes .
Another area is the question of how can we , how can the Member States organize the fight against fraud ?
The Commission 's anti-fraud unit , UCLAF , has passed its initial test and achieved some successes .
But UCLAF could be even more effective if it had comparable interlocutors with clearly defined powers and decision-making structures in all the Member States .
Sadly , what we still find too often is a dissipation of powers , which are still jealously guarded today .
The citizens not only expect us to uncover fraud and bring the guilty parties to court .
The citizens also expect us to recover the misappropriated funds .
So far , the recovery quota stands at most at 20 % .
We urgently need an action programme here for more and better trained staff and we must remove any legal obstacles such as excessively short limitation periods , which make it impossible to recover the funds .
Lastly , in future we must check our rules and regulations systematically for susceptibility to fraud and where appropriate amend them .
One present-day example is the rules on subsidies for olive oil .
This year we will be spending more than ECU 300 million more on this than the originally earmarked ECU 1 800 million .
We are fully aware that a considerable portion of that will go straight into the pockets of fraudsters .
Here we urgently await proposals for reform from the Commission .
In this context we must also remember the Council decision on budgetary discipline which specifically provides for the possibility of suspending the payment of agricultural expenditure if Community resources have been misused .
A word on the forthcoming reform of the EC Treaties . Here we expect the Intergovernmental Conference to formulate Article 209a , i.e. , the article on combating fraud , more efficiently , which is to say that legal instruments must be found that are equivalent , effective , proportional and deterrent , as was also decided in Judgment 68 / 88 of the European Court of Justice in the Greek maize case .
Combating fraud should be established as a question of common interest and in future , legislative decisions should be taken on a co-decision basis , i.e. , with the full participation of the European Parliament !
Experience to date with co-decision in other areas has shown that this procedure not only represents a gain in democracy but also produces more rapid results .
Unfortunately the Council decided just the opposite - and this brings me to the oral question - in relation to the protection of financial interests under criminal law , namely by deciding on an inter-state convention in the third pillar .
The Council took that decision on 26 July last year , but so far not a single Member State has ratified it .
And if my information is correct , there is no prospect of such ratification if only because the dispute about the competence of the European Court of Justice has still not been settled .
Another open question is that of the additional protocol to the convention , which is meant to regulate the question of bribes , among others .
Here too we have made critical comments and put forward proposals .
It is a pity we do not have a chance today to ask the Council how things stand ; unfortunately its bench is not fully occupied .
But Mrs Gradin , you are here as the Commissioner responsible and I would like to remind you of what you said here before this House on 15 March 1995 , namely that in spite of Parliament 's warnings the Commission would opt for a convention in order to avoid a blockade situation .
But we now have this blockade situation and we are growing impatient .
You have this Parliament 's full backing .
That is clear from the decisions to date and I would ask you how much longer you will continue to be patient with the Member States ?
When can we expect ratification , or will you follow us along the path of the proposed directive on this matter ?
I would be grateful for an answer and I believe you have our support !
Mr President , the committee on behalf of which I am speaking was very positive in its assessment of Mrs Theato 's report , particularly since the clarification of the proposals is designed to give very strong impetus to an activity that Parliament has been supporting for some time now .
Turning to the proposals that I put forward in committee : one is of a general nature but seems to me to be important and concerns the issue of sound legislation .
We run the risk of finding ourselves with a jumble of various instruments in this field , more especially conventions and protocols and , indeed , protocols and conventions on the same issue , such as corruption , with the far from edifying result that they are ineffective because the conventions will remain a dead letter while at the same time helping to generate a great deal of confusion .
These instruments need to be merged and , in relation to corruption for example , we are recommending the adoption of a single independent instrument encompassing both prosecution where the Union 's financial interests are damaged and the corruption of foreign officials .
It is clear that there is a gap here in the international legal order .
We have to raise another point concerning our competence in relation to corruption .
We are calling for the new Treaty to refer explicitly to corruption as an issue of common interest .
This is in fact an offence that underlies all acts of international fraud , fraud that damages the interests of the Community budget and which also forms the connective tissue linking organized crime .
Furthermore , other organizations , such as the OECD and the Council of Europe , are taking action .
It is my view that the revision of the Treaty will have crucially to include corruption among the issues of common interest .
On the point of corruption , I wish to point out , to the Commissioner , Mrs Gradin , in particular , who has been involved in this , that preventive measures are also important .
I think we need to look closely at preventive measures also , at transparency and at simplified , accessible , comprehensible and usable mechanisms .
The second point which we consider to be very important concerns the second protocol on the liability of legal persons .
I shall not spend much time discussing why it needs to be tackled , but it is a key point .
Liability is increasingly attributable not only to natural persons but to bodies , to undertakings .
This is a difficult legal issue but it is one that needs to be dealt with because it is clear that only if there are adequate penalties for legal persons , that is to say undertakings , will we be able better to deter fraud and crime .
Finally , a key point which perhaps encompasses all of the others is the adoption , as we are calling for , of a general and horizontal legal instrument covering both judicial cooperation and judicial assistance .
To give just one example , we have the problem of extradition and inter-court relations .
The speed at which crimes are committed is on the increase while the speed at which crimes are prevented is , if possible , declining , despite our efforts .
We have therefore to understand that this instrument may offer a strategy for the future .
Moreover , all of that is contained in the report .
I am only sorry that pressure of time meant that we were unable to incorporate it but I intend to put forward three proposals by way of oral amendment .
If the House agrees , it will be possible to add to the excellent report , presented here by Mrs Theato , these three points which may be very useful for the purposes of prevention .
As far as the question is concerned , I support the concerns and the incentives proposed by Mrs Theato .
Mr President , fraud is not merely a financial crime which cheats the European budget and the European taxpayer .
It is increasingly a cancer in the body politic of the European Union .
In my opinion it is disproportionately eroding our credibility with European citizens and provides opponents of the Union and national governments alike with an easy alibi on which they can blame all evils .
Citizens have a greater negative image from the allegations of the incidence of fraud than for any other reason .
That is why these reports we are debating this morning are so important .
I should first like to congratulate Mrs Wemheuer on her excellent report .
It sets out quite clearly and pragmatically the intention to work with the Commission in the new culture which is very evident in the Commission to take the fight against fraud more seriously now than perhaps has historically been the case .
It adds some very sensible , pragmatic proposals as to the sort of things that ought to happen in the Commission 's work programme and the relationship between the work programme and the annual report .
I hope that Commissioner Gradin - and I am glad to see her here today - will be able to respond positively to the Wemheuer report .
It is a positive report , supported unanimously in the Committee on Budgetary Control , and I hope the Commission will acknowledge it for what it is - a sensible approach to working jointly to attack the twin problems we have to face .
I now turn to the Theato report .
Before I congratulate Mrs Theato , I really have to congratulate you , Mr President , because the parentage of the Theato report was your own intervention at the Essen Summit .
The Essen Summit laid the basis for a conference which brought together the real parties who must cooperate if the fight against fraud is going to be successful .
We cannot expect Mrs Gradin and the UCLAF unit to do it by themselves .
80 % of the budget , as we all know , is spent by the Member State and the incidence of fraud in the Member State is at least as serious as the incidence of fraud in that money which is organized and spent collectively at the centre of the Union in Brussels .
So we had this conference and Mrs Theato has produced an excellent report which my group supports as a follow-up to the initiative which you started and the conference we had .
We have to see these two reports - the Theato and Wemheuer reports - as a coherent response to a single problem ; the Wemheuer report addressed to the Commission , the follow-up to your conference addressed primarily to the Member States .
Unless we all work together we will have failed the citizens of Europe .
Fraud is not only a crime .
Fraud is not only a political disaster .
It is also the price every one of us will have to pay next month when we start discussing the budget .
It is the price we pay in terms of opportunity cost for the policies we want to have at the level of the European Union and cannot afford because the money has been leeched out of the budget .
In the fight against fraud we have to accept that the European citizens will not trust us with greater resources until we can demonstrate that we use the existing resources with effectiveness and efficiency .
That is the simple message that comes from these two reports .
Unless we work together the European Union will have failed the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must begin by complimenting both rapporteurs , Mrs Wemheuer and Mrs Theato , and by thanking you , Mr President , for the initiative of the interparliamentary conference we had in Brussels .
Last Sunday the European Parliament held an open day when more than 12 000 people walked round the European Parliament and talked to MEPs .
One of the many things which members of the public asked about time and time again was precisely this massive level of fraud involving Community funds .
What happens to taxpayers ' money ?
What is the Community doing to counter this fraud ?
Those effectively are the two things our citizens want to know .
We have to explain afresh each time that the battle is waged collectively and that the responsibility too is shared between Community institutions and national authorities .
So we too need to know something : what are the Community 's powers here ?
Commissioner , I should like to draw your attention more particularly to a judgment by the European Court of First Instance in Luxembourg .
In a judgment of 24 April 1996 , so this year , the judges of the Fourth Chamber ruled that there is indeed a legal basis for action by the Commission to counter fraud .
I do not know if we yet appreciate the full significance of this ruling .
The judgment also expressly says that the European Commission has an essential role to play in the matter .
Without the authority of the Commission the irregularities in question would quite simply go unpunished .
This is fully consistent with the view of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
I will move on to the important matter of the numerous conventions we have to deal with .
Some come from the Commission , others from the Council , and others come from the presidency and we end up totally confused .
It really is not easy to know which convention , from which institution , we are dealing with .
Nor are they subsequently ratified .
I would also emphasize that cooperation between European institutions and the national parliaments needs to be improved .
Let me tell you my experience of a few months ago .
I am rapporteur for the Belgian Parliament 's advisory committee on European affairs and I report on the scrutiny of financial flows between the Union and Belgium .
In that capacity I organized a hearing in the Belgian Parliament in May on measures to combat European fraud in Belgium .
At that time there was no talk of any serious abuses .
But two months later a Flemish newspaper came up with a Commission report on instances of large-scale European fraud involving farm subsidies in Belgium .
This report , Madam Commissioner , was not forwarded to the Belgian Parliament or the European Parliament , but it appeared in the paper .
So how are we to devise a strategy for collective action ?
Clearly we have to devise a strategy of transparency , but also a strategy of cooperation , otherwise we shall never achieve anything worthwhile .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the persistence of this House in calling for the problem of fraud to be made a real priority for the Institutions of the European Union has finally reaped positive results .
Fresh attention began to be paid to the problem when the Council signed , on 25 July 1995 , the Convention on the Protection of the European Communities ' Financial Interests against the background of the third pillar of the Maastricht Treaty .
Another important event was the Interparliamentary Conference on combating fraud , of 23 and 24 April - as has already been mentioned - which increased awareness of the seriousness of the problem , involving the national parliaments and arousing some press interest .
Are we , however , able to say that the results and progress achieved are commensurate with the efforts put in by this House ?
In taking stock for the first time , we need to consider specifically whether we could have done more - and if so what - and whether and how we could have done things better .
Regulation 307 / 91 allows the European Union to accord the Member States ECU 20 million annually to help them develop controls on the implementation of EAGGF-Guarantee Section spending within their territory .
We have bitterly to note that in 1994 the take-up rate of that appropriation was barely 30 % .
How does the Council explain that under-utilization ?
Do the Member States consider themselves so little concerned in the prevention of fraud in the agricultural sector ?
And is the Commission is a position to tell us whether it has so far had available to it a general legal framework statutorily laying down its powers of investigation in the territory of the Union ?
Are those powers operational ?
Are the controls able to be exercised properly and to what extent are they actually effective ?
Has the Commission taken into account the comments made in the last report by the Court of Auditors and the relevant suggestions contained in the document on internal policies - submitted by me to the Committee on Budgets which approved it - designed to remedy a number of problems identified in the financial implementation of some aspects of internal policies ?
For instance , what measures has the Commission adopted regarding project selection procedures and control of the contracts concluded for the projects chosen ?
And , if it has adopted them , do those measures make it possible to reduce the violations and the fraud and , more especially , to reduce the risk as a result of speedier and more efficient controls upstream of the procedure ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not wish to extend further the list of questions , though it could be continued .
The scale of the problem is such as to justify our concern .
We must not in fact lose sight of the fact that , as the only institution directly elected by the people , we are politically responsible for the use of the Union 's public resources .
Once again today - I wish to reiterate this in this debate - I continue to take the same view as always : is the fight against fraud a question of technical resources , of staffing or of legal instruments ?
Even with the existing resources more could be done if greater commitment were shown in applying them .
The real problem - and let us not try to conceal it - is one of political will : if we are to act , we must want to act ; merely proclaiming its importance , as does the Council ritually , is just not enough .
Mr President , once again the European Parliament has put forward a series of initiatives on how we can protect the financial interests of the Union .
We are not content with talking about how we can restrict the scope for fraud with EU resources , but are also coming up with specific proposals for EU legislation to ensure that we have the necessary instruments to combat fraud .
At the same time , however , we are seeing no progress at all being made by the Council .
The Council is clearly unable to take the decisions required or implement them .
The fact is that the Member States simply do not have the necessary will to surrender their sovereignty in order to tackle the problem .
We still hear fine words , but there is no specific action .
A good example of the lack of will to solve the problems on the part of the Member States is the failure to ratify the Convention on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests .
Although the Convention was adopted in July last year , it has not been ratified by a single country as yet .
I think this is embarrassing for the EU and that , in a sense , it reveals the paralysis of the Member States .
There is no final deadline by which the Convention has to be ratified , there are no sanctions , there is no scope for bringing pressure to bear on Member States if they choose not to ratify , and consequently there is no real substance and no real progress in the Convention .
Not even my own country , Denmark , has ratified it .
Denmark , which otherwise has always been keen to raise its voice and call for greater efforts to combat fraud , is not doing anything in practice either .
I regard it as hypocritical when , at one meeting after another , the minister responsible reiterates and insists that more efforts should be made , but at the same time is unwilling to implement the necessary legislation .
Of course , the whole decision-making procedure is a crucial problem , since we do not have a proper legal basis enabling us to take the measures that are required .
Finally , I would also appeal to our colleagues in the national parliaments , since they apparently have little interest in the matter either , or they would be pressing their governments and raising a debate in the national parliaments on why the Member States are so perverse when it comes to taking the necessary decisions .
Mr President , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left supports all Community initiatives aimed at increasing its success in combating fraud against the Community .
It also supports the work carried out and reports submitted by Mrs Wemheueur and Mrs Theato .
We are also in agreement with the ten summary points highlighted by yourself at the closure of the Interparliamentary Conference on fraud .
There are , however , three aspects I would like to discuss in particular in connection with fraud .
Firstly , it should be pointed out that a proportion of fraud is possible because of the neoliberal philosophy which harms the reputation of the state and which encourages the current European policy of believing that everything taking place on the open market is positive and that state control should be disparaged and discredited .
As stated earlier , this weakens the position of public finances and the standing of public services .
Secondly , we therefore believe that it is essential , in the review of the Maastricht Treaty at the Intergovernmental Conference , to adopt an expressly worded chapter or paragraph on strategic policy , precedent , coordination between police and taxation authorities , and uniformity in these matters since , otherwise , it is impossible to instil the correct attitude in people whereby they are brought to accept joint responsibility in such matters .
I find it unbelievable that public associations , organizations , officials , trade unions and employers ' organizations should be participating in the practice of profiting from European public funds by committing fraud against the Community 's tax authorities .
Thirdly , in my opinion , greater effectiveness on the part of the European Commission is absolutely essential .
I have had the unpleasant experience of having informed the Commission of fraud against the European Social Fund committed by organizations in our country and , moreover , I made my report using Treasury documents .
However , the Commission dodged the issue , saying that this was not its responsibility , and it referred it back to the Government .
We must combine efforts when presented with a cause as important as fiscal reform .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Theato 's report on the follow-up to the interparliamentary conference on combating fraud rightly notes - and I quote - that there are still ' important loopholes in the legislation intended , at the national and Community levels , to protect Union finances ' .
But these legislative loopholes are preceded by clear loopholes in terms of public awareness .
On several occasions during that conference Member State representatives actually seemed surprised to hear about Parliament 's plans , wishes and intentions .
I can only hope that some of these lacks will have been made good at the latest by the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Member States must finally realise that effective measures to combat fraud , also and in particular measures administered by the Member States themselves , can only be effective if we finally create an effective legal basis , undertake the necessary harmonization and give Parliament co-decision power in this field .
Until this happens , all our endeavours will only scratch the surface .
But I doubt whether the Council has the political will , given the proposed cuts in funds for combating fraud in the next financial year and the Council 's domination of today 's debate .
I emphatically support the request made in Mrs Wemheuer 's report for an analysis of the risks already present directives and regulations .
We need to check the susceptibility to fraud in advance .
After all , nothing seems easier - as confirmed by what we found in the Committee of Inquiry into the Community Transit System - than fishing in the troubled waters of the jungle of subsidies and refunds .
Simpler standards and a reduced policy of subsidies are just as necessary as effectively penalizing fraud against the Community .
In the end , as the committee of inquiry found , we should focus more on the dangers of organized crime and the movement of illegal earnings and I would ask the Commission , and in particular UCLAF , to provide Parliament with solid information on this .
Finally , Mr President , I would be interested to know how you yourself , as the initiator of the interparliamentary conference on combating fraud , evaluate the results to date and the measures taken by the Member States .
Mr President , there are quite a lot of people in Europe who think that Europe is pathologically wasteful .
On top of that there are reports that a good slice of the European budget gets into the hands of people and organizations which do not need the monies received or are not entitled to them .
I am a member of the Agriculture Committee and anyone who studies the machinery of export refunds and intervention knows what I mean .
Millions of ECU end up in the pockets of professional fraudsters , criminal organizations and even organized crime .
The sums of money involved are staggering , as witness a few examples from the meat sector .
In 1994 , for example , a big network of fraud was uncovered in Italy .
Nearly 200 people were interrogated , 50 were detained and charged .
It transpired they had taken bribes .
In February 1996 a second meat fraud came to light in Italy .
But there are cock-ups over meat in the other Member States too .
Take the infamous revelations about the Goodman International Imperium in Ireland .
Between 1991 and 1994 a special committee of inquiry investigated all the instances of embezzlement in that case .
A European Commission inquiry even revealed that in the period 1990-1992 frauds to a value of 100 million ECU had been perpetrated in Ireland alone .
But Belgium , my own country , was up there with the best of them .
This year an enormous network of fraud has been uncovered there .
Meat normally coming in officially and simply transiting paid no import charges because the meat was repacked in Belgium and exported to other countries such as France and Spain .
Forged customs stamps were used in all this .
Later investigations showed that the accused were at the centre of an ingenious network , with contacts in abattoirs , property companies , front men , the hotel and catering industry .
An Irish abattoir was involved .
Accounting firms were involved .
There was complex cooking of the books .
These are just a couple of examples out of dozens of such examples .
But they illustrate the importance of the debate .
The two reports we are debating today deserve our full support .
My party and our Group are essentially in favour of Europe , but naturally a different Europe , which is fraud-free .
This dossier places the main responsibility for the disbursement and safeguarding of Union money on the national authorities , and that point must be made very clear .
But Europe has a responsibility too .
So I will recap on the important demands made in the two reports .
The absolute necessity of more transnational cooperation , a single legal framework in which judicial cooperation is very much improved .
The need for changes to administrative law , better cooperation over that too , better training programmes , the involvement of customs and excise administrations in the combating of fraud . There is far too little of that at present .
We also need greater use to be made of the new technologies in combating fraud . These are two extremely good reports which are most timely and for that reason we shall support them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when one meets a large number of people , as is presently the case in Austria in the context of the campaign for elections to the European Parliament , one realises one thing : there are few subjects the European taxpayers feel so strongly about as the fact that they know a substantial part of the budget is annihilated by fraud and waste .
There is a direct link between the growing rejection of the European Union and the awareness of this deplorable situation .
Fraud and waste to the detriment of the Community budget are of course primarily fraud and waste to the detriment of the taxpayers in the Member States .
Efficient measures to combat fraud therefore represent first and foremost a service to the European taxpayer .
Citizens with fewer social advantages , who have to make great sacrifices to enable their state to fulfil the Maastricht criteria , have no sympathy at all for the fact that criminal individuals or institutions can indirectly become wealthy at their cost .
In the context of Community policy , a very important place must be given to combating fraud .
The necessary instruments must be created , including legal provisions , machinery for combating fraud and in particular a basis for cooperation .
We need efficient control .
Above all , very strict penalties must be imposed for fraud .
A common , uniform , effective and deterrent policy of penalization must be established .
We must also prevent Member States from trying to escape from efficient control under pretext of the subsidiarity principle .
That would be an unacceptable abuse of the principle of subsidiarity .
Those who receive money from the Community budget must also allow the appropriate checks to be carried out .
The prevention of fraud must , however , be given priority .
A regional development policy that distributes aid in an indiscriminate manner opens the door wide to corruption .
But a development policy that consistently and efficiently sets and pursues specific objectives is less exposed to the risks of waste , corruption and fraud .
Mr President , before I became a Member of Parliament , I was an avid reader of detective novels , and I like to watch crime series and films on television .
Now , I only need to go to work to see fraud running into billions .
I would accuse Europe 's governments of complicity in fraud , to the extent that they know how much fraud is taking place , but choose to look the other way .
If we are to combat fraud involving EU resources and ensure that they are used effectively , it must be done at European level .
Fraud does not stop at national barriers .
In many cases , it profits from the fact that the attempts to combat fraud by the national authorities and the EU 's inspectors are checked by national barriers which are maintained by Europe 's governments on the pretext that they are protecting sovereignty .
If international fraud can be tackled just by us giving up a little sovereignty , then I am all in favour of it .
And that in spite of Denmark 's reservations .
Last week , my Danish colleague Kirsten Jensen described Denmark 's reservations as political necessities , but said they could restrict EU cooperation , and she was right .
Mrs Kjer Hansen is right as well .
In ten years of non-socialist government in Denmark , not the slightest thing was done .
So I think it is a splendid thing that the Danish Prime Minister has the courage to come out and say that he is ready to step up international cooperation within the EU on combating crime .
A number of other EU heads of state could learn something from that .
The specific point here is that the EU 's inspectors should be able to have access everywhere and to pursue matters everywhere .
Crime does not stop at national borders .
Crime knows no borders .
To be able to combat crime , we must cooperate in an international way , from government level to that of the inspectors .
The point is to work together towards a common goal : combating international fraud involving EU resources .
That is something our citizens can understand .
And that is why this question is so important .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Gradin , we keep managing to describe new cases of fraud here in Parliament .
We also keep managing to have them taken up by the media who report on them .
But what we really should manage to do is to establish an effective procedure to deal with it .
The international media pay little tribute to our endeavours in that direction .
However , we must also acknowledge that there are reasons for that .
Several speakers have said that there are considerable gaps in the fight against fraud , considerable gaps in the fight to protect the Community 's financial interests , gaps that exist in the Community and in the Member States .
The efforts made by the European Parliament have not been without success , as we know , but often lead nowhere .
What we really need is an overall strategy .
We must not be tempted always just to discuss the details of individual reports .
Otherwise our efforts will go unnoticed .
Article 209a on the protection of the Community 's financial interests which provides that the Member States shall take the same measures to protect the Community 's interests as to protect their own interests is not sufficient , nor is it being implemented .
We need concrete proposals and we do not need a purely sectoral approach .
However much the convention might help , it remains weak and I am firmly convinced that neither this Community convention nor the additional protocols will be ratified in the next five or more years .
What we really need is a Community directive which establishes a common definition of criminal offences and equivalent forms of criminal prosecution and the participation of the Community bodies in criminal proceedings .
That is the minimum requirement .
I personally give warm thanks to Mrs Theato and Mrs Wemheuer for their reports , which have helped to raise our common awareness of this subject .
In Mrs Wemheuer 's report I attach particular importance to the request that work programmes , risk analyses and annual reports be linked more clearly and that in these reports the Commission must very clearly describe the rather slow development of the legal bases .
In any case , we can only take preventive or even deterrent action in this fight - without which the whole thing is pointless - if we really do play the game boldly against the Member States and the Council .
Let it try to stop us !
And then we will say quite openly who is stopping us .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , in fact , the European Parliament has in recent times performed a very important role in fighting Community fraud and has pulled out all the stops to counter the idea that Europe is a kind of sieve that everything gets through , only adding to the insecurity of consumers and investors .
Europe , such as it is , constituted from the point of view of controlling transit , controlling merchandise , offers no confidence .
Because , in fact , it is very difficult to control , due to the ill will of Member States , everything that happens at Community level .
In respect , however , of the actual measures taken , enormous progress has been made here in the European Parliament thanks to the action taken by Mrs Theato , Mrs Wemheuer , Mr Tomlinson and so many others , to try and apportion blame and decide which measures must be taken .
The truth is that since the Inter-Parliamentary Conference of 23-24 April , regulations have been passed on the action to be taken and there are now agreements on both responsibilities and competences ; action can now be taken at both Community and national levels , since there is now a far-reaching legislative panoply stipulating all of the criteria concerning sanctions , controls , judicial processes and the means of recovering any money which has gone astray .
But will the Member States cooperate ?
Will the Commission be able to take the Member States to court ?
Will they actually cooperate ?
Are they aware of the problems - and I do not think they are , in that VAT revenue has not been applied to computerising ?
Are they really willing to take responsibility for the general good and maintaining a certain level of honesty in business ?
The truth is that even the criminal world observes certain rules .
Yet in Europe these rules are nowhere to be seen !
In my country , Portugal , livestock has been turning up from all over the place without the slightest control , without any health controls , without any funding , and without anyone knowing exactly where it was all coming from .
However , when will Member States be forced to take responsibility for those areas which , together with the Commission and the Council of Ministers , they should take responsibility for , concerning what happens on their territory ?
Unless honest people show honour , the only honour remaining will be in the criminal world .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as well as congratulating Mrs Wemheuer and Mrs Theato on their excellent work , now a compulsory reference , I should like to emphasize three aspects .
This is a question which by definition has to involve everyone , both in the European Union in general and each of the Members of the European Parliament , as well as all of the Member States , together with everyone representing local and regional authorities .
In other words , it affects every citizen .
This is action which has to be permanent : nobody should think that everything has been done and just rest on their laurels .
We can only be as effective as the action taken at various levels , be they the European Union or local authorities .
Against this background , very special importance lies with ratifying the Convention on the Protection of Financial Interests which will ensure that we have a vision and the consensual action for fighting fraud and an effective division of labour in respect of the principle of subsidiarity .
Given the experience acquired in the field of using the Structural Funds in relation to regional policy , where it should be pointed out that the evolution of fraud situations has not changed , I am convinced that we must simplify procedures , cut red tape and eliminate some stages .
The complexity of the processes are fertile ground for encouraging fraud and corruption .
If we simplify these processes this might be one of the best ways of effectively combating these phenomena .
But where it comes to this simplification there is still a lot to be done .
Madam President , in her detailed report , Mrs Theato points to a series of measures able effectively to translate the political will to combat the fraud that damages the Community budget , by further harmonizing existing provisions and the cooperation between the Community and the national authorities .
Mrs Theato 's proposals anticipate the introduction into the Treaty of a legal basis permitting anti-fraud regulations , envisaging a codecision procedure and the establishment of legal machinery requiring the Member States to protect not just their own but Community finances also .
Harmonization of the existing rules needs to take place both at an administrative level - that is to say in relation to penalties and controls - and in terms of legislation , with the speedy ratification of Convention on the Protection of the European Communities ' Financial Interests , adopted in 1995 , and the signature of the two accompanying protocols , one of which relates to the institution of criminal proceedings against officials guilty of corruption and the other the liability not only of officials but also of members of parliament , national institutions and governments .
That is certainly all commendable , but we must be realistic because we are persuaded that the Commission itself does not really believe that the 1995 Convention will be able to be ratified by all of the Community governments , bearing in mind the objective difficulties involved in coordinating the political will of fifteen countries .
Ratification is proving difficult particularly because it is linked to two additional protocols which relate not only to the liability of officials but also that of members of parliament , institutions and governments .
We think it would be more serious and honest were the Commission to look into establishing a Community instrument able to function as a regulation of the European Community and finally set under way an effective procedure for combating Community fraud .
Madam President , we have heard time and time again in this debate how citizens across Europe are calling for the highest priority to be accorded to the fight against fraud .
I can tell you that those people I represent in Hampshire and the Isle of Wight certainly endorse that demand .
We should not get things out of proportion , however .
Sometimes in the debate I have got the feeling that the European Union is the only body that is being defrauded .
We need to remember that nation states have their own problems .
We must all share in the fight against fraud wherever it occurs .
I want to congratulate the Commission on the work it has been doing , on stepping up its efforts , and to congratulate the President of this Parliament for lending his authority to the establishment of the Assize .
We can all remember the old-style Western films where bandits gallop across the state border while the Sheriff 's posse has to grind to a halt on one side .
Are we really that much further advanced ?
We must get the message over that we have to be able to cross those national borders , and the ratification of the Convention clearly is a very high priority .
I would draw attention to two ways we could perhaps get improvements .
One is in transparency , as other Members have said .
If members of the public know where money is being spent they can act as our ears and eyes .
The Commission has already established the hot-line .
If the public have got information they will be able to make much more practical use of that hot-line .
Also , regarding cooperation - cooperation between the Community and national governments , and between national governments and other national governments .
I can tell the House that the British Government certainly takes this need for cooperation very seriously . Indeed , the British Prime Minister has asked me to chair a working party of members of the House of Commons , of this Parliament and of the House of Lords , to look jointly at the problems of fraud and see how we can get better controls at a national level over Community expenditure .
A British Prime Minister came to the European Community on one occasion and asked for her money back .
I think that if we do not resolve this problem it will not just be one Prime Minister from one state demanding her money back , but all citizens demanding all their money back .
That is why we have to get this right .
Madam President , the reports by Mrs Theato and Mrs Wemheuer are fascinating : fraud , corruption , organized crime , white-collar crime .
They could almost be the minutes of a meeting of the Socialist International .
And , of course , we have the fascinating reports by the Court of Auditors , the judgments of the European Court of Justice , olive oil fraud , cereal fraud , expenses fraud , income fraud , ships being loaded at one end and unloaded at the other to collect the refund in the middle , Rotterdam docks - it 's all fascinating .
We need to prevent it .
Perhaps we need to cure it by attacking the root causes , starting with the national causes , Greece and Portugal , trafficking in their national accounts to calculate their GDP .
But , as far as the European Parliament is concerned , wasn 't there something in this House as well ?
Wasn 't there a president who signed a bizarre contract fifteen minutes before his mandate expired ?
At the European Commission , who was it who allowed the VAT fraud ?
Those who abolished the frontiers !
Who was it who permitted the contaminated meal fraud ?
Those who abolished the frontiers !
Wasn 't there a gentleman by the name of Andriessen who , in 1992 , signed a secret agreement at Blair house arranging for the abolition of the microscopic checks at frontiers which showed up the American fraud with the cereal substitute products ?
Wasn 't there a letter from Mrs Scrivener starting ' My dear Franz , if ever the ministers were to find out that you signed a secret agreement , etc .... ' ?
Who is it costs the Community budget ECU 25 , 000 million every year with the GPS ?
Who is it costs us ECU 850 every year for every ton of bananas imported to benefit the multinational Chiquita ?
Isn 't it the European Commission doing that ?
Even if Article 113 , or Article 130w , provides a legal basis for the GPS , the fact remains that these things do exist .
Who has not read the book by the Trotskyite Gérard de Celis , a Belgian radio and TV journalist , entitled ' Privé de public ' , giving the dates and times and restaurants where the senior officials of the European Commission , the ministers and the representatives of the multinationals meet to negotiate the selling-off of public undertakings !
That book exists !
The truth is that you are happy to take advantage of this fraud to further the cause of European integration .
You want Community law .
And in 1995 you signed an agreement on judicial cooperation and police cooperation .
When are we going to have a Community FBI ?
Incidentally , I think Mr Hoover would find the Belgian minister Van der Biest an excellent head of the FBI , no doubt with Mr Gonzales and Mr Tapie as technical advisers .
The truth is that the greatest fraud of all is the European Union !
You have robbed the people of Europe of their freedom , their independence , their jobs , their currency and their democracy .
You have pulled off the biggest theft in the history of mankind - the theft of our national sovereignties !
Well , you might as well do the job properly and move the European Commission to Palermo !
Madam President , the fight against fraud and organised crime is now high on the Union 's agenda .
It was agreed at the Florence summit that these issues should receive priority .
At the big Baltic conference in Visby the need for greater efforts was strongly emphasised , as it was at the interparliamentary conference on fraud involving European Union resources which was , as you know , held at the initiative of the President of this House .
The Irish presidency is also laying considerable stress on the battle against drugs .
And now trafficking in people for the purposes of sexual exploitation has gained a prominent place on the agenda .
I agree with many of the speakers that we must have better instruments with which to meet the major challenges we face in these fields .
Today 's debate in this Assembly has shown that Parliament and the Commission are to a large extent agreed on how the battle should be fought .
It is important that we work together to ensure a safer and more secure Europe .
We must , for example , be able to guarantee taxpayers that their money ends up in the right pockets and is used properly .
We must also be able to wage a more effective fight against organised crime , which is not only highly skilled at diverting money from European Union funds but also continues to enjoy success in trafficking in drugs and persons , fraud and money-laundering .
Mrs Theato 's report stresses that the current Intergovernmental Conference must change the conditions for work under the third pillar .
I agree with her whole-heartedly .
As you know , the Commission has also proposed that all fields covered by the third pillar , except criminal law and police cooperation , should be transferred to the first pillar .
This would mean that the Union 's co-decision procedure would apply and that Parliament would thus be fully involved in the work .
The IGC must therefore establish a fixed legal basis for the fight against fraud , whether it affects the Union 's own resources or those of the Member States .
I therefore agree with the proposal in the resolution that as broad a legal basis as possible must be created .
Decisions on how the battle against fraud and crime should be conducted must be taken on the basis of qualified majority voting and co-decision should become the rule .
As far as can be judged it will also be necessary for the new Treaty text to refer to the need for the entire Union to have similar systems to safeguard against fraud .
I have proposed to my fellow Commissioners that fraud involving EU resources should be covered by a larger chapter on home affairs and justice as part of the first pillar .
The Commission supports this and the next step will be for the interparliamentary conference to adopt a position on it .
We have made considerable progress in the battle against fraud but if the fight is to be really effective we must first have better support from the EU Treaty .
In the 1995 annual report we were also able to announce that some progress had been made in combating fraud involving Union resources .
Mrs Wemheuer 's report , for which I would offer my thanks , encourages us in our efforts to improve reports and give them greater structure .
I have already promised Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control that in future we will not be publishing two reports .
Next year the work programme and the annual report will be published simultaneously .
To make the report more accessible and readable we intend to make it shorter and make the contents more concise , because the report is often used as reference material for the general public and the press .
It makes no sense therefore to overburden people with a whole lot of extraneous information .
There are also a number of proposals in Mrs Wemheuer 's report which I would like to study in more depth .
In this connection I should also like to add that some of Mrs Wemheuer 's proposals concerning the management of EU resources will be acted upon through the Commission 's project SEM 2000 , that is to say the Sound and Efficient Management project .
Intensive work has been started to improve and make more effective the management of Union resources .
This will include improved auditing and checks and examination of EU rules in order to ensure that they are as secure against fraud as possible - preventive work in other words .
I should now like to return to a number of important points in Mrs Theato 's report on the follow-up to the interparliamentary conference which imparted fresh impetus to the continuing battle against fraud within the EU .
I am sure that the national parliamentarians also went home a great deal the wiser and that this should produce results in their own parliaments .
The conference had a direct impact on the current legislative process in the Council .
At their meeting in June , the ministers of finance , for example , took a very important decision of principle on on-the-spot controls .
The decision is currently being considered by Parliament and the regulation will mean a significant step forward in several areas .
For the first time we will have a legally binding system , or an obligation , to protect taxpayers ' money in the same way in all the Member States .
The conference gave rise to a number of highly practical proposals from President Hänsch .
Mrs Theato 's report in turn builds upon these proposals .
I believe it is an excellent report with many interesting proposals which both the Commission and the Council need to study more closely and more thoroughly .
The most fundamental and important point , concerning changes to the third pillar , I have already mentioned .
I will also supplement the regulation on the protection of the Community 's financial interests with provisions on sectororiented sanctions and controls .
The Commission has embarked upon some exhaustive preparatory work in this connection .
In particular , we must investigate whether the Member States are observing the new principle of equal protection against fraud .
I expect that the proposal on this will be submitted during the Netherlands presidency at the beginning of next year .
Parliament 's resolution urges the rapid ratification of the convention on the protection of the Community 's financial interests .
The point is that the convention is a precondition for us to be able to take the issue of fraud seriously in hand in the knowledge that legal proceedings will be instituted against those responsible in the same way in all Member States .
As many of you have pointed out , no country has as yet ratified the convention , though governments have had it in their in-trays for a whole year .
I know that the procedure has started in some countries and that the Irish presidency intends to have serious discussions with the other governments .
At the same time , I believe the difficulties surrounding the ratification of the conventions bring the spotlight to bear on the intergovernmental nature of the third pillar - as some of you have also stated in the debate .
We are now compelled to operate with conventions which enter into force after a protracted ratification procedure , if at all .
We would have avoided this if the Maastricht Treaty had included a more appropriate decision-making system for the third pillar .
The IGC is in fact discussing a very interesting proposal from the Irish presidency on this question .
Parliament 's resolution therefore comes at just the right time for the extra summit meeting in Dublin .
The Member States have already started setting up special units with broad terms of reference to deal with fraud .
I agree that they must have a counterpart within the Commission , both in legal terms and administratively .
I understand therefore the wish for UCLAF also to be given a more specific status and for greater weight to be attached to its work vis-à-vis the Member States .
The Commission and the Member States must cooperate to deal with fraud .
This is why we have put forward a proposal for a protocol on increased legal cooperation .
I should like to conclude , Madam President , with a few more words on the IGC .
The Commission is now discussing how the previous proposal in principle on changes to the third pillar should be followed up .
We will submit an integrated proposal aimed at guaranteeing freedom , security and justice for all people .
Drugs , corruption and international crime present a serious threat and what we need is a united front with measures to combat these phenomena .
It is especially important when we think of the serious contempt in which politicians are increasingly held in Europe .
We must therefore work together to develop confidence and meet the public 's demands for safety and security .
Madam President , let me extend warm thanks on behalf of our Committee on Budgetary Control and also in my own name and , I think , also in the name of this House , for no amendments have been tabled to the reports .
That means we are taking the same line , Mrs Gradin !
Your words of cheer and your plain statements also encourage us to continue working together here .
We will succeed , of that I am convinced .
To conclude this debate , I have received a motion for a resolution from the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs ( B4-1009 / 96 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Elections in Bosnia
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the elections in Bosnia .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , following a request by the European Parliament , and though it was not on the order of business , the Commission has agreed to make a statement about the elections in Bosnia .
Today we will restrict ourselves to passing on the information we have to date , and as agreed , the European Commission will not take any questions .
The official results from Bosnia confirm that Mr Izetbegovic will be leading the new three-member presidency of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Mr Zubak will represent the Croatians in the presidency , and Mr Krajisnik the Serbs .
The results of those elections were expected .
Unfortunately , however , they confirm the nationalistic tendencies and it is likely that they will make it more difficult for Moslem refugees to return to the Serbian Republic of Bosnia .
The elections also took place to elect the members of the national parliament , the regional parliaments , and also to elect the Presidents of the local regions .
The elections were observed by more than 1 , 000 international observers , who covered over 3 , 000 election centres .
The European Parliament participated with 16 observers , supported by the Commission 's agency in Sarajevo .
Three of the Commission 's staff assisted the coordinator of the international observers , Mr Van Thijn , in his activities .
On that point , we must stress the contribution to the preparation and conduct of the elections , by the provisional election committee and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , and all the international observers who took part .
From a technical standpoint , there were few problems and thanks to the particularly evident presence of IFOR there were no important disturbances .
Despite all that , few people took advantage of the opportunity to return to their place of origin in order to vote .
That would have required them to cross the border between the national territorial regions .
Special timetables and means of transport had been arranged for that purpose to ensure the safety of those voters , but unfortunately , fear prevailed in the end .
At any rate , many citizens of BosniaHerzegovina came to vote , many of them under difficult conditions .
The freedom of expression during the pre-election period could also be criticized .
Access to the media for the opposition parties and the three national groups was not satisfactory .
The SDA , the HDZ and the SDS predominated , one can say , during the pre-election period .
For that reason it is only barely possible to speak of a politically neutral environment , which was one of the Dayton Agreement 's conditions .
We therefore agree with the leader of the international observers , Mr Van Thijn , that these elections have been a first step in the transition between the time of intense and violent conflict and the prospect of a democratic future for Bosnia-Herzegovina .
The period that is beginning today will be very difficult .
Now , institutions will have to become more functional , a new central government must be formed , and all the parties must show themselves willing to cooperate .
This will not happen without strong and coordinated international pressure and support .
The conduct of the municipal elections will be an important opportunity to monitor events , I could say a ' test case ' .
As you know , the date of 30 November is under consideration , though it is not at all sure that all the organizational needs , including the compilation of the new electoral role , can be completed in time .
That , ladies and gentlemen and Madam President , is all the information the Commission can put before Parliament at today 's sitting .
Madam President , I apologize for Mr Imbeni , who was to have spoken .
He has had to return home on urgent business .
There were several different elections : for the presidency of the whole country ; the presidency of the Srpska republic ; the presidency of the federation ; and then also , regional elections .
The municipal elections were postponed .
These elections were unique .
They were unique in that they were administered and organized by foreigners - by us , in fact .
There were some specific complaints .
Some polling stations were situated near graveyards , near killing walls or in minefields .
There was a general complaint that 15-20 % of the people who wished to vote could not because they were not on the electoral role .
Anger was defused because it was agreed that one polling station in each community could stay open until complaints were investigated .
So , congratulations to the organizers and to the European Community mission .
A good job was done in terribly difficult circumstances ; not a perfect job , but a good job .
The main problem was that over 50 % of the population did not live in the homes they lived in five years ago .
A quarter of the population live in other countries .
A third of the population are displaced people living in other parts of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
There were three ways in which they could vote : they could vote in the locality where they lived ; they could vote as absentee voters ; or they could travel to where they used to live and vote .
This journey was protected by the IFor troops .
To ensure that people could not vote twice - because they could vote , in most cases , anywhere - there was a magic marker put on their finger .
I only found one person who tried to vote twice , an old woman of about 80 .
I think the election process was respected by the people .
There will be complaint from the Bosnians that the Serbs did not allow absentee voting etc . , but as their candidate will probably be the first president , these complaints might not be as vocal in the future .
All things considered , we must respect the results .
It is only a small step in the peace and rebuilding programme .
What should we do now ?
There are four recommendations .
Firstly , the troops must stay - I-For must stay there .
It produces stability .
We must not bring them home until there is more security in the country .
We have taught local people how to defuse the six million personnel mines in the ground .
Visit the country but do not ever step off the tarmac .
Secondly , municipal elections will be held , probably in November but maybe next year .
I would ask us to send an observer force because there could be more trouble in those local elections than in the other elections .
Election day was a day when no-one was killed , a rare occurrence in the country .
But the mayors and the local councillors have tremendous power .
The elections for the municipalities will be very important .
We must monitor them .
Thirdly , we should somehow link all the different organizations in the country .
We should have some sort of umbrella which links and coordinates them .
They do work together , but this is something which could be improved .
Fourthly , we must have a special aid programme .
There is aid going in but we need to coordinate it .
In Srpska , which has been ethnically cleansed , there was politics of a different sort .
In the federation everyone voted along national lines .
They have actually voted in the people who we accused of causing the problem in the first place .
The elections have not delivered democracy .
The campaign was not free and fair because the media were biased .
On the day of the election people had freedom , but not freedom of information .
All three big parties are authoritarian .
We should ask ourselves if our future aid should be linked to better attitudes and citizens ' rights .
I am sure we will debate this in the future .
Madam President , as leader of the ad hoc delegation that went to Bosnia to observe the elections I would like to summarize our findings on these elections .
Since there is neither freedom of movement nor freedom of information in Bosnia , this election cannot be measured by our yardsticks .
You will therefore not find the words free and fair in our evaluation .
The opposition parties found it very difficult to draw attention to themselves since they were not allowed to present themselves on television in the Serbian and Croatian area .
That is why the election campaign was one-sided .
On election day itself we found that the polling proceeded without difficulties in the ethnically cleansed areas .
This may have been thanks to the sensible approach of the leading parties or to the absence of the other ethnic group , but it was certainly also thanks to the presence of I-FOR .
The failings we all noted were not as minor as we have heard up to now .
But these failings were mainly the fault of the OSCE , which had the task of preparing for the elections .
The inadequate electoral preparations for enabling the refugees to vote in their present place of residence in the federation for their own home area in what is now the Serbian part of Bosnia led to what were at times chaotic conditions for thousands of refugees .
I saw this with my own eyes .
There were also difficulties for the Muslim refugees who dared to cross what is known as the demarcation line in order to vote in their original home area in what is now the Republic of Srpska .
They were deliberately processed so slowly by the Serbs that many of them were unable to vote .
The way the OSCE registered the voters was incredibly inadequate throughout Bosnia .
Up to 20 % of people were not registered .
This could only be corrected in areas where the voters had freedom of movement to complain to the local election committee .
But the Serbs refused to allow the refugees who crossed the border to do so .
They did not have the freedom of movement to go to the local committee .
But in my view the greatest mistake was the OSCE 's decision to add a third option to the two original voting options , namely for voters to vote either where they lived now or whether they lived after the 1981 population census .
Now they were also allowed to vote wherever they wanted .
On paper they could vote where they intended to reside , but no-one had to check that .
That led to nationalist manipulation on all sides and stabilized the ethnic division , as for instance in Brcko where 80 % of Serbs voted although in 1991 this area was almost purely Muslim !
Thank God this will no longer be permitted at the local elections , which were deferred for that reason , otherwise the aggressor would have won right along the line .
We call on the OSCE to learn from its mistakes and to prepare better for the elections at the end of November !
That only some 20 % of expelled Muslims voted in their former home area was also due in part to the fact that they could only vote for a Serbian presidential candidate there .
How difficult they must have found it to elect the direct or indirect perpetrator of the massacres in Priedor or Srebrenica for instance !
On behalf of the EPP Group let me nevertheless say that the alternative to holding these elections would have been the persistence of an intolerable situation in which the dominant national or nationalist parties would have continued to have the say without any legitimation .
These elections may represent the beginning of a possible and necessary democratization .
They could also be the start of a difficult process of rapprochement between the ethnic groups , who still have no peace after nine months of cease-fire , who still feel hostility , hatred even .
But for the first time there will be a democratic opposition , for some people did vote for the opposition .
For the first time there is a state presidency in which the three representatives of the ethnic groups have to share power .
We will see whether that succeeds .
Since all the ethnic groups took part in these elections there is a chance that if they cooperate in joint institutions it will be possible to build up democratic structures and that a civil society can at last develop again .
Of course there remains the risk of Bosnia-Herzegovina splitting apart again , something which the Dayton Accord did not preclude but which it even encouraged by the strict division of the country and the territorial rewards given to the aggressor .
But , ladies and gentlemen , without these elections the risk would have been considerably greater .
If the newly created democratic structures really are to lead to democracy in an atmosphere of continuing hostility - understandable so soon after the end of the war - if the cease-fire in Bosnia-Herzegovina really is to lead to peace , the international peace-keeping force must continue to provide protection and we must maintain our presence and aid .
I agree with the Member who said the aid must be better coordinated .
We cannot have countless organizations working there side by side .
But our Parliament has tied this aid to certain conditions and now we have to ensure that these conditions are met .
We must also ensure that the war criminals are arrested , specifically Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic .
And if it is true that Karadzic voted in Pale on Saturday , then I can only ask whether that really was consistent with our call for I-FOR to arrest him at the earliest possible date .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I think that there is an enormous consensus over this matter , both as to the information which the Commissioner has just referred to , and the information given by representatives of the Socialist and PPE Groups .
However , we will probably be referring again to aspects on which we agree but I should like in brief to refer to some aspects which seem to me to be fundamental .
First of all , it was useful - not to say very important - that the election should take place .
Although it meant that we were perhaps slightly reliant on American aid the truth is that it was a first step .
We cannot commit the mistake , as someone has already said , of transmitting the message that the elections were completely free .
From a technical point of view they were - the effective conditions were such that it was possible to vote freely despite the lack of ballots , despite the lack of registers , despite the lack of freedom of movement - and the truth is that in the pre-electoral period there were no proper political conditions for effectively free elections : the electoral commission belongs to all of the main majority parties and the media were also manipulated , quite clearly , by the parties whose interests they served .
However , as the representative of an opposition party said , there is no turning back , which means that the opposition and the more moderate parties will now at least have a voice and this is very important for the future of this whole area of Europe .
Let us look at some of the aspects and some points of discussion .
We have the impression , as has already been mentioned , that it is vital for IFOR to continue there .
Without IFOR , the war will break out again .
Without IFOR , democratic institutions will not be able to operate securely .
People were speaking about a one-year deadline but I think we have to acknowledge that perhaps they will have to stay more than one year .
The second remark is the image of the European Union : bad , not to say terrible .
The European Union has been accused of everything that took place despite the humanitarian aid which we have already given .
We had no common policy because the Member States were making bi-lateral agreements and tended to refer to history , according to their various strategic interests , and it is quite true that the image of the European Union suffered immensely .
Mention has already been made of the fact that we must try the war criminals : and I think it vital that we do so .
If they are let off scot-free the international community will only be rubber-stamping the crimes that they committed and the international community will lose face .
However , isolating the Republika Srpska seems to me to be a dangerous policy .
The tendency to isolate the Republika Srpska might only encourage very serious radical movements and harm peace in the whole area .
I should like to end , Madam President , by referring to humanitarian aid , mention of which has already been made .
I agree that we should review the humanitarian situation not only for Bosnia but also the whole humanitarian aid policy of the European Union .
I should like to end on a note of hope : renewal has taken place .
If these democratic institutions can operate I think that , as a representative of an opposition party said , it might be possible to begin to build the house starting with the roof .
The roof in this case is comprised of democratic institutions and if they do operate properly it might be possible to solve the problem of refugees , of displaced persons , and all of the ethical problems .
I think that we can send out a message of hope and I would like to say a word of appreciation for the organisation which I think was impeccable and also a word of congratulations to the head of our Delegation who was also beyond reproach .
Madam President , for the record I was not a part of the observer corps , but I was in Bosnia a week before the elections , visiting nearly all the places where problems were expected .
Technically speaking , as has already been said , the elections in Bosnia can be regarded as a success , in the circumstances at least .
It is clear that the organizers and the OSCE did their best .
And why not ?
But the elections were peaceful and that is an important fact after so many years of horrendous war .
Not counting technical problems over registration , the people who voted probably did so democratically .
But there are also many people who were not able to vote , or were not able to vote where they wanted to .
Continuing intimidation and disinformation ensured that the interethnic border was a very real border .
Mrs Pack made that very clear .
Only a very small group of muslims voted in the Republika Srpska .
And when they did go to vote in the other ethnic area there were mobs lying in wait for them and a lot of police .
So the preconditions for the elections were not met .
Everybody knows it : without freedom of movement and access to the independent media it was not possible to have a genuine and democratic campaign .
Now that ethnic cleansing has actually been made official and legitimate , we have to say that this is a sad outcome of these elections .
The carve-up of Bosnia is now a de facto reality .
The question is whether strong institutions at the level of the unified Bosnian state can reverse the division .
Can we impose multiethnicity on people who have turned their backs on it altogether ?
We shall make do with what we have .
What should we do now ?
What should our counsel be ?
In any event , as many people have said this morning , IFOR remains necessary .
People want a quiet life , I understand that .
But perhaps we can help with the next elections , not the communal council elections at the end of November , but the elections in two years ' time .
Let us make sure that there is access to the independent media , namely television , so that people know what they are voting for and know what the future will be .
Madam President , Commissioner , my group is well aware of the political importance of these first legislative and presidential elections in Bosnia .
I wish , however , to underline that they are certainly not the permanent solution to the problems that persist in the region and that the unity of Bosnia and its inter-ethnic character are certainly not guaranteed by the elections .
Paradoxically , the elections are likely to have a boomerang effect because ethnic divisions in the country may become still more marked and legitimacy conferred on the more extreme positions in the Bosnian political landscape .
This is demonstrated by the important victory of the Serbo-Bosnian candidate , with views akin to those of Karadzic , that is to say a theorist of ethnic division , and - in some respects and with the appropriate distinctions - not even Izetbegovic 's victory guarantees the integrity of Bosnia , because his electoral campaign was conducted on the basis of a blend of personalism and nationalism which I consider dangerous .
There are , however , positive aspects which we should not undervalue : I am referring , among other things , to the positive statement of those democratic forces which are calling specifically for inter-ethnic co-existence , severely tested during the four years of war .
The good result achieved by the former prime minister of Bosnia , Haris Siladic , gives grounds for hope because it shows that there are positive forces at work in Bosnian society .
Finally , my group wishes to underline a further aspect of the Bosnian issue which goes hand-in-hand with Bosnia 's institutional stability : I am thinking here of the economic reconstruction programmes for that country which the European Union , must , in our view , continue to fund .
There will be no peace without development .
And it is economic reconstruction which will be the measure of the political will of the Commission and Council to promote also the social and civil reconstruction of a country where war has trampled the values on which the European Union is founded .
That is a crucial element in resolving the Bosnian situation and , in my view , an acid test for the European Union which has too often found itself lagging behind and frequently been marginalized at the crucial points in the war .
Madam President , let me straightaway say that in strictly formal terms the elections which we , as a delegation , observed were certainly regular ; a problem was identified in three per cent of seats .
But I wish to underline that they were regular in formal terms only , because we have also to consider all the conditions that existed after the military conflict at a social and general political level , during the electoral campaign and during the elections .
We should not conceal the fact that one of the mistakes which undermined the possibility of holding democratic elections was already contained in the Dayton agreements which in fact crystallized a result obtained by use of force .
This inevitably encouraged the spread of nationalistic currents and , therefore , in political terms , the outcome was already predetermined , the sole issue being to establish the extent of the victory of the three nationalist parties in percentage terms .
That is why we have to condemn the circumstances which led to a lack of equality of opportunity and democracy during the election campaign .
First of all , there was the problem of the sources of information which were neither free nor independent .
In that connection , it is also right to point out that we , the European Union , funded aid for that purpose , aid which did not produce the hoped-for results , and I think that it is necessary - and I say this on behalf of the Green Group also - to hold an inquiry to establish how that was able to happen .
That holds good for the future also , because all of the aid supplied for reconstruction will have to be closely monitored , given that that same humanitarian aid has been used by the forces in power , the forces of nationalism , as a means of exerting blackmail during the election campaign , to achieve greater consensus .
In those circumstances , equality of opportunity is not guaranteed .
I wish also to make a further point concerning refugees and the problems they encounter in returning to their country of origin ; the lack of freedom of movement ; and the fact that the demarcation lines have actually become borders .
In the light of all that I have said , we cannot claim that these were free and democratic elections .
At most , they may constitute a first step towards democracy , but subject to specific conditions , namely that there should now be a commitment , at international level , by the European Union and by the European Parliament , to ensure that the development achieved through these elections brings with it a real possibility of dialogue between the parties .
And so we , the European Parliament and the European Union , together with the international organizations must also guarantee a military presence to safeguard the state of non-belligerence . It is further necessary that aid should be directed towards encouraging independent sources of information , a social and cultural network of dialogue , so that the forthcoming municipal elections , which have fortunately been postponed - the P2 module would in fact have prevented a genuinely democratic system and compounded the division of Bosnia - take place in conditions that provide a better guarantee of democracy and equal opportunity .
Madam President , our mission as observers under the leadership of Mrs Pack took place in surroundings of destruction and desolation , among people most of whom sadly seemed to us to be unwilling to live together any more , and in a general climate in which intolerance , violence , totalitarianism , religious prejudice and , incidentally , corruption are affecting , admittedly to different extents , each of the three major regions of Bosnia .
Against that background , we were able to observe an election that was technically correct but politically not very satisfactory .
In technical terms , voting took place correctly , despite a few incidents - blown up out of all proportion in my view - and despite the obvious inadequacies of a campaign which we ourselves were unable to observe .
There was no intimidation , no violence and no obvious large-scale fraud in the conduct of the ballot , largely because of the presence of the observers .
Politically , the two fears concerning this ballot proved well founded .
The first question was whether the refugees would cross the demarcation line to vote in the areas from which they had been excluded , and none of them did .
The second was whether the democratic opposition parties in each of the zones would be able to challenge the domination of the major nationalist parties .
In actual fact , they were marginalized .
These two dangers were , however , inherent in the Dayton Agreements , which emphasizes - and perhaps we do not emphasize it enough - the responsibility of the western states of the European Union in the development of the Yugoslav crisis .
Today , there is a very real risk of partition .
Bosnia can be regarded as being on the brink .
Paradoxically , the source of hope has been Belgrade , because it was the existence of a candidate supported by Belgrade that prevented a Serb extremist becoming President of Bosnia-Herzegovina , which would have been completely intolerable .
Let us seize upon this fragile hope and pursue four points of action .
First , artificial and conflict-ridden though they may have been , we must at all costs maintain the independence and territorial integrity of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Secondly , we must perhaps take a less black-and-white view in judging the protagonists , and at all events encourage those who are trying faithfully to implement the Dayton Agreements .
Thirdly , we must call - and all the observers are unanimous here , as you have heard - for the retention of IFOR , whose presence is the guarantee of stability in Bosnia at this present time .
Finally , we must call for the municipal elections to be deferred once again , since they cannot be held in the existing technical conditions .
Under these conditions , and under these conditions only , the worst may not necessarily happen .
The elections were controversial , both before and afterwards .
For technical reasons , as has already been said , to do with problems over registration , but in the electoral district I was observing in , for example , there were posters of Dr Karadzic to be seen .
Politically the elections were controversial because of people 's limited freedom of movement and expression , and strategically they were controversial because of the legitimization , the virtual legitimization of the de facto division of the country .
But we have to live with the outcome of the Bosnian elections .
As someone has already said , technically speaking it did not go all that badly and strategically of course the de facto division of Bosnia is not the result of the elections but of the Dayton peace agreement , and the peace agreement was needed at the time in order to silence the guns .
Better ballots than bullets , as the British put it .
And that is perhaps a somewhat lame justification of the fact that we now have to live with the outcome .
Bosnia 's future looks bleak .
The Bosnian Serbs have obtained a lot for their Republika Srpska .
Their own president and their own parliament , and to me that augurs badly for the cohesion of the country .
The presidency of the new Bosnian state now comprises two potentially separatist co-presidents , the Bosnian Serb president and the Bosnian Croat co-president .
Looking to the future now , the war criminals must be brought to justice .
The elections are over and IFOR is still there .
Not for much longer , and the question is what is to be done with it afterwards ?
Lastly , the most important thing is that the hatred has to stop , but that is up to the Bosnians themselves .
The debate is closed .
Votes
At the request of the chairmen of the political groups , all the texts on the agenda up to the motions for resolutions on the political situation in Turkey will be put to the vote during the current voting time .
Madam President , if I have understood properly , we shall be taking the vote this morning only up to and including the situation in Turkey , and so the vote on minors will have to be postponed to a time when it is probable that many honourable Members will not be present .
It seems to me that an issue of that importance has absolutely to be voted on this morning when Members are present .
The sooner we get started , the farther we shall be able to go with our voting .
Madam President , an irregularity occurred yesterday when a particular report was put before others and the agenda that had been drawn up was thus changed .
I would like to see that irregularity remedied today by reintroducing the Herman , Barzanti and Tongue reports ahead of the Thyssen report .
I can assure honourable Members that voting time will continue at least until we have voted on the resolutions relating to Turkey .
In due course , I shall ask you whether you want to go any further .
Madam President , this House is paying no attention to the fact that an elderly and frail head of state is being insulted at this time while here in France churches are being profaned .
I call upon the European Parliament to show solidarity with a head of state who is also the head of a religion .
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of Mr Barzanti who wishes to apologize to you and to honourable Members for having had to leave unexpectedly .
There are three points which I wish to make .
First of all , a corrigendum has been distributed in all languages and this has to be seen as an integral part of and must therefore be voted on along with the rest of the text .
There are then two important corrections that need to be taken into account : the first concerns paragraph 26 , the original text of which refers to problems linked to the ' holding of rights ' where the word ' holding ' has been translated as ' ownership ' in many languages . There is a clear distinction between the holding of rights and the ownership of rights .
We need therefore to consider the expression ' holding of rights ' in the original text .
One last point : in paragraph 9 , there is a phrase in the middle that needs to be considered deleted .
We shall need therefore to have a split vote on that paragraph to get rid of the phrase in the middle .
We shall see when the time comes .
I shall ask you to take the floor again and table an oral amendment , because I cannot accept it in this form , at the start of voting .
Madam President , I think we should welcome the presence in the gallery of a delegation from the Quebec Assembly .
Welcome , ladies and gentlemen .
Madam President , on behalf of the author of this joint motion for a resolution I would like to table an additional oral amendment .
After recital A insert the following new recital :
' having regard to the recent ruling of the European Court of Human Rights on human rights in Turkey ' .
Are there any objections to this addition ?
Madam President , on principle , on these matters it is very unwise to accept oral amendments however worthy they may sound .
I would hope that the House would agree on this occasion not to accept a verbal amendment .
I am sorry , Mr Sakellariou , I do not think it helpful to bring these matters up at this stage .
Mr McMillan-Scott , I did look round at the presidents of the political groups , who seemed to be in agreement .
But , of course , you personally have an absolute right to oppose the tabling of an oral amendment .
That is what Rule 124 is for .
Are there twelve members opposed to this oral amendment ?
( The tabling of the oral amendment was approved )
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Madam President , I wish to table the following oral amendment , bearing in mind that yesterday , during the debate in the House , all of the political groups present were in favour of the amendment I shall be presenting , including the Irish President-in-Office .
The amendment is as follows : ' Provide Europol with the resources to enable it to conduct active investigations into criminal networks through exchanges of experience and specialized information , in particular via the creation of specific databases on individuals found guilty of paedophile acts ' .
Are there twelve Members who oppose the tabling of this oral amendment ?
( Mixed reactions ) Ladies and gentlemen , Rule 124 does allow for this kind of situation .
We were not in favour of this motion because what its author said is simply not true .
A great many of us were present during the vote yesterday and no oral amendments were discussed .
We have only just heard about it for the first time , which is why I do not think it is possible to allow this motion .
( The tabling of the oral amendment was rejected )
Madam President , having been present for the whole debate yesterday , I have to say that Mrs Todini did say that she was going to put down an oral amendment .
She did not say what it was , but she certainly signalled that it was going to go in during the debate yesterday .
There can be no argument - Rule 124 is very clear .
Twelve Members object to the tabling of the oral amendment and so it is not admissible , whatever our views may be on its merits .
Madam President , I wish to point out that the oral amendment that I have today tabled and with which - I repeat - the Irish President-in-Office was fully in agreement is reproduced in the verbatim report also .
The honourable Members who have risen bear all of the political responsibility for this .
We are not going to have a debate on the merits when the Rules of Procedure are completely clear .
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Madam President , the confusion is brought about by your chairing of the sitting .
My point of order has been up for a very long time and is this : it is becoming an unwelcome practice in this House for oral amendments to be put by Members .
If an amendment is desired then thought should be given to it in advance and it should be placed in writing for the consideration of others .
Therefore I ask you to take this matter to the Bureau to investigate the possibility as to whether one should accept oral amendments as in the case of the last speaker .
That was unwarranted and uncalled for .
If the amendment is worth it , it should be put in writing prior to the vote .
Mr Falconer , you know as well as I do that our Rules of Procedure cannot be changed by the Bureau - it is a matter for the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
This is a written rule , and in the present instance all I am doing is applying the Rules of Procedure .
The new version of this multiannual programme for the SMEs is clearer and may enable us to create the minimal conditions necessary for the development of SMEs in the European Union .
After all , we must remember that , in this period of crisis , the SMEs do , and must do , more to create jobs than the large corporations do .
So Mrs Thyssen has achieved a very broad consensus on the substance of her report , whose general philosophy relates to improving the administrative and financial conditions for the development of SMEs in an information society dominated by endeavours to achieve optimum competitiveness .
Nevertheless , some anxieties do remain , and voices are being raised here and there to claim that the sums allocated , ECU 180 million over 3 years , are too great .
I don 't believe that .
I would even go so far as to say that this appropriation is the minimum of minima in terms of what should be done for the European SMEs .
I recall that Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has rejected various amendments concerning study drafts within this programme to allocate maximum funding to direct action in favour of enterprises .
So what is the situation ?
Will it eventually be understood that the Union is doomed to failure unless it undertakes significant steps to promote employment , and if it persists in going no further than sterile diplomatic ramblings ?
The Council must accept its responsibilities to the citizens of the Union , who expect Europe to provide genuine answers to genuine problems .
I would like to express my Group 's support for Mrs Thyssen 's report on the SME multiannual programme . May I congratulate Mrs Thyssen for submitting a report which once again demonstrates her knowledge of this important sector of the economy .
I would like to bring to mind the importance of SMEs in the European economy as the entrepreneurial sector which is most dynamic in job creation and adaptation of the open global economy 's new requirements .
The Commission has attempted to respond to this positive influence and dimension of SMEs in the Union 's economy with various interannual programmes , the third of which we are studying in this part-session .
I would like to express my anxiety and unease concerning the application of this programme by drawing attention to the need to avoid its being applied in a routine fashion .
Over recent years , I have noticed a lack of dynamism and excessive red tape on the part of the Commission 's responsible departments , which are not doing enough to expedite the Commission 's actions regarding SMEs .
The problem of credit access and receipt under conditions favourable to SMEs has not been solved by the continuation of a system of allocation which does not make it possible for the SMEs precisely to ascertain the origin of credits on account of the method used to allocate the relevant funds .
I would repeat that this situation requires renewed dynamism and more effective action on the part of the Commission 's responsible departments in the application of the actions and proposals of the Third Interannual Programme for SMEs in the European Union .
As a keen supporter of small businesses I am glad to vote in favour of this report .
Whilst I welcome the Commission 's focus on cutting red tape for smaller companies , making it easier for them to receive financial assistance and - not before time - tackling the big business late payers , I am especially in favour of the promotion of entrepreneurship .
Training is the key to the success of managers as well as their workforce .
Training for small businesses has to be carefully tailored to their needs , however .
Such training can be found in the Small Business MBA course at Bolton Business School in my constituency which I launched this summer .
The way it harnesses public and private resources for the benefit of the small entrepreneurs should serve as a model for schemes elsewhere in the EU .
Of course , it is up to all of us in this Parliament to make sure that the Commission 's proposals become a reality , given the huge importance of smaller companies to our economic future .
Herman report
The arrival of the global information society has transformed the international communications systems .
It promises great advantages for remote areas such as Ireland where the cost of communications has been a brake on economic development .
Thanks to huge strides in technical developments these disadvantages are now being removed .
The arrival of the information society has opened up the possibility of direct access to government ( local , national and European ) decisions .
It can only improve the democratic and open nature of European society .
Unfortunately the best known global communications system ' the Internet ' is being abused in one important respect .
There is a massive quantity of pornographic and violent material published on the Internet .
Paedophiles are organizing networks to exchange information and entice children into their sordid world .
This must stop .
People publishing pornographic material on the Internet should be subject to the criminal law .
We must introduce standards to prevent the abuse of the Internet because it reaches right into our homes and is easily accessible by children .
We Greens voted for this report once improvements had been made to various important points .
Yet I would still like to take the opportunity to point out that an ' action plan ' in the form of a ' communication ' is not in our view the appropriate framework for a general socio-political debate of the trends and alternatives in the implementation of the ' information society ' .
We still maintain the need for a directive that brings the many individual Commission directives together in a coherent whole !
On the basis of the Gomes procedure the EP has managed to produce an opinion that is considerably more balanced overall than on earlier occasions when it gave its opinion on the subject in general .
But it remains to be hoped that the Commission ( and also the Council ) will understand that a number of socio-political decisions need to be discussed and taken by contradictory argument .
It is a question of far more than marketing and creating acceptance of a situation that has already become established .
So , we will not give up hope that we will still manage to conduct a discussion by contradictory argument on these questions of the future , both in this House and among the general public in Europe !
Barzanti report
As parliamentarians we feel it incumbent upon us to show the greatest concern for European works of culture which , if considered to be goods , on a par with other consumer products , run a very serious risk of becoming arid and losing individuality .
We are persuaded that Europe 's cultural dimension needs the political will to withstand market pressures which treat works of cultural genius in the same way as bottles of spirits .
The Commission Green Paper of July 1995 seemed to mark progress .
With this morning 's debate , the European Parliament too appears to be moving in the direction of that clearly expressed ' political will ' .
It is as though a mechanism long-jammed began to work again .
On behalf of Europe 's artists , we wish to express gratitude for the work done by the Commission and by Parliament , in particular the outstanding report by Mr Barzanti .
However , on the very difficult issue of safeguarding and protecting copyright and related rights , it is probably not enough simply to establish the political will .
We need to make up for a delay in legislating forthwith .
We need a directive to harmonize national laws and , more especially , one robust enough to support three basic principles :
A. Even in a highly liberalized market , works of art constitute an exception .
They need to be protected and safeguarded by reorganizing and regulating all aspects of copyright and related rights .
Unless there are rules , the threat of such works being treated as a commodity will always be with us , very seriously damaging the whole of European culture .
B. Copyright has always to be safeguarded , regardless of the forms or means used to express the work of art .
We can no longer tolerate different treatment for musicians and cinematographers , performers and actors in the theatre or , worse still , the creators of software and the authors of literary works , plays or cinema scripts .
The new directive will have to complete the task of aligning rights , beginning by safeguarding the originality of works .
C. Every transmission or communication to the public of an original work in fact also constitutes distribution - one of the basic elements in copyright .
We consider that this concept should be defined all of the legislative effectiveness that a Community directive offers .
It would be a real turning-point were we to succeed in regulating one of the most worrying aspects of Europe 's cultural industry .
Finally , Europe 's artists express to the Commission and honourable Members their appreciation for the work done so far .
Shortly , once this parliamentary stage is completed , we expect to see the new directive launched and hope that there will be greater and more consistent involvement of artists , authors and performers at all stages in the decision-taking process .
Tongue reportDarras ( PSE ) and Bernardini ( PSE ) , in writing .
( FR ) I give this explanation of vote on behalf of my colleague François Bernardini as well as myself , since we worked on this together .
We absolutely support Carole Tongue 's excellent report .
In the era of the information society and new communications technologies , it was only right to reassert and defend the role of public service broadcasting .
The essential functions of the public service channels are to inform , instruct and entertain .
It is precisely because they are not interested in audience ratings that they have this ability to supply a wide range of programmes , programmes that have something of interest for all members of the public and draw them into this sought-after European social model .
Public service television must be able to perform its public service functions completely independently . For that reason , the European Union must continue to regard all public financing as being legitimate in the case of the public service channels , provided of course that they comply strictly with their obligations to provide a public service .
This financing cannot , therefore , be compared with ' reprehensible ' State aid within the meaning of the 1957 Treaty of Rome .
This is the case where the rules governing competition must be interpreted intelligently and flexibly .
The public service broadcasters are our guarantee of free communication , of high quality , accessible to all , and respecting cultural diversity .
They are involved in mutual familiarity and understanding , they help to spread the idea of European citizenship , and at the end of the day they are the guardians of our democracies .
It is in that capacity that they are worthy of extensive support within a ceaselessly changing audiovisual environment .
With the advent of so many privately sponsored television channels , public service television has undergone real and dramatic changes in recent years .
However , for the future , public service television channels must remain the bedrock for the provision of the widest range of services to the general public .
As commercial competition intensifies and mainstream commercial channels become more similar in their mass market appeal , public service television will provide the best method of maintaining the widest range of accessible choice for the public .
I support the call for access by public service broadcasting organizations to major sporting events .
European Parliament 's Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media is right when it insists that , where exclusive rights to sports entertainment or other events with particular value and interest to the viewing public are brought to pay television , highlights must be available on television services that are free and available to all .
I share the concern that European society could divide into ' the information rich and information poor ' as access to information becomes more expensive with the development of pay television and pay-as-you-view .
Public service broadcasting must remain available to all citizens .
I agree that cable and satellite services should be obliged to provide public service broadcast channels on their services .
In conclusion , public service broadcasting will be under increasing pressure from market forces as pay-per-view and other services buy up more programmes and sporting events but a correct balance between private and public services needs to be struck on this issue .
I shall not be voting in favour of the report presented to us by our Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media on the role of public service television in a multimedia society , because the ideas defended in that report would create serious distortions of competition .
As you know , there has recently been a sharp increase in complaints to the Commission about State aid to public service television , the reason being that distinguishing between a ' public television service ' and ' commercial television ' in the European television sector is becoming more and more difficult .
There are ever-increasing signs of a confusion between their roles , because the public service enterprises have reacted to competition with an increasingly commercial service , whereas the commercial broadcasters are being subjected to a great many regulations and obligations .
My reaction to the ideas defended in the Tongue report must be to warn against an increase in public spending which would create even more distortions of competition and jeopardize the creation of jobs in the private sector .
In voting for the Tongue report , we did so in particular in the belief that the public broadcasting service is a fundamental vehicle for disseminating what a country wants for itself .
The concept of public service must not be limited to culture , sport , recreation , health and education but should also include science , the environment , technical innovation , all areas of economic activity of interest to the population ; it should also target the whole public however far away they live , even those living abroad .
Nor is it important whether public service broadcasting is carried out over one or more channels or stations or through private operators , on payment for services offered or whether it is exclusively funded by the State or whether there are commercials .
Whatever happens , States must provide it !
For us it is also clear that , in Europe , we must have a set of public broadcasting services , in the plural , and not a single European service .
A good example of this - and we are proud to point it out - is RTP Internacional an excellent example of a national public service which is broadcast to the enormous community of Portuguese emigrants .
However , we must have close cooperation between all of these services , especially when dealing with common problems affecting Europe and the rest of the world .
Finally , I should like to say that the public broadcasting service should not be one but should actually take on multiple forms according to the different target publics to be reached .
We feel that the most important thing is to achieve the main objective : to defend the existence of public broadcasting service ( s ) !
We Greens welcome and support Carole Tongue 's strong commitment to strong public service broadcasting that is able to provide social communication and cultural self-portrayal as important public goods on a permanent basis .
The points we consider particularly important are as follows :
that the necessary broadcasting licence fees are charged and this is not prevented or put at risk by a policy of competition in the audiovisual field that is geared purely to the private sector , and that-important events of what is called mass culture still cannot be appropriated by the private sector or used commercially , i.e. , that important sports events , for instance , can continue to be broadcast uncoded and by public sector organizations.Naturally we particularly support several important Green statements , for instance on the concept of broadcasting , which have been incorporated in Parliament 's resolution since spring 1996 .
Resolution on Turkey
Madam President , we are very glad that the customs union agreement with Turkey has been suspended .
We recall that it was in this very House that our colleague Jean-Thomas Nordmann told us that we must not drive Ankara to despair ; it was claimed that by voting in favour of this agreement to integrate Turkey we would prevent the triumph of Islam in Istanbul .
Well , Islam won anyway , and Turkey has now embarked on a path which can be symbolized by the transformation of Hagia Sophia - once a Christian church , already converted to a museum , and shortly destined to become a mosque .
Admittedly , Europe is not a Christian club , as Mrs Tansu Çiller claimed , echoing the remarks made by Mr Attali .
But the fact remains that the only end result of our policy of opening-up will be to strengthen the grip of Islam on Turkey , at the very time when that country , in Cyprus , is practising an absolutely unacceptable form of imperialism , in total violation of the rights of nations and human rights .
That was what we wanted to say , Madam President .
Madam President , I voted for the resolution on Turkey because I believed it was important to stress that in many , many respects Turkey really is violating human rights .
I nevertheless deplore the lack of balance in the resolution .
Among other things , I believe that it is unreasonable to mention a number of people on the Greek-Cypriot side who have been killed .
I do not find it unreasonable in itself , rather the contrary .
What I find unreasonable is that there is not at the same time some mention of the fact that similar things have happened to Turkish citizens in Cyprus .
I regard this as a lack of balance .
Where respect for life and for human rights is concerned we must have the courage to show it to both sides .
During the debate on whether or not to conclude the customs union with Turkey we heard more than one naive voice here in the European Parliament .
Yes , all manner of criticisms could be levelled against Turkey .
But we had to trust Turkey .
And the concrete manifestation of that necessary trust was the customs union .
Once we had that everything would get better .
The customs union was approved , but nothing has changed and nothing has got better .
For the naive it was a lot of work for no return .
And anyone with an ounce of sense knew that beforehand .
Anyone with an ounce of feeling for political reality could predict it without fear of being wrong .
Ending up empty-handed does not suggest shrewd statesmanship .
But there it is , many things are and have been expected of many European politicians , but political wisdom is not one of them .
That said , one should emphasize the undesirability on our side of creating any tensions at all in relations between Europe and its neighbour Turkey .
We want good relations with all our neighbours , Turkey included .
But firstly it must remain a neighbour .
No more and no less .
And secondly we must hammer home the message that good relations will only be possible when there is an end to the occupation of European territory , namely of a part of Cyprus .
Continuing occupation and massive Turkish immigration into Cyprus can prompt only one demand : for the ending of this customs union .
Resolution on Iraq
Madam President , The Green Group of course voted for the resolution on Iraq .
It goes without saying that strong condemnation of the Iraqi forces ' actions in Kurdistan was appropriate but at the same time there should also be some criticism of the US intervention .
It is certainly quite justified to defend the interests of the Kurds and to try and help get rid of Saddam Hussein 's regime .
On the other hand , we are not convinced that this should be done through unilateral measures by the Americans but rather by means of a unanimous decision by the UN .
Saddam Hussein 's regime is without doubt one of the worst in the world .
I myself have had the opportunity of visiting Iraq a number of times while Saddam Hussein has been in power and in comparison with most other dictatorships I have visited Iraq is still a special case .
It is the only country where you will never anywhere meet a single person , not in private , not even in the middle of the desert , who dares to utter a single word of criticism of Saddam Hussein .
We have naturally supported the resolution but we regret nevertheless that our amendments were not adopted , especially that concerning the need to take the initiative to arrange an international conference aimed at solving the Kurdish problem .
This long-standing problem must be solved and it must be solved in a manner which gives the Kurds the reasonable amount of self-determination to which all peoples are entitled .
Recent events in Iraq exposed once again the inadequacies of the European Union 's common foreign and security policy .
Member States spoke with different voices in response to the evolving crisis .
The United Kingdom supported United States action ; others remained ambivalent , while a considerable number were clearly unhappy with the US administration .
The current IGC must bring to an end this farcical state of affairs .
We need to change the process and procedures to ensure that we have a coherent common foreign and security policy .
This can best be achieved by abolishing the need for decisions in this area to be unanimous .
This would prevent any individual Member State ( or small minority ) from being able to block the framing of an effective policy in a given situation .
Furthermore , although dissenting Member States should not be required to go along with the agreed policy they nonetheless should not be allowed to take a course of action which would undermine the majority view .
Reforms of this type might help create the situation where the EU will be able to exercise the same sort of influence in geopolitical matters that it currently exercises in global economic matters .
Resolution on child abuse
Madam President , the majority in this House has been shedding copious crocodile tears recently , forgetting that it systematically and repeatedly voted in favour of marriage between homosexuals , and we know what they can inflict on the children they cannot bring into the world .
It is true , too , that Parliament has consistently denounced attempts at a return to moral order , no doubt preferring immoral disorder .
And now what do we see ?
This very day , in the newspaper Libération , we have an apology from Mr ThierryMeyssan who , with a base in the French Grand Orient and using his Voltaire Network , has organized the most extraordinary outburst of anti-Christian racism and hatred against the arrival of Pope John Paul II .
We have Mr Thierry-Meyssan 's Ornicar Network , with all its propaganda in favour of paedophilia on the Internet .
We have France-Soir - where they don 't persecute these people , it 's politically correct ! - where Mr Duvert , a friend of Mr Matzneff , boasts that he only ever makes love to children aged 5 or 6 !
His book has just been put on sale in every bookshop .
So why should we be surprised by the abominations of the Dutroux network , in Belgium , linked to all the connections of the clergyman Doucet in France ?
Why should we be surprised when we see propaganda everywhere , in Libération once again , in favour of the newspaper Charlie Hebdo , whose main contributor , Patrick Font , has just been jailed for paedophilia .
So what we have today are crocodile tears !
Freemasonry rules in this Parliament , and it is freemasonry that beats the drum of every kind of hatred , because today all the healthy freedoms of the individual are to be abolished , whereas this Parliament has nothing but affection for paedophiles !
Madam President , I would like to welcome the vote on the subject of paedophilia .
However , one of my disappointments about the resolution which finally emerged is that we only make a glancing mention of the word ' family ' in paragraph 1 , when we refer to the courage of those families that have been victims of child abuse in Belgium .
It is time , in Western Europe , that we accepted the fact that the best defence for children against the scourge of paedophilia is to understand that the paedophile targets the most vulnerable children .
The most vulnerable children are those who do not have the assets of a stable , loving home .
The time has come for us to say that we must do something to encourage people to live with their children ; to make it clear that all children have the right to two parents who love them from birth right through to adulthood .
The time has come for Europe to realize that unless we look very carefully at the way in which we structure our homes and our families , we will reap an awful whirlwind .
The terrible and tragic events in Belgium have focused our minds on the need to protect our children from international paedophile rings and criminals involved in the sex trade .
We are dealing with an international problem and therefore we must respond accordingly .
The role of Europol in particular must be strengthened , especially in the area of providing a central database for missing children and compiling a central register of known paedophiles .
Whatever powers are required must be given to Europol to prevent a recurrence of the sordid and depraved incidents which happened in Charleroi .
The European Union must also take action against child sex tourism .
Each individual Member State must ensure that its laws are adequate so that its own nationals can be prosecuted for participating in this evil trade , irrespective of what part of the world they visited to pursue their perversion .
Additionally , the abuse of the Internet to promote pornography , including child pornography , must be investigated and action taken .
The time for talking has ended - it is action that is required .
There never has and never will be a perfect society .
There always has been and always will be crime .
This is no reason to resign ourselves to human shortcomings , let alone advocate a laissez-faire attitude .
The casting off of all inhibitions causes significant and lasting damage to society , family and individuals .
When all religious standards disappear ( often as a result of the activities of ' progressive ' clerics themselves ) ; when moral standards are dumped ; when permissiveness is taken to excess ; when indifference rules supreme ; when the idea that ' anything goes ' takes on the craziest of forms ; when decency is ridiculed and considered oldfashioned and outdated ; when values such as order , virtue , inner dignity , discipline , self-control and others are seen as suspect ; when the family is undermined ; when education is stripped of its status ; when abnormalities are praised ; when the forces of law and order are not allowed to do their job ; when the law makes victims into criminals and criminals into victims ; when all efforts to establish a moral and spiritual elite are jeered at as fascist .
Yes , then the way is wide open for all kinds of crime and all manner of perversity .
Then , indeed , it is not just the immediate perpetrator who is to blame ; the blame , the responsibility is shared by the society concerned .
The joint motion for a resolution on minors who are victims of violence contains a wealth of good intentions , but overlooks the essential point .
It disregards , or tries to disregard , the overwhelming responsibility of the Belgian Minister for Justice who agreed to the release of the paedophile Dutroux against the recommendation of the public prosecutor .
This Minister is now a judge at the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg . No proceedings have been brought against him , no measures taken .
And yet Melchior Wathelet is a multiple offender when it comes to this kind of blunder .
In June 1990 , in a confidential memorandum to the Belgian Sûreté , Minister Wathelet granted the release of 215 prisoners serving long sentences for robbery with violence , and in some cases rape , although the law required them to be repatriated to their countries of origin in the Maghreb .
On Melchior Wathelet 's own admission , several of them have reoffended , while others have vanished from sight .
We are speechless with outrage to find that my colleagues from all three regions of Belgium who have tabled this motion have passed over the flagrant guilt of a former Minister for Justice who regularly commits such criminal acts .
Measures to combat violence against minors must be carried out at all levels , by individuals , by Member States and at international level .
Violence can never be acceptable .
We have therefore supported the resolution but would stress that we distance ourselves completely from those sections concerning Europol .
The battle against paedophiles and violence against minors can best be fought through greater intergovernmental police cooperation through Interpol .
We would like to emphasise that it is important that this cooperation is expanded outside the EU too , to include for example police forces in the Baltic states and the countries of South East Asia .
The tragic events in Belgium have put the issue of the sexual abuse of children in the spotlight .
I believe that all forms of sexual abuse of children are criminal acts and totally unacceptable .
Forceful and coordinated international measures are needed to prevent children being exploited for sexual purposes in Europe and in other parts of the world .
I am therefore voting for the resolution even though I believe there are several other measures which could be taken apart from those whose only aim is to strengthen the EU 's third pillar .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0994 / 96 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in Cyprus ; -B4-1024 / 96 by Mr Kaklamanis and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on Greek Cypriots murdered on the Green Line ; -B4-1039 / 96 by Mr Hatzidakis and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the murder of two young Greek Cypriots in Cyprus ; -B4-1043 / 96 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the slayings that took place in Cyprus ; -B4-1058 / 96 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the murders of two Greek Cypriots by the Turkish occupying forces ; -B4-1073 / 96 by Mr Avgerinos and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the coldblooded murder of two young , unarmed Greek Cypriots by the occupying forces in Cyprus .
The Liberal Group is profoundly shocked by the murders committed last month during a peaceful demonstration in favour of the island 's reunification .
Everything possible must be done to stop the situation escalating .
The way in which the Turkish Government is behaving suggests that escalation is precisely what it wants .
We must condemn here in the sharpest terms the fact that the Turkish Government is paying for armed ' Grey Wolves ' to move in to stabilize the situation in Cyprus .
The Turkish Government is using criminals from mainland Turkey because the Turkish Cypriots were not prepared to dance to the Turkish tune .
We must insist that the Turkish Government ensures that those responsible for these acts of violence are arrested and tried .
This incident makes it clear once again that the Union will have to work to secure a peaceful resolution to the Cyprus question .
For the umpteenth time I thus urge the Council to devise a collective initiative on Cyprus .
Peace and stability in Europe is after all one of the prime objectives of the common foreign and security policy .
The Irish presidency has made a good start by appointing a further special envoy , ambassador Heaslip , but more is needed .
One element is the stepping up of pressure on Turkey which now openly admits to using public funds to help destabilize Cyprus .
We must stand by our insistence that the island is a single undivided unit .
We must maintain our opposition to the illegal Turkish occupation and continue to uphold the UN resolutions as our guidelines for action .
There is work to be done .
I urge all parties to the conflict to keep a cool head and continue working for a peaceful solution .
The Union must help its would-be member , Cyprus , in this .
These are our international contractual obligations .
Mr President , the whole of Europe and the world saw the barbarous way in which Isaac and Solomos were murdered last August by Turks , and there is therefore no need for me , I think to mention the facts of the case .
What I want to say , is that expressions of sorrow or even indignation by this Parliament about those facts are not enough .
So long as all we do is to express sorrow , not only will the impasse continue , but Turkey will grow bolder , because we have reached a point where the Turkish Cypriot authorities bring in hit-men from Turkey - because the Grey Wolf group are certainly murderers .
We have reached a point where a Minister of the self-styled Turkish Cypriot government - the Minister for Agriculture - himself became the murderer of Solomos , who like Isaac after all , was doing nothing more than calling for the restoration of legality to that long-suffering island .
And I must say that we have reached that point with the help of our own inactivity .
The inactivity of the European Union .
That is why I would say that there is no point in today 's debate unless it motivates an active involvement of the European Union in the restoration of normality and international legality to the area .
Despite what I must call the Council 's sorry attitude yesterday , today the European Parliament has sent out the message that ' we are not prepared to grant you aid when your human rights situation is getting continually worse and when your behaviour is endangering stability in the area ' .
With the present debate , we and the Commission should send a second message : ' Do not think that the tragic events in Cyprus will constitute a reason to relax pressure for a solution to the Cyprus problem .
Do not think that the murders will be a reason to stop the progress of Cyprus towards accession to the European Union .
Quite the contrary . These events are added reasons both for the European Union to involve itself more actively in the Cyprus problem , and for a reassertion of the decision to begin negotiations on the accession of Cyprus to the European Union , a development that could catalyse the finding of a solution to the Cyprus problem ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Greens deplore the fact that the crisis on Cyprus , which has been dragging on for 22 years now , has once again led to confrontation costing human lives .
Not only must the murder of two young Greek Cypriots by the Turkish occupying army of paramilitaries be condemned in the strongest terms ; those responsible for these crimes must be brought to book .
We also think that the killing of the Turkish soldier should be investigated , because someone was murdered on the Turkish side too .
The withdrawal of Turkish troops is a sine qua non for demilitarization of the island .
We think it is truly time to say that given the prospect of talks on Cyprus 's accession to the European Union every effort must be made to secure a breakthrough .
A breakthrough which offers guarantees to both population groups in Cyprus .
So great efforts are needed to that end in the immediate future .
It will not happen by itself .
For 22 years we have been muddling along and despite international condemnations , UN resolutions and all the rest of it , nothing has changed .
If the European Union does not manage to exert pressure and force a political solution we shall have a situation where , possibly , one part of a Member State of the European Union is under occupation .
That is politically intolerable .
Mr President , it was with shock and consternation that we witnessed the terrible events in Cyprus this summer .
After 22 years of Turkish occupation , in violation of international law , of more than one third of the territory of Cyprus , the violence has now escalated to a level that was scarcely considered possible .
Some media reports have wrongly given the impression that this is an inter-community dispute .
The fact is that unarmed Greek Cypriots who were demonstrating against the division of their country in the buffer zone were confronted with a massive show of Turkish military force and with members of the Grey Wolf fascist youth organization who had been brought specially .
Sixty-five billion Turkish lire were allocated by the Turkish treasury for the expedition conducted by this extremist organization .
So it was not a dispute between Greek and Turkish Cypriots .
Two young unarmed Cypriots were murdered by members of this terrorist group and by a Turkish occupation officer , others were seriously injured .
On behalf of my group I totally condemn these atrocious deeds .
Any constitutional state would automatically track down , arrest and prosecute the perpetrators .
In northern Cyprus , which is not a state and even less a constitutional state , one of the perpetrators was appointed minister of agriculture .
That is quite unbelievable !
These terrible events in Cyprus tell us nothing about the relations between the two ethnic groups .
Greek and Turkish Cypriots have the right to coexist , and they want to do so .
It is up to the European Union to do everything in its power - which means more than before - to put an end to the occupation of Cyprus and bring about a united Cyprus .
As early as June last year the European Parliament called on the Council to decide on common action in relation to Cyprus .
On behalf of my group , I most emphatically reiterate this request .
Only this morning the European Parliament strongly condemned Turkey for its violations of human rights and international law and decided to freeze the financial commitments for Turkey .
Now it is urgently necessary for the Commission and the Council to make it clear in unequivocal terms to the Turkish Government that better relations with the European Union also depend on a solution to the Cyprus problem .
Mr President , both public opinion and the Members of this Parliament have been taken aback by this double murder and the many injuries to citizens , among them two members of the UNO forces in Cyprus .
I do not think this surprise is justified , because these were murders , this was an organized enterprise , whose aim was to promote the idea and cultivate the conviction that it is impossible for the two communities to live together peaceably on the island , even though they did so for centuries .
And why is that ?
To justify the de facto partition imposed by the invasion and occupation for over twenty years , and the legitimization - as if such a thing were possible - of this situation of occupation .
That is the hothouse from which all these events stem , which will increase as time goes by .
However , Mr President , behind that satanic , devilish and unacceptable plan of Turkish chauvinism there are plans by other powers .
Specifically , it has come to light that the United States have plans and that there are studies by some of their services envisaging the partition of Cyprus - and not just Cyprus , but the Aegean - so that they will be able to control the partitioned area , the oil deposits which they calculate to be present , and the oil outlets from the Efxinon , the Caucasus , the Caspian sea and wherever else they can .
Consequently , this motion of ours is adequate in some degree , though in our view it is not enough because it does not reveal , does not denounce those ulterior motives .
Despite that , however , it is something and we will vote for it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has been following with deep concern the deterioration of the political situation in Cyprus following the various clashes between the two communities and which , as someone has already mentioned , resulted in the death of two Greek Cypriot civilians and , more recently , a Turkish Cypriot soldier .
Soon after the tragic events which took place in August , the European Union issued a statement in which it called for both sides to come together , and deplored the disproportionate violence by the so-called ' Turkish Cypriot security forces ' .
For its part , the Commission emphasized that events of this type would not in any way affect the agreement between the European Union and Cyprus and that accession negotiations would be begun , as originally planned , six months following the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Commission also intends actively to pursue its action of information on the European Union among the Turkish Cypriot community in order to inform it of the advantageous of Cypriot accession to the European Union and , also , the principles and rules implied .
These activities are mainly aimed at members of the Turkish Cypriot community , and are carried out both on and off the island .
In respect of a political solution to the Cypriot problem , the European Union will continue to support the mission of good offices undertaken by the Secretary General of the United Nations aimed at finding a global solution and , in more practical terms , the current efforts being made to seek a basis , so that direct talks between the leaders of both communities can be resumed .
The urgent need for a solution was once again illustrated by the tragic deaths which recently took place on the island .
The presence of Cypriot President Clerides , my colleague Mr Van den Broek and the Member States , through their Ministers of Foreign Affairs , at the opening of the 51st General Assembly of the United Nations will , I am certain , be an opportunity for all parties interested in finding a solution to the Cypriot problem to discuss the most recent events in Cyprus and try and re-launch the peace process .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1010 / 96 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Burundi ; -B4-1015 / 96 by Mrs André-Léonard and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on Burundi ; -B4-1019 / 96 by Mr Pradier , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in Burundi ; -B4-1033 / 96 by Mr Carnero González , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on Burundi and the coup d 'état of 25 July 1996 ; -B4-1038 / 96 by Mrs Baldi and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on Burundi ; -B4-1045 / 96 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on Burundi ; -B4-1074 / 96 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Burundi .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the political situation in Burundi was once again totally reversed in the past two months .
The coup d 'état on 25 July showed that the Burundian army will do its utmost to retain absolute power , even if that means ruin for the country .
My group believes that we should strongly condemn this coup .
In that way we will demonstrate our support for the Burundian people in their endeavour to build up democracy and law and order in a country devastated by civil war .
Mr President , a coup must never be worth carrying out .
That is why we should also express our support for the seven African states that are trying to prevent this injustice from becoming internationalized .
The only effective hope for Burundi , however , is that all the parties to the dispute should agree unconditionally to come to the negotiating table .
In that respect , we particularly acknowledge the efforts made by the Tanzanian president to achieve this .
Mr President , since the coup d 'état by the Tutsi officers , Bujumbura has been relatively quiet .
Unfortunately , the same cannot be said for the countryside , where guerrilla warfare is raging , making it impossible for the NGOs to work outside the capital .
Despite the tireless efforts of ex-President Nyerere , no solution to the Burundi crisis has been found .
There is a lamentable absence of any desire for national reconciliation .
Even so , Mr Ajello has continued the negotiations begun by the extremist forces , which seems to support the views of those who favour sending an international armed force .
Such a force , made up of Africans , should make it possible to prevent a similar tragedy occurring in Burundi to that which occurred in Rwanda in the spring of 1994 .
But we really do wonder , Mr President , whether our resolutions still have any prospect whatsoever of being heeded .
Nevertheless , we must hope that a dialogue can be established so that further bloodbaths can be prevented .
Mr President , it really is disastrous that we should have had more than ten successive motions for resolutions about a country which has just been the victim of another coup d 'état .
Obviously , one of our first reactions will be not to recognize the legitimacy of the existing authorities .
Our second reaction , an important one , might be or should be to tighten the embargo , especially as regards all strategic products .
I am thinking especially of fuel , weapons and ammunition , because as far as other things are concerned it is usually the public at large that pays the price of an embargo .
But in this case it would be the armed forces .
Our third reaction arises from the fact that the massacres are continuing . In this context , one can only feel that a new level of depravity has been reached with the deliberate murder of Monsignor Ruhuna , Archbishop of Gitega , who was a man of peace and a man of courage , and a man whose disappearance was in the interests of all the extremists .
For the present , as far as we are concerned at any rate , we must bring pressure to bear for negotiations to begin among all the parties concerned , including those who have so far resorted to armed force .
It is also necessary that the peace-keeping force - regarding which an agreement in principle had been reached at Arusha - should be ready to intervene and , it must be said , should intervene at once .
After all , only a substantial change in the major institutions of the State will be able to bring back peace to that country .
The selective genocide which is still taking place in Burundi , including since the military coup of 25 July which brought Pierre Buyoya to power , is without doubt desired by certain parties wishing to suppress the will and intelligence of the people .
Although the international community is continuing to make every effort to try to re-establish democracy and guarantee peace and national reconciliation in the various countries of the Great Lakes region , the situation is becoming more and more tragic .
We are deeply shocked at the murder , on 9 September , of the Archbishop of Gitega , Monsignor J. Ruhuna , along with other victims .
The military coup carried out by Buyoya and condemned by all governments took place unbelievably at the very time that the OAU , with the backing and logistical and financial support of the European Union and the UN , had decided to intervene in an effort to resolve this tragic situation .
There has to be definite action , given that there is no security whatever in the country and impunity is at the root of the conflict which some are allowing to happen simply because of ethnic hatred , that is hatred between the Hutu and the Tutsi tribes .
The urgent call for aid and the desperate appeal from several parties in the country is addressed to us , asking us to impose economic sanctions and a total embargo , including a weapons embargo throughout the regions of the Great Lakes : those calls cannot go unheeded , and there has therefore to be an arms embargo .
Many questions remain unanswered : why was the military intervention decided upon at Arusha by the OAU , with Burundi present , refused ?
Why are individuals belonging to specific political groups being killed ?
Why has this state of insecurity and impunity existed for more than 30 years ?
Why , if there is the will to resolve this situation , has it not been possible to restore the rule of law ?
Finally , why are the efforts of the entire community not succeeding in making the crucial changes needed to achieve a democratic state without the use of force ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad that this resolution of Parliament 's is clear , far clearer than the statements of the Council and the positions of various governments , notably France , Belgium and others .
The big difference is that Parliament has had the courage to say that it condemns this coup , and secondly that it not only supports Nyerere but the embargo too .
This is vital if we are to have any influence over those in power in Burundi today .
If we shirk this duty we are fooling ourselves .
So I believe the demand made here that the embargo should impel the two parties to sit down together again and reach agreement on a plan for power sharing is essential , because only if agreement is reached on the sharing of power between Tutsis and Hutus can there be peace in Burundi .
Mr President , I would like to make an oral amendment to the motion for a resolution on which we will be voting .
I am referring to paragraph 7 , which states that the European Parliament notes the re-establishment of the National Assembly and the lifting of the ban on political parties . This is a positive , although insufficient , step towards re-establishing the rule of law .
This point must be deleted because , firstly - according to direct information from the democratic political forces in Burundi - it is incorrect to state that the ban on political parties has been lifted .
This is nothing more than an attempt on the part of the regime to gain the support of opposition Members of Parliament .
Secondly , and this is a key point , there is only one way of making progress on the re-establishment of the rule of law after a coup d 'état and that is to hand the power that was usurped back to whomever is constitutionally , democratically and legitimately entitled to it . Currently , this is President Ntibantunganya , who has taken refuge in a western embassy , whilst his family has gone abroad .
Any formula other than one involving the restoration of power to the overthrown authorities or the calling of free elections - like this extremely dubious re-establishment of the National Assembly - is no more than a clumsy attempt at lending legitimacy to the coup d 'état we are against .
The National Assembly has been re-established - and I am reading from the communiqué issued by the rebel regime - within the legal context of a transition of the institutional system .
It is my opinion that what the rebel regime says in respect of the re-establishment of the National Assembly speaks volumes .
On the subject of Africa , we in Europe have a tendency to fall for such fictitious democracy , as if this were our ineluctable destiny .
If we applaud solutions such as this one , in which a dictator attempts to manipulate supposedly democratic institutions , we will be helping to lengthen the list of countries governed by regimes which are repugnant to us in Europe but which we cynically find acceptable in the case of Africa .
I therefore propose the deletion of this paragraph 7 as written in the joint motion for a resolution .
I would also like to point out that this House will have an opportunity , next week , to apply the principles we defend beyond the mere rubber-stamping of resolutions .
There is to be a meeting of the ACP / EU Joint Assembly and I would hope , indeed I would like to request now , that the representatives from Burundi are actually those legitimate parliamentary representatives whose mandate was approved by the 1993 elections and not the diplomatic envoys of a regime which the European Union should not recognize .
A massacre is taking place in Burundi in the name of ethnic cleansing , the reason why intervention was necessary in Bosnia .
More than 7000 people , including the Archbishop , Monsignor Ruhuna , whom I had the honour of meeting and speaking to about Burundi , have been killed in that country since the coup d 'état on 25 July , which led to Buyoya 's seizing power .
The level of violence in Burundi is not diminishing - it is , in fact , increasing .
The only solution is for us to support Julius Nyerere , African leaders and the OAU in their efforts at finding a solution to the grave crisis afflicting Burundi and the entire Great Lakes region .
Thank you , Mrs Sauquillo .
I listened to your contribution with interest , as always , and would inform you that the oral amendment you have tabled will be dealt with in due course at voting time , which , as I shall repeat at the end of the debate , will take place this afternoon at 5.30 .
Mr President , yesterday we heard the presidency of the European Union fudge on the issue of Iraq and Turkey .
Today , I have no doubt , the Commission and the presidency of the Union will be aware that Parliament no longer wants to fudge on the issue of Burundi .
The tragedy of Burundi continues with total disregard for human rights , summary executions and the massacre of thousands of people over a long period of time .
There is no embargo on bringing armaments into that region .
I have , along with Mrs Baldi and other members of my group , urged an embargo on armaments in the region because of the scale of the killings and abuse of human rights which is very frightening indeed .
I ask the Commissioner , whom I have personally great faith in and in his ability to achieve things within the Commission , to press for an embargo of this kind in the region .
I would also ask the Commissioner to think again about the whole situation as far as the Organization of African Unity is concerned and its desire to intervene directly in the situation there , to bring about peace and stability insofar as that can be arrived at .
The persistent instability in Burundi , together with the escalation of fighting , has to come to an end and the European Union can no longer stand uncommitted in finding a solution to that particular problem .
One particular problem , Commissioner , is an arms embargo - not just in Burundi - but let us begin with Burundi and then let us look at how we can bring about control of armaments coming from the European Union , which contribute to the terribly sad situations we see occurring in Burundi , in Rwanda and in other regions .
Mr President , the Liberal Group deplores the coup in this unstable nation of Burundi .
The coup has led to a further escalation of violence .
A stable and democratic government is urgently needed , to restore control over the army and bring those responsible for crimes of violence to justice .
So a dialogue involving all the parties must be started as soon as possible , as Mrs Aelvoet has pointed out .
Consequently we the Liberals also welcome the pressure which the international community is putting on the new regime .
This should include an embargo on arms and munitions .
And it is the least which can be done to prevent the situation from escalating again .
This embargo must of course apply to Zaire too which is being forcibly persuaded to give support to the extremist gangs .
The international community must not stand idly by .
Mediation will only succeed if an international intervention force is set up for Burundi .
Boutros Ghali 's proposal can be implemented swiftly , given that a number of African countries have indicated their willingness to provide troops .
I thus urge the Council to ask the European members of the Security Council to back this idea .
Mr President , the delegation of the Alleanza Nazionale agrees with the substance of the resolution and will therefore be voting for it .
However , we question how effective this can be unless the European Union speaks with one voice and responds on a collegiate basis to the human tragedies taking place all around the world .
My impression is that , now that their elite have abandoned the communist ideals and clearly disappointed by the political and culture message that comes to them from the West , the peoples of Africa are dangerously lapsing into tribalism .
Added to that is the fact that the pulpit from which we hurl anathema and preach such principles is beginning to look unsteady as a result of the tragedies and ethnic divisions that have taken place at the very heart of Europe , and the attempt at secession by the Lega Nord in Italy could be a move in that direction .
A touch of realism and an element of the specific would not therefore come amiss .
And so realistically , what can we Members of the European Parliament do ?
Next week the ACP-EU Joint Assembly will be meeting and that is the context in which we shall be able to take those measures of economic retaliation which may produce more results than any number of high-sounding declarations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , obviously the Commission is continuing to be very concerned over the current situation in Burundi and once again it must deplore events there , especially the recent assassination of the Archbishop of Gitega .
We share the opinion of the Members of the European Parliament that the only solution to Burundi 's problems lies in its own people .
As such talks must be held between all of the parties involved in the conflict , so that an attempt can be made to establish a stable and fair system for everyone belonging to all of the ethnic groups , it is important that we should continue to call upon the parties to put an end to their fight and to start speaking about peace .
The Commission has referred on various occasions to the fact that it is prepared to do all it can to support the reconstruction of Burundi in cooperation with neighbouring states , relevant international organisations and other donors .
We obviously think that it is possible to contribute to the funding of peace observers and human rights monitors as an important measure in the scope of the peace process .
We also wish to continue to cooperate in order to establish national dialogue , to restore the constitution and legal system as well as prepare a sizable package of recovery measures and measures aimed at development , as soon as circumstances in the country permit .
But it is important to say that , having on various occasions called on organisations such as the Organisation of African Unity and other sub-regional organisations to play an active and priority role in discussing the problems of Sub-Saharan Africa , we now have an occasion , and one which we have taken , to support the group of neighbouring countries which , meeting in Arusha , have taken important decisions - and I would even say courageous decisions - aimed at restoring constitutional legality in the country .
Therefore , the European Union unequivocally supports the process and the guidelines which have been worked out by the regional African Heads of State and it should be done through its own statements or through the noteworthy action taken by the special envoy , Mr Aldo Ajello , the European Union 's special envoy to the Great Lakes .

Again , I should like to stress that , despite the terrible scenario which reaches us every day from Burundi , despite all of this there are signs of hope .
I have to tell Parliament that I was somehow encouraged to know that extremist groups in Burundi have had exploratory contacts in Rome via the Community of Santo Egidio , a community which has already played a decisive role in the peace process in Mozambique .
These are preliminary contacts but they could be seen as the light at the end of the tunnel and , obviously , they do nothing to stop the rest of the process which has developed more formally but in parallel , probably in a supplementary and very useful way .
I should also like , if you will allow me , to emphasize that the question of an arms embargo has already been discussed in various bodies .
The Commission has never hidden its sympathy for this idea of an embargo but I should like to emphasize that as a consequence of the sanctions which are being applied the arms traffic is at this moment virtually impossible in that there is no possibility of significant physical movement across frontiers .
I think though that , at the General Assembly of the United Nations and the meetings which are going to take place next week , I think , in New York , this is one of the points on the agenda for the contacts , whether with the UN SecretaryGeneral or our other partners , mostly Americans , and also obviously with our African partners . This is one of the main subjects which is going to be on the agenda and which I hope will be discussed .
And I also hope that new guidelines and a new voice might come out of this round of New York negotiations . I should like to conclude , Mr President , by saying once again that the European Parliament has hit the nail on the head in terms of some of the very topical aspects of the Burundi question and I am very pleased that this resolution has been approved .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , the Liberals have always been strongly in favour of a permanent international criminal court .
Universal human rights should be internationally upheld and infringements should be internationally punished .
The ad hoc international tribunals for Rwanda and former Yugoslavia are doing a good job , but it is now time to think about setting up a permanent body .
The time which is constantly wasted in setting up ad hoc tribunals could be saved and it might even be cheaper .
Happily considerable progress has been made and the committee responsible for drafting the statute has completed its work and asked for a diplomatic conference at the end of 1998 to establish the Court .
But there is a lot of work still to be done and the Union must play a leading part in it .
If we are to exert as much influence as possible the Union must agree a common position , as quickly as possible , on the need for a court of this kind and it must voice that common position during the next General Assembly of the UN .
The Union should advocate the renewal of the drafting committee 's mandate and press at the General Assembly for a diplomatic conference before the end of 1998 .
If the Member States act collectively they can exert a great deal of influence .
We know that .
That is the basic idea of the common foreign and security policy to which each of us can subscribe .
So the Member States should apply that policy in practice , certainly when it comes to safeguarding universal human rights and punishing crimes against humanity .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I consider particularly important this debate and the determination of the House , for the third time in as many years , to urge the European Union to promote , as has been the case from the outset , a process which led to the political decision to set up the International Criminal Court .
Commissioner Pinheiro , you are well aware that at the UN , in the preparatory meetings to define the position of the European Union , the agenda clearly includes , among other issues , the question of the Court .
The Sixth Committee of the United Nations will in fact be required to state its view , in November , on the two requests of the preparatory committee : the first involves renewing the mandate to complete work on the statutes , while the other , which is a very important political request , concerns the decision , to be taken this year at the Fifty-first General Assembly , that the constituent conference will , at any rate , be convened in 1998 .
Parliament is therefore asking the European Union , the Irish presidency and the Commissioner - and I am therefore addressing myself to you Commissioner and hoping for a positive response - to do all in their power , all that is possible to harmonize the position of the Union and ensure that 15 countries are able to speak with one voice .
We asked for this debate and tabled this resolution because each of us knows that at least two countries still have reservations , countries which were behind the setting-up of the ad hoc tribunal and which have , one of them at least , actually advocated the idea of the permanent court .
That is a matter of concern to us but we hope that , with the help of the Commission , the Council will in fact take this important decision .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what interests me in this discussion is the credibility of this House .
We are calling for an international criminal court , but unfortunately we proved unable , before the summer recess , to make financial resources available for the necessary activities of that court - which is currently engaged in investigating war crimes in former Yugoslavia .
If this House really wants to have an international system to prosecute this kind of war crime and crime against humanity , then we cannot evade our financial responsibility for such projects .
That is why I ask this House to endorse the requests made by the Green Group and the ARE Group under the Notenboom procedure , in the same way as in the future 1997 budget , in relation to the appropriations to be allocated for the activities of the International Court of Justice for former Yugoslavia .
How credible can we be if we set ourselves political aims , only to impede them by not making the funding available ?
Mr President , for a moment I thought we were being left out .
On behalf of our Group , and Mrs Lenz who unfortunately cannot be here , I rise to express our total support for this resolution .
I believe we must have a cohesive approach to these international war crimes and there must be no hiding place for those who commit them .
I would also like to say that personally I am very glad that the resolution includes a proscription of the death penalty .
Whatever penalty the courts will decide for these people I do not believe the death penalty is right .
I feel it necessary to say this at this time because there are many calls for the return of the death penalty for certain crimes , and I am very glad indeed that the resolution includes a proscription on that .
Indonesia
Mr President , Mr Deus Pinheiro , ladies and gentlemen , with dramatic frequency the European Parliament denounces and repudiates the total disrespect for human rights shown by Indonesia .
And every time it returns to the subject the situation has got worse and not only in East Timor .
What more has to happen before we stop sending arms to that country , and by we I mean the Member States of the European Union ?
This is not only a matter of dealing with political pragmatism : but we are actually providing means for repression .
What about all of these words spoken at meeting after meeting in favour of human rights , only to be followed up by this kind of action ?
The European Parliament 's successive demonstrations repudiating the situation in Indonesia are quite right .
However , the European Union as a whole should back the position of the European Parliament or else I think that it will lose all of its credibility .
Given the situation in Indonesia , when are we going to take a common stance that has effective consequences on our political and economic relations with that country ?
Mr President , I am saddened to be addressing the House yet again concerning a distinct lack of democracy and human rights in a third country , namely Indonesia .
This is a country which enjoys a booming economy and is a member of the important Association of Southeast Asian Nations .
But of course , as we all know , especially those of us who take part in these debates , such credentials are no guarantor of democracy or respect for human rights .
The unnecessarily violent raid on the Indonesian Democratic Party 's headquarters , just days after the ASEAN ministerial meeting in Jakarta , is yet another example of the government 's attempt at suppression of any opposition to its regime in Indonesia .
On this occasion , 90 people were injured and over 180 were arrested ; most are still in prison .
The Peoples ' Democratic Party , another opposition party , has also been criminalized and many of its supporters too are in detention .
Furthermore , prodemocracy activists are being held incommunicado for engaging in peaceful activities .
This cannot surely be allowed .
The Indonesian media have been told to watch out for communist propaganda .
Journalists have been intimidated by the security forces and an atmosphere of censorship prevails .
We contend as a group that we cannot close our eyes to the repression in Indonesia .
The structures for democracy do exist and every effort must be made to uphold them .
I draw attention particularly to paragraph 8 of our joint resolution , which calls on the Commission to keep the establishment of trade relations with ASEAN subject to respect for human rights and invite the Commissioner 's comments .
Mr President , the fight for democracy in Indonesia has become even more visible and the oppressive character of the regime has become even more evident .
We must prevent the growing importance of the Indonesian economy and interests linked to that dynamic from being used as a smoke screen to hide the political situation which the international community cannot pretend to ignore .
On the other hand , it is natural that , in a resolution on human rights in Indonesia , there is no room to make reference to human rights in East Timor .
But we must remember that this political regime , which flouts the human rights of its own people , also does so , and even more violently , against the people of Timor by means of a military occupation which has now lasted for two decades ; among the human rights which have been violated by the Indonesian regime we should also include the right to self-determination of another country subjected to the process of genocide .
We should not forget this and we should not lose any opportunity to recall that this is the case .
Mr President , when the Dutch East Indies became Indonesia many of us rejoiced at this step in decolonization and towards democracy .
But how sour this dream and this vision have become !
The days of the Bandung Conference , which was a watchword for liberation , seem like many centuries ago , because what we have now is a repressive regime .
The proof of this is not just the attacks on their own citizens but the continued denial of the right of self-determination not only to East Timor , which colleagues have already testified to and which this House has already underlined many times , but also in West Papua or West Irian Jaya .
We have to ask the Commission when it is pushing Indonesia - as we assume it will - on human rights , to let these particular denials of the democratic right of self-determination be to the fore and at the top of the agenda , so that when Indonesia finally achieves a return to democracy these areas can be liberated , just as Catalonia and the Basque country benefited when democracy came to Spain .
Mr President , after what we have just heard from Indonesia , we can establish the following : this is not a democratic state and it is not a state in which human rights are protected .
On 27 July the headquarters of the democratic Indonesian party , the PDI , was stormed by military and para-military troops : 5 people dead , 24 disappeared and 149 injured are the minimum figures to be condemned .
We are outraged that peaceful demonstrators from the democracy movement were pursued in the days that followed .
According to our figures , at least 100 individuals were arbitrarily arrested and are now facing prosecution under the anti-subversion law .
There is no freedom of opinion or of the press ; on the contrary , journalists are being prosecuted too .
Indonesia did not subscribe to the international pact on civil and political rights .
There is no agreement on the prevention of torture , which is of extreme concern to us .
That is why we call for three things : first , the release of the people under arrest ; secondly , what we have always called for in relation to East Timor and Irian Jaya , an end to all military aid from Europe ; and thirdly , the inclusion of human rights in the trade agreements with ASEAN .
The EU has concluded trade agreements without addressing the human rights question .
The Commission must alter that .
Human rights must be protected here .
It is our obligation to do so .
Violent suppression of a peaceful movement in favour of democratic reform in Indonesia , with arrests , restrictions on journalists , injuries and deaths , is something to which this Parliament must react .
This is not an isolated event which is out of accord with the usual policies pursued by the Indonesian Government .
This Parliament has repeatedly gone on record against the human rights abuses for which the Indonesian Government has been responsible .
Worst of all in recent years is the case of East Timor , where a third of the population is estimated to have died .
There are , however , sadly , many other examples of flagrant abuses of human rights on a considerable scale by the Indonesian Government .
The European Parliament must , therefore , demand that all deliveries of arms and military equipment are permanently stopped and that maximum efforts are made to force the Indonesian Government to end its policy of crushing all dissent by force .
Those who are in prison for purely political offences , including Muchtar Pakpahan , should be released , and so should those from East Timor and Irian Jaya .
Legal proceedings against Mrs Megawati Sukarnoputri should be abandoned .
Unless there is a change , the Indonesian authorities must understand that their total disregard of international standards on human rights will have an impact on economic and political relations between Europe and the Indonesian Government , and the Council and the Commission should give careful consideration to what action can be taken on this forthwith .
We want the best possible relations with Indonesia but these can only be achieved on the basis of a very considerable improvement in the sphere of human rights .
This is a message we must make very clear to the Indonesian Government .
Mr President , once again we can see that the political groups of the European Parliament agree about the defence of human rights in Indonesia , hence the need for practical measures to be taken by the European Union and its Member States .
On other occasions , the European Parliament has already assessed and condemned the serious violations against human rights by the regime in that country against its own people and other peoples in the region subject to its illegal domination .
Once again , reference is being made here to the case of Timor , inter alia .
What is new in the situation which took place in July - developments of interest - is the generalisation of protests and the emergence of a broader democratic movement with credible leaders of a genuine opposition calling into question practices and , I dare hope , the very survival of this dictatorial regime and the leadership of its tyrant , Suharto .
The European Union must stop propping that regime up but that would mean exchanging principles and values for business .
The joint resolution on the growth of repression in Indonesia reflects the widespread disapproval in this House of some aspects of policy in Indonesia .
I say some aspects , because we know that some areas of Indonesian policy are to be commended .
But nevertheless we are aware that things are bad when it comes to the upholding of human rights in the country and the country 's democratic behaviour .
When I think of the machinations against Mrs Megawati Sukarnoputri and her Democratic People 's Party , which effectively make it impossible for any democratic opposition to function in Indonesia , when I think of the arrest of Muchtar Pakpahan , leader of the SBSI labour union , when I think of the numerous political prisoners , when I think of the recent raids , and when I think of the opprobrium in which Indonesia is held over the Timor affair , then we have to acknowledge that very little progress has been made , and indeed , things are getting worse rather than better .
Today I think this resolution is focusing on the position of Mrs Megawati and Mr Pakpahan .
Our main concern is to improve their position by voicing our support for them , and we want to secure the release of these trade union people , and other detainees too .
This means that the resolution contains a couple of points which are not relevant just at the moment and are perhaps not quite so easy to accept and approve .
I am thinking of paragraph 7 , but paragraph 8 too .
If we can maybe take those out , I would hope that the resolution might receive the endorsement of a very broad majority which ought to make the Indonesian Government stop and think .
If a loud enough noise is made here in Parliament , the Indonesian Government will hopefully listen and respond .
Madam President , Commissioner , the latest events in Indonesia , which I refer to in the motion for a resolution , only go to vindicate all those who for many years now have denounced what was happening in East Timor .
Against this background , we have heard that the Commission and , in particular , the Irish presidency might play a major role here .
Firstly , they must bear in mind the common position already adopted by the Council and apply provisions on every occasion and whenever necessary , in particular at the 51st Assembly of the United Nations and the meeting of the European Council which will mark the end of the Irish presidency , as happened in Madrid in 1995 .
Secondly , we must include the question of East Timor whenever possible in questions of international affairs concerning the European Union .
Thirdly , we must back and promote any action which is aimed at using the resources at the European Union 's disposal to improve human rights in Timor and finally , we must promote the publication of a White Paper which brings together witness reports and documentation about human rights violations in East Timor .
Alexander Nikitin
I am glad that our initiative in getting this matter included on the agenda for urgent debate has received so broad a measure of support from other honourable Members .
This House is regularly accused of holding the same debates time and time again , but regrettably we find that there is a very real need to discuss the case of Nikitin , the Russian environmental activist , for the third time in ten months .
Because despite two previous resolutions on urgency by Parliament and despite measures by the European Commission in Moscow , it seems that Alexander Nikitin 's position is getting worse .
Not for nothing has Amnesty International declared him a political prisoner .
We must not forget that Nikitin used only publicly available sources for his report .
So in this case there is no question of his having published secret information in a manner prejudicial to state security .
It is intolerable that someone in a country which , incidentally , is a member of the Council of Europe , should be imprisoned on political grounds .
Nikitin should thus be given a fair trial and exonerated by a civil court .
I hope the Commission will give particular attention to this case and make representations to the Russian authorities about it again .
I look forward to the Commission 's reply with keen interest .
Madam President , the Nikitin case is important for two reasons .
What we have here is political persecution by the Russian authorities of a former officer who has done his duty as a Russian citizen and as a European citizen without revealing any military secrets whatsoever in doing so .
What has Mr Nikitin done ?
He has denounced the state of the nuclear installations in the Kola peninsula : literally , a nuclear dustbin .
Much more than a threat - a real , huge and present danger , not confined to Scandinavia alone but spreading through the Barents Sea to a much wider area .
A situation which calls for the urgent setting-up of a joint commission by the Russian and European Parliaments - and , of course , the immediate release of Mr Nikitin .
) Madam President , this House must show its concern for the continuing deterioration in respect for human rights in Russia .
In the case in point , a campaigner on environmental issues has been arrested simply for collaborating on a report dealing with pollution of the waters around the Kola peninsula .
This House gave its opinion in February , but Amnesty International , the High Commission of the United Nations and the Helsinki Committee also regard him as a prisoner of conscience .
I believe we should demand , not request but demand , the release of a man who has been imprisoned simply for fulfilling his duties as a citizen .
It would be good for the environment in Europe , and in Russia in particular , if all citizens were to fulfil their civic duty of respecting our environment .
This House , therefore , must vigorously call for the release of Mr Nikitin , whose health is also deteriorating .
Madam President , the case of Alexander Nikitin is also particularly important to us because he has participated in the EU 's TACIS work with the Bellona organization .
Amnesty International has declared Nikitin a political prisoner and , what is more , the first prisoner of conscience in Russia since the collapse of communism .
This is what Amnesty says .
Amnesty has investigated the figures quoted by Nikitin in Bellona 's report , and confirmed that they are based on publicly documented sources .
We really have no reason to turn a blind eye in this case .
It is also time for us to debate who should receive our annual Sakharov Prize , and I hope that the various political groups will consider Nikitin .
He is likely to be sentenced in October or November to up to 25 years ' imprisonment , and now is really the time to act .
By the end of the year it may already be too late .
Finally , I should like to mention that the Globe environmental network , which has many Members in this Parliament , wanted to visit Murmansk and the Kola Peninsula to investigate these matters about which Bellona and Alexander Nikitin have written , that is , this radioactivity problem .
This trip was scheduled for the end of October , but unfortunately nothing has come of it this time , as it was impossible to establish good cooperation with the local authorities .
The issue is topical , and I hope that Members of this House will be able to familiarize themselves with the matters on account of which Alexander Nikitin has been groundlessly imprisoned .
Romania
Madam President , we hear that Romania has conducted a review of its Penal Code . This has led to the introduction of penalties of up to five years ' imprisonment for homosexuals .
The gravity of the penalties envisaged in this review requires that the Commission and the Council adopt measures aimed at demanding respect for human rights in Romania . In this case , rights are being attacked by laws which , in addition to being discriminatory , express value judgements whereby an attempt is being made to criminalize those whose lifestyle and tastes are different from those of the majority , as always happens where respect for an individual 's autonomy is non-existent .
It is therefore essential for this House to demand that the Romanian government comply with the undertakings entered into with the Council of Europe aimed at the total abolition of repression of homosexual behaviour .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with its decision to impose a sentence of up to 5 years ' imprisonment for homosexuality , the Romanian Parliament has discredited itself in my eyes .
Either the Romanian parliament is clueless about European human rights standards or , as I presume , this is a deliberate slap in the face of all those who are being persecuted in Romania because of their sexual orientation and also all those Romanians who are looking for a rapprochement with the European Union .
In my view we cannot accept either alternative , and they only show the need for a process of democratization in the Romanian institutions .
We must react today , immediately !
It is absolutely essential that we increase the pressure , for we have a chance to ensure that this threat of prison sentences really is averted , possibly through the conciliation procedure or as a result of a constitutional inquiry , and that homosexuality does not become a crime .
Let me stress that I very much welcome the fact that the leader of the Romanian delegation in the joint parliamentary committee has already informed us that he intends to enter this question on the agenda of our next delegation meeting .
Madam President , this motion for a resolution is particularly important , and I believe that the government of Romania considers it as such , and regards it as opportune too .
After all , it is time that the Romanian Parliament - or at least the members of certain parties that specialize in such dubious activities as that which concerns us today - should understand that measures of this kind are contrary not only to the agreements to which Romania freely adhered but also to the values on which the European Union , of which Romania wishes to become a member , is based .
In conclusion , I also believe that this episode and others of the same type should prompt every Member of this Parliament to make greater efforts to ensure that the European Union finally acquires a constitution in which these basic rights are codified .
Madam President , I am a Member of the Romanian Joint Parliamentary Committee .
When we visited Romania some months ago , I must say I was quite appalled by the attitude of leading politicians to the issue of homosexuality .
But now I am utterly dismayed by the recent actions of the Chamber of Deputies in Romania in wanting to introduce even harsher , stricter penalties for homosexual acts between consenting adults .
This is quite unacceptable in a society which claims to be civilized .
As we all know , Romania wants to become a full Member State of the European Union .
The European Union often quite rightly demands that Romania and countries like it embark upon a programme of liberalizing their economies .
That is essential .
But I think it is just as important to demand that , if countries like Romania are going to be Members of the European family , then they must introduce more democracy , they must develop their civil society and , above all else , they must develop their human rights record and improve it dramatically .
I hope that that is the message which will go out to the Romanian Government today , loud and clear .
Madam President , Commissioner , I believe that every human being has the fundamental right to express their sexuality in complete freedom and with full respect for their partner , whatever their sex .
That is why it is important vigorously to condemn - as does my group - the shameful decision of the Romanian parliament to increase the penalties for homosexuality between consenting adults , an action which effectively puts any country at the limits of civilization .
We urgently call upon President Iliescu to veto the law : that is possible and provided for under Romanian legislation .
I would in fact stress that homosexuals and heterosexuals should have the same social , economic and political rights .
That has been the opinion expressed by this House in past years .
I am asking the Commission to undertake to remind Romania of the commitments it entered into when it acceded to the Council of Europe : those commitments actually included the elimination of discrimination against homosexuals .
Let us try for once to get decisions already taken enforced !
In 1995 60 people were jailed in Romania for homosexual acts and the new legislative proposals make the situation worse ; they are truly disgraceful and contrary to all existing international human rights law .
A very courageous gay movement known as ' Accept ' has recently begun action to change the position of homosexual men and women in Romania .
If the proposed changes in the law go through , these people may be arrested right away since the freedom of gays and lesbians to form organizations will quite simply be banned .
So I urge the Commission to do everything it can to protect the Romanian gay movement against the rabid , crude homophobia which is rampant in Romania .
A country like this should not aspire to membership of the European Union .
Existing measures of aid to the Romanian Government should be frozen .
Colombia
Madam President , I well remember Mr Samper coming to this House some two years ago and assuring us that he would do his utmost to devote more attention to protecting and enforcing human rights in his country .
I have statistics before me , which were published by the German church organization ' Brot für die Welt ' ( bread for the world ) , according to which more than 30 000 people were murdered in the year 1995 .
Now I know that the situation in Colombia is extremely complex , but I cannot accept , nor can this House , that there have still been no decisive steps towards genuine protection of human rights , especially in the form of setting up a human rights office in Colombia .
That means the government is definitely behindhand .
I ask the House to adopt this resolution and to give it to the delegation to take with it , rather than keeping quiet about our political position on the human rights situation in Colombia out of some over-hasty sense of obedience .
Madam President , for several months , our Group has been attempting to obtain approval of a motion for a resolution relating to human rights in Colombia where many members of the rural population have either disappeared or died .
We support the move to rid the country of its drug crops , but these should be replaced by substitute crops .
It is not possible to take away the farmers ' way of life without offering them an alternative , and it is this that is giving rise to a clandestine civil war .
We have heard about the expulsion of a number of families from the Bellacruz estate and are also aware that the Office for Human Rights approved by the United Nations has not yet started to operate - our fear is that this motion will not be adopted .
It would be highly significant if the delegation this House is sending to Colombia were to take with it such a resolution , in other words our agreement regarding Parliament 's deliberations on the observance of human rights in Colombia and all these doubts surrounding the attitude of the Colombian authorities , since they are , it would appear , attempting to implement a counter-reform , viewing the army as a judicial police force .
It would be a great pity if this motion were not approved and our delegation could not rely on the agreement of the European Parliament .
Madam President , we have given a great deal of consideration to this motion for a resolution currently under debate and , in all sincerity , find the greater part of the motion very reasonable .
We are just as concerned as the next person about the generalized climate of violence prevailing in Colombia .
However , this motion does contain elements which are debatable .
For example , we are not sure that this is the appropriate time to discuss whether it is the done thing to analyse the soundness of the coca-crop eradication campaign .
However , in the view of our Group , this is more a question of procedure : the motion 's manifest inappropriateness is so blatant that we simply cannot support it .
We are well aware that a delegation from this House is about to visit Colombia - next week , in fact , as mentioned by the honourable Member -where it will conduct discussions with the Government , the Opposition , Congress , the Attorney-General and non-governmental organizations .
The logical thing would be to wait for its report before approving this motion .
We should not forget that this is an official visit by a delegation from this House and that one of its most important objectives is to discover the facts about the circumstances reported to us .
If we were to approve the motion now , we would be attempting to sanction before verification .
We should remember that , on many occasions , this House and also Commission institutions have shown themselves to be in favour of continuing the current coca-crop eradication campaign .
Our attitude is therefore that it is totally inappropriate to approve the motion at this time .
Madam President , I shall try and be as brief as possible and respond to everything that was said or at least everyone who has made a statement about this matter .
I shall begin with the question of the International Criminal Court by saying that , apart from some of the arguments already made by many of the speakers , which are relevant , we must look at the examples of ad hoc courts in former Yugoslavia and Rwanda which show that , in terms of time and cost , the option of ad hoc situations is not necessarily the best one .
But it is also important to look at the question of cost which is undoubtedly also one of effectiveness .
The existence of an International Criminal Court with a well-defined statute and a very well-limited scope ( and practical actions to take ) would certainly be a major deterrent for stopping crimes against humanity and crimes against human rights , all which are taking place in various parts of the world .
That is why the Commission is giving all of its support to the creation of this International Criminal Court . This is also why the Commission has , over the last two or three years , paid out 3.5 million ecus to set up ad hoc courts in former Yugoslavia and Rwanda .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as to the question of human rights in Indonesia , this unfortunately is a situation which has existed for some time . Speaking of the East Timor question , runs the risk unfortunately of becoming something of a cliché because nothing has changed and nothing has improved .
But now that the lack of democracy and violations of human rights are obvious , vis-à-vis the citizens of Indonesia , in particular trade unionists and opposition politicians , the issue - from my point of view - has become an even more urgent one .
That is why this resolution has been passed and is in line with others already approved by the Council and subscribed to by the Commission in terms of the respect of human rights , not only in Indonesia but in general , and the influence that this might have on the Community 's political and economic relations . This is definitely an important resolution and I hope that the Council and the Commission together will take account of it , as I do .
Madam President , as far as the question of the case of Alexander Nikitin in Russia is concerned , the Commission has obviously taken initiatives and approached the Russian authorities , and has been monitoring closely events through the appropriate channels .
I think that the legislation to which Russia subscribed when it joined the Council of Europe is certainly one of the main arguments for us to use when demanding , as someone has already said , that the Russian authorities release Mr Nikitin .
Protection of the environment , as someone else said , must not be the preserve of committees or NGOs , however well-intentioned they are , or even the European Parliament .
Everyone must take part , and that includes private citizens .
Mr Alexander Nikitin acted as a citizen and as such he deserves our solidarity , that of Europe and the rest of the world .
As for the question of the rights of homosexuals in Romania , I am pleased to tell you , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that we have been told of a memorandum published yesterday by the Romanian government in which the Minister for Justice is entrusted with seeing that the Romanian Houses of Parliament do all they can to make sure that the Council of Europe 's rules of conduct are respected in full , in particular with reference to Article 200 of the Romanian Criminal Code .
This might mean that the action taken by you , Members of the European Parliament , and may I say so with some immodesty , the Commission , by acting more discreetly , might have led to these first results .
Let us hope that this will have positive consequences very quickly .
Finally , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as for the Colombian question , the Commission as you know has subscribed to the thesis , which you also mentioned , that it is not enough to fight and try to bring an end to coca production : we must also give farmers alternatives to earn their bread .
That is one of the reasons why , at the level of the system of generalised preferences , not only in the case of Colombia but also other Andean countries , we have allowed some supplementary facilities and we think that they are important .
That is also why we think of Colombia as a priority country under the rubric of democratisation and human rights in Latin America .
This is also the reason - but also the violations of various areas of human rights which have been detected - why the Commission has decided to meet the costs for five observers responsible for carrying out on-the-spot appraisals of the human rights situation in Colombia , under the hierarchical authority of the Secretariat of the UNHCR now installing offices in Bogotá , under the auspices of the UN , and also with funding from the Commission and Spain .
Let us hope that the report to be drafted by these experts might give us a detailed indication not only on the issue of Santa Cruz but also other questions which have been reported and which definitely call for a much more detailed assessment .
Just for the record , Madam President , when you are sitting here in the middle at the back of the Chamber you cannot see any of the screens .
May I ask you to get a television monitor installed here as soon as possible so that we can keep abreast of what is going on whilst we are sitting here .
Just one screen at the back here would do it .
I did ask for one two months ago .
If it is too expensive for Parliament I would consider bringing one and setting it up myself .
Just say the word .
But let us get it sorted , please .
Thank you , Mr Eisma .
We are going to consider the situation .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0999 / 96 , by Mr Pailler and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the expulsion of immigrants ' without papers ' ; -B4-1023 / 96 , by Mrs André-Léonard and Mr Nordmann , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on irregular immigrants ; -B4-1040 / 96 , by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on racist prejudices and the expulsion of illegal immigrants ; -B4-1047 / 96 , by Mrs Roth and Mr Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the expulsion of the ' paperless ' immigrants from the Saint Bernard Church in Paris ; -B4-1061 / 96 , by Mrs Palacio and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the expulsion of illegal immigrants ; -B4-1065 / 96 , by Mr Van Lancker and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on practices associated with the expulsion and removal of unlawfully resident third country nationals ; -B4-1066 / 96 , by Mrs Dury , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the expulsion of the Vangu family ; -B4-1069 / 96 , by Mr Pons Grau and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the deportation of 103 illegal immigrants .
Yesterday , Parliament received a group of immigrants ' without papers ' , as I shall refer to them from now on , although some prefer to go on using the term ' illegal ' to justify what cannot be justified : the axes of the French government smashing the doors of the churches where they had sought sanctuary .
Contempt , arbitrary handling of cases , challenging the right of family reunification , etc .
They were here - women , children and men - with their faces uncovered .
They were here to bear witness , to explain and fight against laws such as the Pasqua laws , which make an immigrant into an illegal , a human being into a hunted animal , anyone ' different ' into an enemy .
Some of them testified to their fondness for France and Europe , after many years spent working here , paying their taxes here , studying here - in a word , living here .
For example , Henri Leclerc , President of the Human Rights League and a prominent advocate , introduced into the discussion the idea of incorporating the presumption of integration into our legislation .
Although the shock treatment was handed out by the French government , the question already concerns - or very soon will - the majority of our Member States .
The situation was described to us yesterday on behalf of the immigrants : it is already very serious in the Netherlands and in Germany and , in a more furtive way , in the United Kingdom , Spain and Portugal , apart from the regularizations granted in the latter two countries .
It is to be regretted that despite the success of yesterday 's event - by which our institution granted recognition to these men and women - a number of Members did not see fit to come and meet them and look them in the eye .
Would they then have been able to hold them in contempt , describe them in meaningless terms such as ' illegals ' or ' offenders ' ?
Human beings and human dignity were the keynote of yesterday 's meeting at the European Parliament .
Europe must go all the way , must respect its own principles and values , must increase its aid to the southern countries , must contribute to development policies and make no concessions to the dictators .
No concessions , either , to the Le Pens and other Mégrets who speak in tones of hatred and often blame immigrants for all our ills .
Too often , the countries of Europe have greeted foreigners by slamming the door .
Let us do what we can to see that the doors are opened again .
Madam President , one of the curiosities of our Parliament is that a signatory to a compromise amendment in the topical and urgent debate can get up and say something which is completely at odds with the spirit of that compromise .
As we have just heard .
As far as I am concerned , I shall defend the compromise .
I shall defend it because it is a reasonable compromise , which does not accuse the government of a Member State by name , and I believe - to be frank - that the French government was right not to let the situation get any worse , with possibly tragic results .
What would people be saying now if one of the hunger strikers had gone all the way and died ?
The French government prevented a Bobby Sands situation from happening , and it was quite right to do so .
That is not to say that the legislation is perfect ; no legislation is perfect .
Legislation is an ongoing process .
The French laws of 1993 righted certain wrongs .
They may have created tricky situations , individual problems that will have to be examined individually .
But it is important to get things into perspective and remember that a breach of the law cannot , in itself , create any rights .
In consideration of which , the immigrants in irregular situations are not necessarily offenders , comparable to thieves and murderers .
They need to be treated with restraint and humanity , and fortunately that is what happened in France .
Let us get away from these cross-purposes and confusions , and try to find a way in which cooperation between governments might make it possible to solve - or help to solve - this problem of illegal immigration , one which concerns us all and must not be left to the extremists .
Strong feelings are not always wise counsellors .
Even so , how can anyone not be indignant at the way in which these immigrants ' without papers ' , as we are calling them , have just been treated in France ?
After all , how can we accept a situation where , in a so-called democratic country , brutality takes the place of dialogue and collective deportation by a charter flight does duty for immigration policy ?
This , then , is a fundamental problem facing France today .
The application of the Pasqua laws has often had very serious consequences because , in the guise of combating illegal immigration , it has resulted in a number of immigrants who were previously in regular situations losing their right of residence and becoming illegal .
In any case , this new legislation which we have so often denounced offers no possible justification for the violence with which this movement was repressed .
I would add that some of those who were expelled have been persecuted and arrested on returning to their countries of origin .
All this is in conflict with the fundamental texts defining human rights ; quoting from memory : refugee status , the concept of family reunification , the ban on collective deportation - all principles enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights .
We have a duty to react against this generalizing tendency which treats people without papers as illegal , equates immigration and illegality .
We know that this is an open invitation to racism and xenophobia .
There are various notions about racial inequality that prove the point .
So , ladies and gentlemen , let us be on our guard !
Madam President , as a German of my generation I have learnt a lesson from history . It must never happen again that the possession or non-possession of papers becomes a question of survival , that papers become more important than people .
This must never happen in any place where we have political influence .
I do not want to pillory or accuse the French state now .
This is far more a common problem , which all our bureaucracies tend towards because of course bureaucracies always prefer dealing with papers than with people and as a result trample elementary human rights underfoot .
In a situation where we are all immigration countries in our capacity as a European Community , one thing must be clear , namely that the uncertain legal situations that inevitably occur at regular intervals must be clarified by legalization , that everyone who resides here must be guaranteed the same human rights regardless of their colour or passport .
It must be made clear that we are pursuing a policy of human rights and civil rights , with the simple objective of returning to the beginning of the French Revolution , when the question of citizenship , of citoyenneté , was simply the question : who is living and working in this territory ?
Unfortunately that has almost become a utopian objective today , but we will achieve it .
Madam President , we are faced , here , with a highly sensitive matter of great concern to the Member States of the Union and European public opinion as a whole .
The economic and political aspects of immigration into Europe are the source of much tension and debate within the countries affected , particularly those forming the Community 's outer border or bordering on countries which receive people , sometimes in desperate straits , who are seeking solutions to their problems of work or political persecution .
However , in democratic countries , such as those in Europe , governmental action is obviously set against a background of the application of law which , under the terms of international treaties or agreements and legislation emanating from their own parliaments , they have decided to promulgate and apply .
What is more , the laws are there to be complied with , not only by governments themselves and the courts , but by ordinary citizens - this is what the governments of France and Spain have done .
Independently of this , our political Group believes in and is working for a free Europe where fundamental human rights are respected - not only those of European citizens themselves , but also of those who come knocking on our door requesting asylum or economic aid - and where those with racist or xenophobic motivations for refusing entry to foreigners are repudiated outright .
However , problems require solutions and laws define rules whereby people may coexist .
Individual rights require individual treatment .
The Member States of the European Union grant asylum on the basis of Article 1 of the Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees as protection against persecution on grounds of race , political convictions , religion , nationality or membership of a social group .
In addition to the right to defence , those requesting asylum have a right of residence , access to translation services and legal advice as well as a right to basic assistance , in accordance with the principles of the welfare state .
Economic immigration has other connotations : Europe has a high rate of unemployment and , regrettably , cannot take in the hordes of people from third countries who are pressing on our borders , requesting work or sustenance .
We need to implement a policy , to my mind an aggressive policy , to help those countries from where these immigrants originate . An attempt has been made to do this , I believe , with the recent association agreements with North-African countries .
However , at the same time , we have to pursue the organized mafia which is exploiting such people , advising them , at a price , to avail themselves of the law fraudulently , to destroy the papers which prove their nationality and to make their return virtually impossible . The identities of such mafias , Madam President , are well known .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , France is of course not an isolated case , but the way in which the French Government forcibly drove people who had no papers out of St Bernard 's church this summer shocked an awful lot of people .
Problems are not solved by truncheons , tear gas and brute force . Responses of that kind are proof that despite all the conventions on human rights our Western countries , and not just France alone , display an alarming lack of humanity and furthermore lack any coherent vision on immigration .
Mr Nordmann is right to say that Member States have the right and even a duty to take decisions on whether or not aliens have the right of abode , but they must do so in a democratic manner .
Parliament must thus continue to oppose the Council 's practice of using recommendations on asylum , immigration and expulsion as instruments of a very restrictive policy which escapes any form of democratic scrutiny either by the national parliaments or the European Parliament .
Illegal immigrants , ladies and gentlemen , are a product of the law .
They are created by the law , by governments of the right and - regrettably - the left as well , which make it difficult for people to obtain the right of abode and to have their families with them , so that people who had the right papers yesterday find that they do not have them today .
Anyone who claims that a complete stop can be put on immigration is blind to war and violence , does not see that there is hunger and exploitation in his world which drive people to flee .
Criminalizing people who do not have papers is grist to the mill of parties which are racist and xenophobic .
A few months ago a Belgian journalist , Chris De Stoop , published a book entitled ' Haal de was maar binnen ' ( ' Bring the laundry in ' ) in which he describes the dire way of life of people with no papers : on the run , often from far-right mobs in Germany , from the police or the courts , with no entitlement to health care , no right to a roof over their heads , no education for their children and no income , they are easy prey to racketeers and slum landlords .
He also describes how our governments treat these people : group repatriations using private travel agencies , in Belgium , Sweden and Germany ; confinement in detention centres in lamentable conditions , with no privacy or visiting rights , with no information about what is to happen to them and often even without the freedom to return home of their own volition .
Even people with no papers , ladies and gentlemen , are entitled to health care , to education for their children and to humane treatment .
Their position must be considered on a case by case basis , fairly and generously .
They must only be sent back if their safety and ability to reintegrate is guaranteed .
Efforts are urgently needed to regularize the status of those who have been here for years or those who cannot go home .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my Group is happy that we have this resolution at last , and we hope it will be supported by all democratic parties .
We are asking for an in-depth debate .
This subject is too serious to be deemed closed after an urgent resolution .
Madam President , first of all I would like to point out to Mr Nordmann that the idea is not just to signify our agreement to the compromise , publish it , make sure everyone reads it and leave it at that .
What we say here also serves to defend our points of view , which necessarily may lie to one side or the other of that compromise .
There were many of us in Europe , and especially in my own country , who were shocked by the attitude of the security forces and the French government to those they call the immigrants ' without papers ' .
In addition , what may have strengthened our feeling that there was a need for a joint action in Europe was an upsurge of solidarity towards these people .
We realized that there still existed , within our countries , men and women who were no doubt living comfortable , problem-free existences but were reacting on the basis of a certain set of values , such as respect for human dignity , the respect for children we have heard so much about in recent days , and the consideration we must show for all those who come to Europe , perhaps seeing it as their only recourse , but also fleeing from the realities of violence , the problems of survival and real economic hardship .
Since this was to a large extent a question of law , it must be said that we should live in States governed by the rule of law - and even in a Europe governed by the rule of law .
Of course , it is necessary to have rules , because rules are one of the guarantees of democracy , but the law is also a living entity : it observes how things really are , and sometimes follows their development .
To take a campaign which I myself conducted , the abortion campaign , the Belgian law has been unchanged for many years .
What we ask is that the law should adapt to people 's situations , in other words that fundamental rights should be respected .
What I would like to see , on behalf of all those who come to us appealing for social solidarity , is that they should be acknowledged when they have become integrated , that their children should be protected , that their families should not be broken up and that Europe should be a Europe of solidarity and of the defence of a certain set of values .
Madam President , many thousands of citizens in European Union countries live in what might be termed irregular circumstances and people from other countries are arriving every day from countries where there is armed conflict or truly untenable socio-economic situations .
Despite our wealth , we are incapable of offering a humanitarian response to such situations , nor do we have a common immigration policy .
We make a great fuss about banning the export of radioactive waste and other products , which is all very well , but our reaction to the mass expulsion of illegal immigrants is not so forceful .
We know where the rubbish dumps are located but we have no reliable information as to the destination of those we expel . The question of illegal immigrants is used to stir up feelings of xenophobia and racism .
The recent expulsions from France and Spain are neither an example to be followed nor a solution to the problem .
In the case of Spain , I am sorry to say , the operation was carried out in secret .
The institutions which monitor the undertakings given to such citizens , when some of them submitted requests for asylum , were not notified .
The 103 emigrants were sent to various African countries - in some cases , not to their country of origin - arriving on military aircraft and under sedation administered during the journey . In addition , sufficient legal guarantees were not extracted from the receiving countries .
Spain is a signatory to all international protocols and agreements in defence of human rights , the country 's constitution is progressive and tolerant , and there is a law on aliens , albeit a much highly criticized one , but even this was flouted .
It 's not asking for much to request that , on the one hand , at least the legal code should be observed and , on the other hand , that a country which is receiving emigrants should promote , within the European Union , a commonpolicy consensus to deal with this type of situation .
I am convinced that this House will assist with such objectives .
Madam President , for your benefit and that of the House I should say that in recent years the Union Member States have one by one made it increasingly difficult to get in as a legitimate refugee .
Unclear concepts such as ' safe third country of origin ' or ' safe third country ' have led to a situation in which we are frequently at odds with internationally agreed practices or the principle of not sending people back , which we have made sacrosanct .
As a result of all this we have succeeded in recent years in steadily reducing the inflow of legitimate refugees , but at the same time the proportion of illegal refugees has grown .
It is high time the Commission , and the Council , thought about what we are really going to do about the problem .
That they looked at how the problem might be shared instead of offloaded on to someone else .
How we might move from ' burden shifting ' towards ' burden sharing ' .
What we famously have agreed on , without formal assent , is how to get rid of the illegals .
This happens in an increasingly reprehensible and inhumane way .
It is a scandal , in my view , that such practices occur in this supposedly ' civilized ' part of the world .
But it is a good thing for us to be debating the matter today , and I am optimistic .
I regard it as a preliminary to the debate we shall be having here in November on minimum guarantees for asylum , on which I am rapporteur .
I naturally hope that then too we shall be able to agree on a fair and humane course of action towards all those who have been driven out of hearth and home .
Madam President , given some of the contributions made in this House this afternoon , I feel I need to call for coherence , coherence in the sense that everything must be said , not just a small part . If not , we risk misrepresenting the situation and sinking into sectarian argument , even demagogy .
I feel I have to - and will make an attempt to - explain the situation factually and objectively and , to do so , I will simply refer to some newspaper headlines on events in Spain ( I am referring to the Spanish case ) : On 11 July 1992 , El Diario de Melilla ran a headline stating ' Reserve police forces to make Africans abandon their rally ' .
The next day , ' Reserve police officers violently ejected Africans from government premises ' ; ' Thirty-six immigrants were detained at the police station ' ; ' Another group was expelled to Morocco across the wire fences ' ; Around the same time , July 1992 , ' Almost 100 Africans are trapped between Spain and Morocco ' ; ' The State Commission for Refugees is taking Spain to the European Court of Human Rights ' , and so on .
To end , I would remind the House that the current Spanish government was not in power at that time in 1992 .
Madam President , all our Member States , as one of my colleagues has already said , are today confronted by the problem of mass immigration by groups of people who are refugees not so much from persecution by political dictators - increasingly rare today , I am happy to say - as from the economic conditions they face in their countries of origin .
Our Member States , including France , have a long tradition of harbouring political refugees , and they intend to keep it .
That is a moral duty as well as a human one .
However , an immigration policy creates both duties and rights .
Is there anything more difficult in human terms than illegal immigration ?
Are these people , who have left their countries , their backgrounds , their environments , finding their hoped-for Eldorado as illegal immigrants ?
Surely not .
So we must oppose any attempt to encourage the continuance of these situations , and the circumvention of the right of asylum through the use of unacceptable political pressure .
The automatic regularization of illegal immigrants would infallibly create two situations that no one wants .
The first would be the harsh injustice done to those who , obeying the rules , have voluntarily returned to their countries of origin , respecting the sovereignty of the State to which they applied .
The second one would be the very serious disservice done to our States which , by encouraging the circumvention of the right of asylum , would inevitably result in more foreign groups embarking on this undesirable adventure .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are not going to solve the problems of the illegal immigrants by forming them into associations .
Our duty lies elsewhere .
We must aid those countries which are now experiencing difficulties .
A partial solution is no doubt provided by the Union 's development policy .
European programmes deal with these questions .
They are often called into question in this House .
Let us support the European Development Fund , PHARE and TACIS , and let us also support the MEDA programme , because they represent a variety of forms of economic aid to support democracy which will enable people to live happily on their native soil .
The law is made by people for people , and if it is imperfect , let us take action to change it , but let us not exploit human misery for political ends .
Incidentally , I really would not like to see the European Parliament become a platform for opposition to one of the Member States .
Speakers should confine their remarks to European policy .
Madam President , I was unaware that drugging people in order to expel them to countries which were not , in fact , their own is complying with the law in Spain , as stated here .
This has been duly acknowledged by the Spanish Ministry of the Interior .
And , by the way , in the case of Spain , there is more than enough evidence not only that human rights have been violated but also that the law on aliens has been infringed .
At any rate , Madam President , I would like to extend my thanks to colleagues in various political Groups and congratulate us all on having been able to include a debate on the status of those ' without papers ' in Europe within a debate on an urgent subject .
Recent events within the European Union reveal that we are faced with a phenomenon which involves more than just national interests .
Melilla and Paris are just two examples - I do not think we would have to go in for mental acrobatics to identify others fairly quickly .
Member States are preparing increasingly restrictive laws regarding the entry and settlement of foreigners on their territory and the Geneva Convention is continually being violated regarding the right of families to live together and join the initial immigrant , the right to asylum and freedom of movement .
Approval of such laws will simply turn the majority of them into stateless persons , snatching away from them the status as citizens - albeit second-class citizens - they have fleetingly enjoyed after long residence in those countries .
Given this context , the European Union must develop a democratic system of laws to protect these minorities , creating the conditions for Member States to tackle problems within a framework of frank dialogue with organizations supporting these groups .
Madam President , there are several lessons we must draw from the many incidents involving the expulsion , or attempted expulsion , of illegal immigrants that have littered the front pages this summer in various European countries .
First , we have found that the great majority of public opinion expected the authorities to behave in a humane manner but also to apply the law .
Constantly , people have said to us , ' Why should I abide by the law if others consider themselves above it ? '
This question poses the fundamental problem of public consent to the social pact - a consent that can only be obtained if everyone knows that the laws of democracy are being respected .
Well , the first humanitarian duty of governments is to preserve that pact , and with it the society that has elected them .
Lesson two : it is very difficult in humanitarian terms to expel people who , even if they do lack the legal paperwork , have been living in a territory for a long time , because they have naturally established many links there , sometimes including family ties .
On the other hand , when an illegal immigrant is detained at a frontier , or close to one , sending him back causes few psychological problems .
All the experts tell us that a person who crosses a border without authorization is fully aware that he is in the wrong .
He is trying his luck anyway .
If he fails , he regards it as bad luck , but not as a trauma .
This is why the campaign against illegal immigration must first of all be conducted at frontiers .
Admittedly , as we know , a frontier cannot solve every problem , but it is still easier to detain illegal immigrants at this stage than it is later , once they have disappeared into the general fabric of society .
So it would be very harmful if we were finally to abandon our permanent or mobile border checks , even at the internal borders .

Finally , lesson three : irregular immigrants must be entitled to a form of treatment that respects their human dignity and , moreover , complies with the international undertakings which we have all signed . At the same time , though , we should avoid granting any benefits that might encourage new arrivals .
As far as this matter is concerned , I can do no better than refer to the Council recommendation of 22 December 1995 , which states , among other excellent proposals , that the demand for state benefits for immigrants should , and I quote : ' be able to be met only once it has been verified that the party concerned and his family are eligible for the benefit , having due regard to their residence and employment status ' .
Obviously , exceptions will have to be made to this principle on essential humanitarian grounds , for example if there is a serious risk to the health of those concerned .
However , we do not feel that the need for education can constitute a sufficiently essential humanitarian reason for delaying the expulsion of an illegal immigrant , which seems to be the bizarre suggestion contained in the motion for a resolution upon which we are to vote .
Madam President , Parliament seems to have been shocked by the rather dramatic expulsion of a few dozen illegal aliens .
Though I should say in passing that I find it difficult to reconcile the extent of Parliament 's emotion and shock , as expressed in the tone of paper resolutions , with the enormous number of empty seats here when the resolutions are being debated .
But as far as the substance of the matter goes , no one can ignore the fact , certainly in the French case we are primarily concerned with here , that every human and proper legal procedure was followed .
If one allows one group of asylum cheats to stay because that group happens to be occupying a church , one is opening the door to every possible form of asylum deception and those who suffer in the end will be the very small minority of genuine refugees .
I should also say in all honesty that I myself am not all that happy either with these dramatic expulsions .
Not because I do not think them necessary .
I do .
But because the facade of a few dozen illegals , fortunately deported in a humane and properly controlled manner , a facade designed to suggest that our governments are doing something about the problem of foreigners , because that facade hides a quite different reality .
The reality of a huge problem of resident foreigners , of streets and areas which have been taken over , of alienation and small and largescale crime which is inseparably bound up with that alienation .
It pains me to see once again that the great majority of honourable Members of this House are blind to this reality , to this desperate situation in which the weakest of our own people find themselves when they are driven out of their own streets and areas or worse .
Madam President , the action taken against the French immigrants ' without papers ' compels us to find a different basis for the problem of illegal immigration , since we have had proof that a purely repressive attitude is both inhumane and ineffective .
Although the French Minister for the Interior was mainly concerned with demonstrating his firmness , the small number of deportees has clearly shown the limitations of the procedure .
After all , there is a choice to be made : either we respect the rule of law and abandon the pretence that any illegal immigrant must be expelled by force of arms , or we follow the method to its logical conclusion .
In that case , though , we will have to renounce the rule of law and accept a shift into totalitarianism , the inevitable result of the radical methods recommended by the far right .
Many of the French immigrants without papers , far from being clandestine , have been forced into illegality by the absurdity of the law , the ill will of the administration , or a narrow interpretation of the right of asylum .
Far be it from me to maintain that any rejected asylum seeker should be regularized on principle . But I do know that , although the number of applications in France has fallen by two-thirds in the last few years , the percentage of cases where refugee status is recognized is still falling .
Nationals of certain high-risk countries are virtually excluded from the protection of the Geneva Convention because of a restrictive interpretation of the definition of the term refugee , which incidentally is supported by a common position recently adopted by the Council .
Yet the fact is that some of these people are in real and serious danger in their own countries , as the HCR has confirmed , which should lead to their situations being reexamined .
France , of course , is not alone in facing this kind of problem , and so I approve the recommendations set out in the motion for a resolution before us , whereby thought will be given to finding solutions at European level .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has been carefully following the events which have taken place this summer , and one of the most newsworthy events has been that some Member States have been taking decisions to expel nationals of third countries without immigration papers .
These decisions and their application have led to a public debate and the Commission would like to say , before anything else , that these measures have been taken by the Member States in the exercise of their national powers .
The events which have been attacked do not result , on the other hand , as it might seem and has been suggested in some of the proposals , from the application of recent decisions by the Council on expulsions ; they have absolutely nothing to do with them .
The Commission has also heard - in this debate , once again - criticism from Parliament about the decision-making process concerning cooperation on matters of internal affairs and we have already had the opportunity to emphasize , in various circumstances , that we deplore the lack of consultation of Parliament .
Similarly , we have criticized the Council 's constantly referral to texts which are not legally binding .
The Commission has always maintained that decisions in the field of immigration have to be compulsory and there must be some guarantee of controls by European Parliament .
That was why , when the Intergovernmental Conference was coming up , we clearly came out in favour of the ' Communitization ' of these matters .
Ladies and gentlemen , the basic problem we are dealing with here , leaving aside the recent events , is that of the immigration policy of the Member States .
The Commission , for its part , has had the opportunity to emphasize , in various circumstances , mainly through its statement to the Council and the European Parliament and what was said by my colleague , Anita Gradin , in the European Parliament , that its approach is based on two principles which must always be kept in mind and taken jointly : on one hand , controls on migratory flows but , at the same time , the integration of illegal immigrants .
It is , therefore , inevitable that , while respecting fundamental rights , we should take measures to expel the nationals of third states whose papers are not in order .
Expulsion is a necessary measure to show that States are set on fighting illegal immigration but this must go hand in hand with a strong commitment to stop illegal entry in the first place and the exploitation of the nationals of third country living in Community countries clandestinely and very often in very fragile conditions .
It is also important to emphasize that some of the practices recently adopted in some Member States to deal with the situation of illegal immigrants could actually be seen as quite positive .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Biescas
B4-0967 / 96 , by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the disaster at the ' Las Nievas ' campsite at Biescas ( Spain ) ; -B4-1013 / 96 , by Mr Sisó Cruellas and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the disaster which occurred at Biescas ( Spain ) on 7 August 1996 , leaving 86 dead , 1 missing , hundreds injured and considerable material damage ; -B4-1030 / 96 , by Mr Pasty , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the disaster which occurred at Biescas ( Spain ) on 7 August 1996 , which leaving 86 dead , 1 missing , hundreds injured and considerable material damage ; -B4-1076 / 96 by Mr Izquierdo Colado and Mr Cabezón Alonso , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the disaster in Biescas ( Huesca , Spain ) ; Floods in Spain
B4-1014 / 96 , by Mr Ferrer and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the storms in Catalonia ; -B4-1025 / 96 , by Mr Sanchez Garcia , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the floods in the region of Valencia ; -B4-1032 / 96 , by Mr Gutiérrez Diaz and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the floods in the region of Maresme ( Catalonia , Spain ) ; Storm in Greece
B4-1035 / 96 , by Mr Theonas , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on major crop damage resulting from high winds in Pilion ; -B4-1062 / 96 , by Mr Dimitrakopoulos , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on natural disasters and hailstorms in the Thessaly region of Greece caused by torrential rain ; -B4-1079 / 96 , by Mr Lambraki , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on natural disasters in the Thessaly region of Greece caused by hailstorms and flooding ; Hazardous waste trade in South Africa
B4-0998 / 96 , by Mr Iversen and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on human rights violations and the devastation of the environment in South Africa caused by the trade in hazardous waste ; -B4-1052 / 96 , by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on human rights violations and the devastation of the environment in South Africa caused by the trade in hazardous waste ; -B4-1071 / 96 , by Mr d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the devastation of the environment in South Africa caused by the trade in hazardous waste ; Pilgrim route to Santiago
B4-1072 / 96 , by Mr Izquierdo Rojo , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on support for the conservation of the pilgrim route to Santiago de Compostela in the face of the brutal destruction of and assault on the village of Pazos.Biescas
Madam President , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left fully supports the joint motion for a resolution regarding our condolences to families and friends of the victims of the Biescas disaster and the request to help these people and to carry out reconstruction work in the area affected .
However , we wish to point out that the most significant aspect of this disaster was the fact that it could have been prevented .
We advocate the adoption of preventive measures in all European Union countries to prohibit campsites being set up in at-risk areas and that those already in existence be inspected in order to prevent a repetition of this type of accident .
We believe it is important for the European Union to act , firstly by expressing its condolences - as I have stated - but , above all , regarding future prevention , since thousands of European holidaymakers make use of such facilities every summer .
Madam President , I would like to begin my remarks by once again expressing my condolences and support for all the families and friends of the victims and everyone else affected by the disaster in the Pyrenees near Huesca during the afternoon of 7 August .
It was one of the greatest tragedies Upper Aragón has ever suffered and was the result of a storm which released a violent downpour over the Limes range , causing the Arás gulley to overflow . This , combining with the waters of the Betés , which was in spate , produced an avalanche of water , mud , trees and rocks which destroyed and dragged along everything in its wake , eventually bursting over the ' Las Nieves ' campsite which was located on the outskirts of Biescas .
It literally swept the site away .
At the time , the campsite was home to several hundred people but , in a matter of moments , tents , caravans , cars and the people who were sheltering were violently swept away . Eighty-six people were killed , one person was never found and hundreds of people were injured to varying degrees .
A glance at the reports giving information about the situation of families affected by the tragedy gives one an idea of its scale .
There are families in which the mother and children were killed , leaving only the father , or in which the father and children have died , leaving the mother , many of those left being in desperate economic straits . Children have lost parents and are alone , parents have lost all their children , and there are even families which were completely wiped out .
In addition , the dead , injured and other people affected did not come only from the Autonomous Region of Aragón , but also from many other regions in Spain and other European Union countries - the painful effects of the disaster have reached far and wide .
In their name , I would request assistance from this House .
I would once again ask that honourable Members demonstrate their sensitivity and pledge support for those in need .
Lastly , I would ask that we vote in favour of this motion for a resolution which can be implemented urgently to alleviate the pain and serious economic situation in which some of those affected find themselves . The Community needs to give as much help as it can .
I would make the same request of each and every one of the Commissioners at the Commission , asking them to be generous in their donations and to make the arrangements for the corresponding budget entry . Above all , I would ask you all to be most diligent in this matter because those affected require our urgent help .
Madam President , I support my colleague 's words of condolence and remembrance for those affected by this tragedy .
I would also like to pay tribute in the motion for a resolution to the people of Biescas , Jaca and Sabiñánigo and to all those who were of help at such a difficult time and who amply demonstrated their feelings of solidarity with the victims .
This motion for a resolution we are currently discussing is a call for basic , genuine , effective and sufficient aid from European institutions to help the families and friends of the victims , to help the injured and to rebuild the fabric of infrastructures which was damaged in the disaster .
A call should also be made for more sensible and more responsible legal measures to be applied when siting campsites .
Spanish government assistance is insufficient - the assistance of the European Union is required .
Madam President , I did , in fact , intend to speak about the floods in Catalonia and the Region of Valencia and to join with my two colleagues in their expression of sorrow for the tragedy which occurred in Biescas .
Madam President , natural disasters occur every summer in Mediterranean areas - there is torrential rain or devastating fire .
The Region of Valencia has not escaped what one might term nature 's revenge .
Just a few days ago , the Baldiña , Sazor , Marina and Ribera Baja areas were the scene of serious flooding which has swept away crops and destroyed industry and infrastructures .
The damage is put at several hundreds of millions of pesetas but this does not take into account the jobs lost in farming and the industries which will have to close down .
The President of the Autonomous Region , Mr Zaplana , made a lightning visit to the area but , surprisingly , decided that it was inappropriate to declare the region a disaster area .
I know the area very well and I am currently wondering how all these companies and jobs which were destroyed will be able to survive without the official help and compensation which should quite reasonably be given as a result of the catastrophe they have suffered .
Floods in Spain
Madam President , the loss of life and physical damage caused by floods which , in this case , occurred in the region of Maresme in Catalonia as well as in the Region of Valencia , moves the Group of the European People 's Party to express its condolences to the families and friends of the victims and , at the same time , to request the active solidarity of this House to alleviate the effects of the flooding and to attempt to prevent the recurrence of such a disaster .
We therefore ask the Commission to set up , together with the competent authorities , a plan to rehabilitate the affected region of Maresme and aimed primarily at the canalization of watercourses , to prevent flooding , and the rebuilding of infrastructures , homes and agricultural installations which have been damaged as a result of this torrential rain .
Moreover , given the recurrent nature of this type of flooding in the Mediterranean basin , we would draw attention to the need for a budget line to be used specifically for preventing and making good the effects of this type of disaster .
I believe that , if the European Union can show solidarity with its citizens in times of , albeit natural , disasters , we will undoubtedly be encouraging the creation of the concept of European citizenship , which can be of so much help to us in our efforts to make progress within the Union .
I would therefore reiterate this House 's request to the Commission to take account of the damage suffered and the need for action both in the region of Maresme and in Valencia . We can thus go some way to preventing damage of this type in the future .
Madam President , in this , my maiden speech in this House , which I joined only yesterday as a replacement for a colleague , Isidoro Sánchez , I would like to greet all honourable Members and thank them for welcoming me .
It is my sincere hope that I will be worthy of their kind welcome and will be able to contribute in my modest way to the work in hand .
Regrettably , my first intervention refers to recent tragic events both in Biescas ( Huesca ) and in the Mediterranean area of Spain .
I believe everyone must be aware of the terrible tragedy that the disaster at the Las Nieves campsite in Biescas represents for the entire European Union . Eighty-six people lost their lives - I would ask you to reflect on that for a moment .
Events clearly demonstrate the need for urgent action on the part of various institutions , as advocated by the Commission .
However , we cannot forget what happened also in the Mediterranean area of Spain , which is ravaged by storms on an annual basis . On this occasion , it was the Region of Valencia which was devastated and turned into a wasteland as a result of the worst flooding for over 14 years .
Rivers and gulleys burst their banks , and containment walls and bridges collapsed . The intervention of Civil Protection forces , the Red Cross , firefighters and even the army and police was , unfortunately , not enough to prevent the disappearance of one person and the substantial damage .
Even now , one week later , there are areas where it is still impossible to quantify the damage because access routes are totally cut off .
Given that serious damage has been caused to all basic infrastructures in the regions affected , to homes , businesses , agricultural crops and installations , it and is therefore essential that urgent measures be implemented firstly to rehabilitate the areas affected and secondly , perhaps more importantly , to set up a budget line , as already stated , to prevent and repair the damage caused by the downpours which come , year after year , to devastate this area .
Mr Nouvo Belenguer , I congratulate you on your maiden speech in this House and bid you a warm welcome .
Madam President , the destruction is unprecedented : floods , hail and gales have destroyed considerable areas of apple orchards in the Pilion region .
Apples are a single crop that provide the sole source of income for their growers , and the destruction took place just ten days before harvesting .
At this time , the growers have nowhere to turn , they have no income at all on which to live , much less with which to reorganise their production .
I ask Parliament , for its part , to vote unanimously for the motion we have tabled , and the Commissioner , for his part , to tell us in his speech whether the Commission is going to institute immediate measures for the economic support of the growers and other , later measures to help them get their production going again .
Madam President , at the beginning of August violent hailstorms struck certain parts of Thessaly , specifically the districts of Karditsa , Trikala , Larissa and Magnisia .
Those hailstorms were so violent that very many crops were destroyed .
I will mention cotton , maize , and apple orchards , which were completely devastated .
I would like to think that our Parliament , with the sensitivity for which it is known , will express its sorrow and solidarity with those who live in the areas affected , and in parallel , that the Commission and the Council will act promptly to provide economic aid , both for the farmers and the residents , so that relief may be quick to come and work may begin to restore the damage .
Hazardous waste trade in South Africa
This urgency relates to a serious case of the export of toxic waste .
It concerns the fact that the British multinational Thor Chemicals , which has exported hundreds of tonnes of toxic mercury waste from the European Union , in particular from the United Kingdom , from Spain and from Italy , to its plant in Cato Ridge , South Africa .
It was first assumed that the waste would be recycled , would be reprocessed in an environmentally compatible manner .
Instead of being recycled it was simply stored .
The result of the storage of toxic mercury waste has been sludge ponds , one death and twenty workers who will suffer for the rest of their lives from the consequences of the health damage that occurred at work .
The drinking water is contaminated , the readings are more than a thousand times higher than the WHO drinking water standards .
The Attorney-General of Natal charged three top management officials with homicide in 1993 .
Thor pleaded guilty .
Mandela has now set up a commission of inquiry .
We say to that undertaking and to the European Union : those who produce waste must also dispose of it , which means that 470 t must be repatriated to the United Kingdom , 57 t to Italy and 10 t to Spain .
In particular , we call on South Africa to sign Article 39 of the Lomé Convention .
Let me also refer you specifically to paragraph 4 of our joint resolution .
It is with a deep feeling of shame that I shall say a few words on this resolution concerning the dumping of hazardous waste in South Africa .
Because one would not think it possible that we , a number of countries in the Union , should clean up our own back yard and in the process saddle a country like South Africa , which already has problems enough , with a crisis situation which threatens people 's lives and the environment .
It is scarcely conceivable that the British multinational Thor Chemicals should dump 5000 tonnes of toxic waste in South Africa , falsely claiming that this was part of a policy of environmentally sound waste management . In the full knowledge that this would lead to the death or disability of more than 20 people .
But out of embarrassment those who have been duped are not buying anything .
The only thing they want in South Africa is for the waste to be taken back , and financial and technical aid .
And we must make sure that we are never again guilty of bringing about a scandalous situation like this .
I agree with everything which Mrs d 'Ancona has said , which means that I can save almost a minute of our time , but I would like to make the point that whilst we are able to shape extremely good legislation on the environment , it will not be very effective if companies do not abide by it .
Happily there are organizations which identify and publicize abuses of this kind .
And that subsequently gives us a better chance of taking action against them .
Only yesterday the House voted on the proposal for a regulation on the supervision and control of shipments of waste substances within , into and out of the Union .
The incident involving Thor Chemicals we are debating today shows once more how urgently this is needed .
But we should not forget that this is just one example and that even as we speak the same thing is going on in numerous other places . So we must work to ensure that the enforcement of legislation in the Union is subjected to stricter scrutiny on the basis of the rules we have , but scrutiny is what counts .
Ladies and gentlemen , the scandal over the exporting of toxic waste was a general scandal involving numerous countries of the South .
But what should concern us here particularly is the fact that in the talks between the European Union and South Africa on South Africa 's accession to the Lomé Convention , Pretoria is asking for a derogation from the terms of the Convention so that it can continue to import and export toxic waste .
This really is why we have had to debate this today as a matter of urgency , to ensure that Parliament can send a clear signal to the Commission and of course the Council to the effect that this is not acceptable and at the same time to ensure that Parliament can say to the South African Government please , do not ask for a derogation from an Article 39 which bans the exporting of toxic waste and which is the precursor under Lomé of a call by MEPs and African parliamentarians for this practice to stop .
Pilgrim route to Santiago
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this motion for a resolution is aimed at protecting the Way of Saint James , part of Europe 's cultural and architectural heritage , in the heart of Galicia .
Manipulation of the facts or blurring of the issue cannot be allowed , as is attempted by those who would say that the French or Portuguese section of the route is the more genuine , since we are discussing the very core of the pilgrim route to Santiago in Galicia .
I am not speaking on the basis of hearsay - I myself have been a direct eyewitness of the most serious damage that roadworks on the N550 are causing to the route through Pazos , between Iria and Esclavitud .
This is no less than a grave attack against art , and Europe 's cultural and historical heritage .
Architecture and the landscape are being laid waste in a brutal attack on the environment and on our ethnological and anthropological heritage .
The laws of Spain and those of the Autonomous Region are being violated , but the Galician authorities , in the form of the Xunta , and other responsible bodies are simply standing aside and allowing this unjustifiable atrocity to take place .
I would ask you , fellow Members of this House , is there any sense in our financing the preservation of the Pilgrim 's Way while at the same time consenting to such brutal destruction ?
Even the Archbishop of Santiago de Compostela himself has intervened in defence of those affected and of people living in the area .
There are , moreover , Madam President , alternative , better and less costly solutions .
These roadworks must be stopped and the destruction halted .
Irreparable damage is being done .
The work must be halted to preserve the heritage of all European citizens .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with all due respect to the citizens of Pazos , in Padrón , in my home province of Galicia , who are affected by the work being carried out to widen the N550 road , I must , however , emphatically deny that the roadworks are damaging the Pilgrims ' Way as stated in this motion for a resolution . The Way of Saint James has been declared Europe 's First Cultural Route and a UNESCO World Heritage Site .
The allegations are incorrect for one basic reason which , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , is as follows : the town of Pazos is not actually on the pilgrim route to Santiago .
The route known as the ' French Route ' is the only pilgrim route to Santiago to have been declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO and Europe 's First Cultural Route by the Council of Europe in this very House , back in 1986 .
Therefore , if the facts are incorrect , one can only deduce that the name of the pilgrim route to Santiago is being used fraudulently for reasons of simple political expediency , and I have to say that this is most serious .
It is serious in terms of the route itself and also in terms of this institution , in terms of the credibility of this House .
This Group is therefore against this motion for a resolution .
The joint debate is closed .
Mr President , may I on your behalf ask honourable Members if they are willing to postpone the vote on this resolution till next time ?
We have had a debate on it .
It appears to be a particularly complicated matter .
A delegation from this Parliament is shortly going to Colombia and it is in view of these exceptional circumstances that I would ask the others to postpone this vote till the next part-session .
Thank you , Mrs d 'Ancona .
You will be aware that I would very much like to follow your guidance but I have to tell you that , according to the Rules of Procedure , this is not possible . We have to put the motion to the vote and therefore , according to the Rules , the Chair cannot accept your suggestion .
I now call upon Mrs González Álvarez to speak on a point of order .
I have asked to speak because my memory is not as good as yours , Mr President , concerning the Rules of Procedure - I was unaware that it was not possible to hold the vote on the motion for a resolution over to the following month .
In the case of our resolution , if possible , before it is rejected , we would prefer to hold the vote over until the next part-session because we want approval to be given to a resolution on human rights in Colombia and , therefore , if this were possible , we would prefer the vote on our motion for a resolution to be held over until the next session .
Mr President , we had asked that Colombia should not be placed on the agenda , precisely for the reasons which Mrs d 'Ancona states .
But now that we have a request to postpone the vote , our view is ' better late than never ' and we are more than happy to endorse that request .
Ladies and gentlemen , I understand that there has been further reflection as well as an oral request .
Unfortunately , this Chair is bound by the Rules of Procedure , and Rule 47 which applies to this urgent debate does not permit suggestions such as that made by Mrs d 'Ancona .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I have no choice but to put the present motion for a resolution to the vote .
Mr President , I naturally do not wish to question the faculties and powers of the Chair , but it is my understanding that this House , on matters which concern it as directly as voting or not voting , is sovereign , and if the House should decide by a majority of votes to hold the vote over , it could do so .
It is my interpretation of the Rules of Procedure , in which I am observing a natural principle , although my understanding of the Rules is not as thorough as yours , Mr President , that parliamentary assemblies are entitled to exercise their powers as and when they see fit .
Mr Robles Piquer , this Chair cannot agree with you .
The Rules of Procedure cannot be amended in the course of debate .
Decisions may be taken but the Rules may not be amended .
What is possible , however , is that the authors of a motion for a resolution can withdraw it , but if the motion is not withdrawn , ladies and gentlemen , this Chair will put it to the vote , with due regard for its duties under the Rules .
However , account has first to be taken of the fact that this motion for a resolution was brought by the Green Group in the European Parliament .
Mr President , I think the House has to abide by its own Rules of Procedure .
They cannot be changed just like that .
Secondly , we gave this matter very careful consideration at the time we tabled the resolution and we are on no account prepared to withdraw it .
( Parliament rejected the resolution )
Ladies and gentlemen , we shall now proceed to the vote on the motion for a resolution by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on the same matter , for which no amendments have been submitted .
Does the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left wish to withdraw its motion for a resolution ?
We do not wish to withdraw our resolution for one simple reason : we have spent several months attempting to gain the approval of this House of a resolution on Colombia and respect for human rights in Colombia .
As I stated in my earlier intervention , we have also been trying to persuade the delegation to Colombia to say just what this House thinks about the human rights situation in that country .
We cannot withdraw our resolution because we are not confident that it would be realistic for a motion for a resolution demanding respect for human rights in Colombia to be tabled next month .
This is the only reason we are not withdrawing it , although we know we will lose the vote .
( Parliament rejected the resolution )
Mr President , a point of order .
It is a rule of this Parliament that persons in the gallery should not indulge in any expression of their feelings .
Well , we have had applause from the gallery , which you did not even notice .
Votes
Madam President , after this vote let me say one thing quite clearly .
We were dealing here with very difficult compromises , which we managed to achieve .
I very much welcome the fact that the compromise amendments were accepted , although many of us found this difficult .
In the end there were questions about what the two votes actually signified , for two votes were held against the zero-rate duty on wine .
I know this worried some Members .
But we had already decided in advance that the zerorate duty on wine should be retained .
So it would not have been necessary subsequently to vote on it again twice .
That is how this voting situation arose .
I believe it is most important to make this clarification because I know that some Members were worried about the outcome of this vote .
Mr von Wogau , if you feel that the consistency of the vote has been maintained , so much the better .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for adopting this report .
It was my last in this House because after the direct elections I will no longer be a Member of it .
Thank you for all your cooperation .
Madam President , Mr Bontempi , who unfortunately cannot be present now , asked me to put a proposal on his behalf .
He drafted the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties .
The committee unanimously adopted certain conclusions that should be put forward here as oral amendments because they were not tabled in time .
They are conclusions 1d , 2a , 2b and 6b .
Mr Bontempi has informed me that as rapporteur of the report Mrs Theato agreed to this procedure .
Let me therefore ask you , by way of exception , to admit these oral amendments I have just listed and to agree to them .
I also thank those Members who were so impatient in the beginning .
As I said during the debate this morning , the Committee on Civil Liberties saw that I was not able to submit the opinion in time , which meant we could not , as would normally have been the case , vote on these conclusions in the Committee on Budgets as the committee responsible .
I am sure we would have accepted them in committee .
I have studied them carefully .
There is one other conclusion , however , that I cannot accept .
I can accept the ones that Mr Schulz has just presented .
But I consider it important to point out that the document is available , so that everyone can know what they are voting on .
You can read these conclusions , which are attached to my report , and as rapporteur I am quite prepared to accept the conclusions numbered 1d , 2a , 2b and 6b .
We have an answer from Mrs Theato .
There are two solutions : either we accept the rapporteur 's suggestion , in which case we can vote if there are no objections , or , if you would rather renegotiate among yourselves , we can delay the vote until tomorrow morning .
( Parliament decided to continue voting )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
I have voted against the report .
It is not that I question the Tomlinson report 's assertions concerning shortcomings in the budget and guarantee fund mechanism , rather that I oppose giving Parliament greater budgetary powers and the establishment of a compulsory and binding procedure under which Parliament has to be consulted before any guarantee can be granted .
von Wogau report
Madam President , I cannot put this explanation in writing because what happened during the vote on the von Wogau report was certainly not a credit to this Parliament .
I eventually voted against the report because , as the voting happened to go , we diverged , by a single vote , from what was adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs by an enormous majority - the recommendation to the Commission to retain the zero rate for wine .
A single vote was sufficient to eliminate section 11 c ) , on which we had reached agreement , because the zero rate was mentioned in it and because it was pointless to recall it in section 16 .
Unfortunately , a number of Members failed to understand that , since 11 c ) had been defeated , it was necessary to vote for section 16 .
That is why , now , contrary to everything on which we had reached agreement , there is no longer any reference in our report to the zero rate for wine .
I have no doubt that , things being as they are , as de Gaulle used to say , the Commission will make allowances .
It will understand that , because there were not enough Members present here this evening , a single vote resulted in this Parliament rejecting the zero rate .
And I feel sure that the Commission will know that the majority in this Parliament favours retaining the zero rate .
Unfortunately , not all Members were here to vote .
The differences between the Member States as regards alcohol and policy on alcohol are so important that we believe this issue must remain a national one .
For many countries the production of wine and beer is primarily an agricultural and employment issue .
For the Nordic countries alcohol policy is a public health and social issue .
It is based on the idea of keeping total consumption down in order in turn to reduce the harmful effects .
In these countries prices ( regulated through tax policy ) , alongside information and availability , have been an important part of policy on alcohol .
High prices for alcohol also have a positive effect on moderate drinkers in the sense that they prevent them from drinking alcohol too often .
We believe there is no way that alcohol consumption can be described as ' beneficial in moderation ' .
There is no evidence whatsoever for such an assertion , whereas there is an enormous amount of evidence concerning its damaging effects on health .
Road accidents , accidents at work , the abuse of women and children - these are all among the common consequences of drinking alcohol and are often caused by people who regard themselves as moderate drinkers .
On the parts of the Von Wogau report concerning alcohol policy we have voted in accordance with the views outlined above .
As representatives of the environmental party , the Greens , we have voted against the Von Wogau report because we believe as a matter of principle that tax policy should be decided by the Member States .
One example of the negative effects EU decisions on taxes can have is the current attempt by airlines in Sweden to obtain rebates of Swedish aviation fuel tax , which was introduced for environmental reasons , which they seek to justify in the light of current EU rules .
Moreover , we consider that the final resolution , not least because of the rejection of the health-oriented amendments by the Green Group , takes insufficient account of the need to use taxes in an attempt to limit the use of both tobacco and alcohol , which are both certainly highly damaging to people 's health .
Meier report
I have voted against the Meier report despite the fact that it contains many positive features .
What makes the report unacceptable is the proposal to make technical standardisation bodies EU bodies .
This is a completely unnecessary measure ; the work is being done perfectly well as things stand and involves more countries than simply the Member States of the EU .
I also reject the idea contained in the report that the influence of the authorities over standards should be reduced .
The main problem today is the considerable influence exerted by large private enterprises , not that of the authorities .
Theato report
I have voted against the report by Mrs Theato , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The committee has , without being asked , taken the initiative to draw up a report on the follow-up to the interparliamentary conference on combating fraud in the Union .
The report lacks both analysis and political judgement .
There is not even an attempt at an analysis of the causes of the increase in fraud .
The causes may be sought in the EU 's decision to scrap border controls , the supranational agricultural and Structural Fund policies and the variety of unsupervised programmes involving third countries .
Taken together these causes give encouragement to less scrupulous and criminally inclined individuals to turn to fraudulent activities .
I oppose the proposals in the report to transfer important parts of the third , intergovernmental pillar to the EU 's common and supranational part , which would also mean them being covered by the co-decision procedure .
It is precisely these areas that are of particularly vital interest to the Member States .
This is why I voted against the Theato report .
Although , for the time being , fraud is not the number one problem of the European Union , it is now taking on proportions which perhaps have never been seen before .
In other words , instead of recommending measures which have already been taken and defining the resources which already exist or putting forward ideas which have been forthcoming from all directions , what we really now need to do is act .
The Theato Report is nearly always good at locating the problem , at putting forward options , and demanding action .
That is why we should be voting in favour of it .
However , we must also draw attention to one aspect which , although it is not decisive , we think raises some doubts .
We have reservations , for example , about the question of ' Communitization ' , defended by the rapporteur , of a large part of the ' third pillar ' , which would not be shocking if it were limited simply to aspects connected with fighting fraud , as the rapporteur 's intention seems to be , but raises doubts if we look at the fact that this is not really where the problem lies .
We must always fight fraud , it is true , but ( apart from admitting the hypothesis that governments themselves might voluntarily or involuntarily be involved in some of this fraud ) we do not think that Communitization has a role to play in this fight but we think that , by doing so , we might be giving the European Union a clean bill of health in the matter , as if the Member States did not qualify for one .
What we do need is cooperation , clarification , action , rapidity and effectiveness in relation to protecting the financial interests of the Community , the fight against fraud and the fight against corruption which has been growing in this Europe of ours .
The general public are demanding this and society needs it .
It is a question of security and self-confidence .
Diemut Theato has known how to put this across and she has nearly always done so very well ...
East-West cooperation activities in energy and nuclear security
The next item is the report ( A4-0242 / 96 ) by Mr Adam , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the East-West cooperation activities in energy and nuclear security .
Madam President , the key word in this report is cooperation .
Over the next 20 to 25 years the European Union will become more dependent on imported energy .
The demand for oil and coal and gas , but mainly gas , will increase and will only be met from external sources .
We expect that the additional gas requirements will come mainly from Russia .
Without cooperation there must be some doubt that these supplies would be available , and moreover , influence on technical developments in Eastern Europe , where the West has much to offer , would be weakened .
The report seeks to identify the main issues and to propose a framework for Community action to which we can be confident that the East will respond .
Given that gas imports are of vital interest , the report proposes a joint centre supported by Gasprom and the Community .
It is worth noting that Gasprom is the largest company in the world in terms of annual turnover of some US $ 200 billion .
Energy Centres have been established in all the Eastern countries and it is to them that we should look to encourage cooperation in a wide range of activities .
In particular , I would refer to the encouragement of a culture of energy saving and efficiency and the promotion of renewable energies .
Unfortunately , the Community 's administrative arrangements for supporting the Centres are unsatisfactory .
No fewer than four programmes are involved - THERMIE , PHARE , TACIS and SYNERGY .
There can even be more than one office in the same city .
It is little wonder that the PHARE and TACIS programmes have not yet convinced this Parliament that priorities are being adequately addressed .
The report has some hard words directed to the Commission on this issue .
The resolution invites proposals for developing the role of the Centres through adequate financial resources .
It is an urgent matter .
Only in the last hour I have had the director of one Energy Centre on the phone claiming that the Centre is to close at the end of the year .
This is not the way to encourage cooperation .
Obviously , we have to have a joint commitment between the Community and the governments of the country concerned if there is going to be success .
But precipitate action by the Community on closures must be avoided .
In fairness , I should mention that the Commission has already started to move along the lines suggested and I welcome the inter-Directorate cooperation which is being put in place .
I also want to acknowledge the help I have received from the Commission in the preparation of this report .
Nuclear power in Eastern Europe accounts for only some 17 % of electricity and in most countries this is less than the fall in electricity produced since the move towards market economies .
In theory , therefore , the nuclear power stations could have been taken out of use .
The reasons why this has not happened are political and financial .
There is an unwillingness to become dependent on imported fossil fuels and a lack of finance to buy these fuels .
The imposition of a 20 % tax by Russia on imports from Ukraine obviously does nothing to encourage the sale of gas or oil to that country .
It must also be understood that Western assessments of safety of nuclear plants are not always accepted by the Eastern countries .
Fruitful cooperation between the European Union and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union can only be successful if it is based on understanding .
The West does not have a monopoly on wisdom .
The West cannot dictate to the East .
The build-up of the market economies will take time .
In the 20 years ahead it is unreasonable to expect the energy problem in those countries to be solved by energy savings , nor can dramatic increases in renewable energies be expected .
Nuclear power will continue to be used and will probably increase .
The Russians have not halted work on reactor design .
The report does , however , set out firm guidelines which should regulate financial assistance in the nuclear sector .
The aim is to encourage by industrial cooperation a safety culture and procedures which are mutually acceptable .
The report and the resolution look to the issues where cooperation is to the benefit of both East and West .
There is no instant solution , there is no magic wand , but Parliament now looks to the Commission to implement the spirit of the report .
Madam President , I shall be very brief , because in his introductory statement Gordon Adam has said what essentially needed to be said about this excellent report , the importance of which is in inverse proportion to the number of Members here to listen to it .
This document is an extremely compact one , which really does define the framework of what should be - and alas is not , or not yet - the European Community 's energy policy towards the Central and Eastern European States , and specifically , of course , towards our very large neighbour , Russia .
All too often , we have become bogged down in theoretical debates about sources of supply , about nuclear energy , for nuclear energy , against nuclear energy , etc .
Mr Adam 's report , which is full of fine detail , demonstrates , if any demonstration were needed , that a country like Russia , in particular , must necessarily diversify its sources of supply ; that it cannot rely totally on gas , and still less on renewable energies or , quite simply , on energy efficiency , but that it must , instead , continue to develop a strong nuclear industry .
Of course , the mention of the word ' nuclear ' calls to mind Chernobyl , and hence the absolute need for safety .
This appeal to the ' safety culture ' which we are to help spread in Russia is , clearly , an essential point in Mr Adam 's report .
Another major point : the statement that we are now to abandon the transitional aid we are granting to these countries .
We are to move forward to a better organized and better planned stage of cooperation , arranging for the PHARE and TACIS programmes , the EBRD appropriations , etc . , to be combined within a global plan , a plan for which we have been hoping for several years now , the preparation of which is now becoming - to adopt a term with which you are familiar , Madam President - a burning obligation .
Mr Adam 's report demonstrates all this , and demonstrates too that there can sometimes be a wide gap between words and deeds - the fate of the energy centres is one example .
That is what should be emphasized in Gordon Adam 's report , and I call upon the Commission to read it carefully and then to define the practical arrangements for its application .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , on behalf of the Liberals I too must compliment Mr Adam on his report .
Cooperation between Eastern Europe and the Union is focused on the safety of nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe .
Investing in safety is vitally important both to the people of Eastern Europe and the citizens of our Union .
The down side of all the attention being paid to nuclear safety is that it leaves little room for alternatives to nuclear power .
The Liberal Group believes that cooperation to ensure that our energy is safe can only be successful if it encompasses all energy sources .
So we shall be voting against the rapporteur 's Amendment No 5 .
If the Union exports only nuclear knowhow and technology to the East , highly dangerous nuclear plants will remain in existence and so will the hazards they present to people and the environment .
Recent research has shown that the Union is a leader in the field of environmental and non-nuclear energy technology .
So we should export this too .
It creates a lot of jobs too .
Energy consumption in Central and Eastern Europe has fallen off sharply as a result of economic and industrial depression .
That means that unsafe reactors like the one in Chernobyl can quite simply be closed down .
But it is more profitable for these countries to operate unsafe reactors so that fossil fuels can be exported for hard currency .
My Group wonders whether it is necessary for the Union to spend money on making nuclear power stations safe when these countries are exporting fossil fuels .
We would do better to invest in a more efficient and cleaner use of fossil fuels .
My final point concerns Amendment No 8 put down by the Liberal Group .
It is very disappointing that the United States is not a party to the Energy Charter Treaty and we hope that it soon will be .
I would like , first of all to thank Parliament for its initiative in producing a report on East-West cooperation activities in the field of energy and nuclear safety , and especially Mr Adam , who has drafted a most valuable contribution .
I would like to focus , in my address , on the following items : the functioning of the PHARE and TACIS programmes , EC energy centres , nuclear cooperation , and coordination between programmes .
With regard to the TACIS and PHARE programmes , while the policy might have been insufficiently elaborated in the first years , the Commission services have made considerable efforts to achieve a better concentration of action in areas where there is the greatest need and impact .
This process parallels and is aligned with an evolving understanding in the international donor community .
In fact , the PHARE and TACIS programmes are active in most of the areas highlighted in the draft report .
Particular emphasis is given both to energy savings and related issues and to the reform of the legal and regulatory framework of the energy sector , with a view to creating a favourable climate for investment .
The oil and gas sector , on the other hand , is more inherently prosperous than others , and in a better position when it comes to raising finance from private sources .
Wherever possible , the programme should therefore cede the field to the latter , restricting their activities to legal and regulatory matters .
With regard to the EC energy centres , I fully share the draft report 's very positive assessment of their activities .
As you know , financing of EC energy centres through the THERMIE programme had to stop at the end of 1995 and the centres are being temporarily supported by SYNERGY while the Commission is seeking an appropriate solution for their future .
The Commission believes that it has to take into account the evolution of administrative structures in the countries concerned .
In some cases the financing has been taken over by the PHARE and TACIS programmes after careful reviewing and planning , while financing centres that have not been successful will be discontinued .
The financing of successful centres is being renewed on an adequate scale .
The scope of these centres ' work is also being changed to increase their role in attracting investment , to give them a regional mission and to encourage the longterm sustainability .
In the nuclear sector the report takes a very important step in placing the use of nuclear power in the context of global energy policy .
It is right in considering the energy dimension and not only the safety aspects .
But let us be clear .
Safety must not be undermined .
We must continue to require an improvement in the installations of the countries concerned , with the aim of reaching a level equivalent to the one we have in the Union .
Safety must be a prerequisite for the use of nuclear technology .
Taking into account the economic and strategic aspects of nuclear power in these countries ' energy framework is today essential for the long-term solution of safety issues .
One has to recognize these countries ' right to rely on nuclear power if that is their choice .
Taking this into account , we should help them define and set up the structures that will ensure an adequate safety level .
Such structures are based on a safety culture at all levels of the design , manufacture and operation of equipment and facilities .
This ambitious objective will not be achieved by assistance programmes using grant money alone .
They can help initiate the process but longer-term industrial cooperation based on investment and shared interests will probably be the only way to secure in depth the necessary transfer of competence .
In parallel , the assistance programmes and TACIS / PHARE in particular , must continue to target the most critical safety issues while also considering some specific problems of the fuel cycle .
Specific attention will continue to be paid to the safeguard aspect .
Projects should also continue to be defined by considering the long-term perspective and in-depth development of a safety culture in the nuclear industry of the concerned countries .
A framework has to be defined for publishing the results of the programmes while recognizing the intellectual property issue .
The available results must be put to the best use .
Finally , loan facilities should be encouraged where appropriate in support of a global longer-term approach aimed at developing partnership and cooperation between the industrial organizations of the EU and the countries concerned .
Rules and procedures must be respected and a rigorous , open-minded approach must be adopted to loan dossiers in order to integrate the specific problems of economies in transition .
With regard to coordination between programmes , the Commission agrees with the need for improved coordination between the different actions of the Community in this area .
I should mention the efforts already being made by the Commission in terms of the consistency and coordination of these actions .
Two types of coordination ought to be considered : firstly coordination of Community programmes devoted specifically to energy , namely THERMIE , SAVE , ALTENER and SYNERGY .
The objectives of these programmes are different and often complementary .
For instance , THERMIE is mainly concerned with promoting new technologies and SYNERGY with preparing the conditions for industrial cooperation .
Not only can duplication be avoided , but synergies can be , and ought to be developed .
The second type of coordination is between the specific energy programmes and the general programmes for technical assistance .
There is a major difference between technical assistance , which is strongly demand-driven , and synergy in which mutual interest is a central element .
In addition , the services of the Commission work closely together and have set up structures to ensure permanent contact and avoid duplication .
Mr Adam , I would like to conclude by again thanking Parliament , and especially yourself , for this initiative which will help give a global and consistent view of a subject which is of paramount importance for balanced East / West relations .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Cooperation in the Baltic Sea region
The next item is the report ( A4-0259 / 96 ) by Mr Toivonen , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the Commission report ( COM ( 95 ) 0609 - C4-0017 / 96 ) on the current state of and prospects for cooperation in the Baltic Sea region .
Ladies and gentlemen , you all know that both Finland and Austria are in the middle of the European election campaign .
That is why I am sure you will understand why the rapporteur , Mr Toivonen , cannot be present .
Instead , Mr Kittelmann has said he is prepared to present the report on behalf of the rapporteur .
But first Mrs Stenius has asked to speak on a point of order .
Madam President , you say that it is understandable that Mr Toivonen is not here because there are elections in Finland .
Finnish Members of all the other Groups represented in Finland are here .
In my view , your statement that it is understandable that he should be absent when the Baltic is to be debated during the elections is unjustified .
Madam President , I am always pleased to find special cases in which Members of this House do not really show the cooperative spirit that might have been expected .
I am referring to the comment made just now .
I have the honour and the pleasure to deputize for the rapporteur , Mr Toivonen , and since I also have a personal interest in this region as EPP speaker on external economic relations , my cooperative spirit here is also justified by practical considerations .
We have always known that the Baltic Sea has played a major role in the history of Europe , although we were scarcely ever able to make use of this because the dictatorships and isolation of that region prevented us .
The waterways represented the main cultural and trade links , which gave these waters an additional and special political role .
The Mediterranean is Europe 's link with Africa and Asia .
The Atlantic is particularly important to Europe 's security and trade cooperation .
With the accession of Sweden and Finland to the EU , the Union has acquired a new maritime dimension : the Baltic Sea has come a sea within the Union .
That is why we now need a new Baltic Sea policy .
I grew up in the GDR and I still remember how the Communists kept trying to misuse the potential and chances of this region with their propaganda about the Baltic Sea being a sea of peace ; and we should all be glad , and even feel somewhat euphoric , about the new chances and new potential we have .
The report Mr Toivonen has drawn up on the Baltic Sea region is divided into several sections : democratic development and economic growth , environmental considerations , infrastructure and assistance , cooperation and coordination .
Foreign and security policy considerations provide the background to the economic comments .
Security and peace are the ultimate priority .
Mr Poettering will be saying more on this later .
The search for security and peace in Europe is taking on a new and special form in the Baltic Sea region . For the first time the Union has a common border with Russia .
This area , the point of intersection between East and West , has its own special security policy character .
Russia 's neighbourhood with the EU imposes special demands on the Baltic Sea region , but also offers an enormous opportunity .
Economic integration in this region is the best means to ensure peace in Europe .
Our aim , and I am sure we all agree on this , must be to integrate the Baltic Sea region in the Community , in both political and economic terms .
That is why we must firmly support the continuation of the radical structural changes occurring in the former Communist states of the Baltic Sea region .
We know that economic growth and political stability are closely linked .
The balanced development of both democratic structures and a free market economy , which is the embodiment of democratic structures , will lead to a rapid development of trade .
Here we should draw particular attention to the fact that the creation of a Baltic free trade area and free access of Eastern European products to the Community market are extremely important but at the same time the most difficult aims to achieve .
The Baltic Sea makes up an important part of the life and way of life of the people of that region .
It also affects the standard of living of the Finns , the Swedes , the Baltic people , the Poles and the Germans .
It is in everyone 's interests to resolve the environmental problems in this sensitive area .
Aid to improve nuclear safety is extremely urgent , yet nature and the environment are also exposed to many other risks .
The best way to create the necessary conditions for preserving this varied and special natural area is through common endeavour .
On the part of the EU , there are many channels available for providing finance and aid , for example the various environmental organizations .
The most important infrastructure projects in this region are the links with Central and Western Europe , a network for carrying natural gas and oil from Russia to Central Europe and the inclusion of the Russian inland waterways in the international transport system .
Given the difficult structural adjustment processes in the Baltic countries , we must increase the volume of Union aid for this region .
Compared with the previous five-year period , Commissioner , the increase in the aid granted by the Union is in fact very low , accounting for only a few percentage points .
This cannot be enough !
At the same time , we need to coordinate the existing national and international aid more efficiently .
As a final comment may I once again draw attention to the basic economic aspects of the European Union 's Baltic policy .
It is simply not enough just to describe the content of the policy .
It is also useful to take measures to implement that policy .
And here I must mention something the Baltic Sea region is particularly proud of in its centuries-long tradition , namely the principle of subsidiarity .
Subsidiarity means that the centuries-long trade experience in this region is a major factor , that it is important for action to be taken in this region not only in the form of European Union aid but also in order to building on the experience that has been gained there .
If we manage to do that together , we will also be grasping the historic opportunity offered to us to ensure that this region really becomes economically stable , in the interests of the people living there and of all of us in the Union .
Madam President , when one compares the Commission document with the existing level of regional and local cooperation in the Baltic Sea region , which can look back to long traditions and made it possible to keep bridges of understanding even during the Cold War period , we see that this document is inadequate and falls far short of the existing level of interregional cooperation in the Baltic Sea area !
For the European Union then even to announce claims to leadership in this respect is simply ridiculous in view of the document it has presented !
One central demand is therefore that the European actions in the Baltic Sea region must come under the control of the Council of Baltic Sea States and that existing structures must be used in order to set up a coordination centre for regional planning and regional information on coordinated measures .
The Committee on Regional Policy welcomes all the initiatives to create interregional links in which the regions and municipalities of the Baltic Sea area are participating .
However , we are against any tendencies towards centralization .
In this context , the list of EU financial contributions - divided up into national categories - represents a step backwards .
But this also indicates the need for reform within the Commission when it comes to structural policy in an interregional framework .
In spite of the numerous requests by Parliament , the Commission has not made a single proposal in this document with regard to providing for joint financing or for means of carrying out cross-border projects or interregional projects .
The Commission should not pat itself on the back for making general proclamations ; they are no use to us at all !
To try and sell the list of the financing measures decided long since under the PHARE and TACIS structural funds as a strategy merely shows that it has not done its homework and that so far there is no sign of progress in this area .
That is why I call on the Commission to take up Parliament 's proposals and finally to develop cross-border cooperation for the Baltic Sea region on the basis of model projects and a new budget line - see the amendment tabled by the Social Democrats - in the interests of Europe .
Madam President , may I also point out that the Committee on Regional Policy unanimously adopted the conclusions in Amendments Nos 2 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 15 , 16 and 17 but could not table them under the Rules of Procedure .
The Committee on External Economic Relations failed to vote on them ; they will now be tabled on behalf of the Green Group and put to the vote tomorrow and I would ask the House to show the same unanimity as the Committee on Regional Policy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , our Swedish colleague Mr Staffan Burenstam Linder has asked me to present the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy because he is in the capital of Latvia today , in Riga , taking part in the founding of a Europe-wide faculty of law ..
I think that is a splendid and highly practical contribution to linking these countries , in this concrete case Latvia , with Europe .
He has asked me to present the opinion because I was rapporteur for the report on the European agreement with Lithuania so that - and here I am addressing the critical colleague who felt she had to express reservations in the case of Mr Toivonen - I have a practical and not just a political involvement here .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy unanimously adopted the opinion drafted by Mr Burenstam Linder on 25 June 1996 , thereby expressing the great interest of that committee in cooperation in the Baltic Sea region .
Mr Peter Kittelmann has just referred to cooperation in the Mediterranean area .
I think we as the European Union and the Member States now have a magnificent opportunity to promote peace , security and stability both in the Mediterranean and in the Baltic Sea region through our policies .
The town I come from , a very small town in Lower Saxony , belonged for a long time to the Hanseatic League in Germany , and in past centuries that Hanseatic League of towns was a form of cooperation in the Baltic Sea and North Sea region .
When we talk about a new form of cooperation in the Baltic Sea region today , we should also remember that this kind of cooperation existed once before in European history .
If I may make this personal remark as a remark also on behalf of my group , let me say that I still regard it as a splendid development that today , in the year 1996 , we can still discuss this subject .
Who would have thought ten years ago that we could be discussing such a subject today ?
Cooperation in the Baltic Sea region is important both as bilateral and as multilateral cooperation between states , but it is also significant that the European Union as such is taking part in this cooperation so that everything that can be done bilaterally and multilaterally also comes within the framework of the European process of integration .
Of the cooperating states , Germany , Denmark , Finland and Sweden of course belong to the European Union .
Poland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania want to become members of the European Union , and that is why this cooperation is so important .
Let me emphasize how important cooperation is with Russia .
We have every interest in seeing a stable Russia , a strong , efficient economy , democratic conditions in Russia .
We very much hope that this strong Russia that will hopefully develop always remains open , looks towards the western part of our continent - towards Europe - and does not revert to isolation again .
In the coming months and years we should do our utmost through this cooperation to help those states that want to join the European Union through a strategy of preparation , in the sense of giving help for self-help so that they can build up a strong democracy and good economic relations in the hope that in the not too distant future this continent can become a continent of stability , of peace and of freedom .
Madam President , I should first of all like to thank you for giving me the floor .
I would point out that I am chairman of the delegation for relations with Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , and it is indeed in that capacity that I am speaking .
I should like to mention three points : the many initiatives which have been taken , nuclear safety , and transport links from the Baltic Sea .
Firstly , the previous speakers have already referred to the many positive developments .
One should mention here the commitment on the part of the EU , the cooperation in the Baltic Sea region , the work in the Nordic Council and the Baltic Council , and the many forms of sectoral cooperation in the fields of energy , transport and security .
It is very important for me to emphasize that at the conference last week in Riga , at which I represented Parliament , we were simply treading water , so to speak .
We did not really move forward .
The reason is that we are now at a crucial stage where we need to put things on a more operational footing , as the previous speakers have also said .
We are pleased at how things are developing , but also a little apprehensive , or perhaps concerned , in a constructive way .
The market economy is doing well , and it is making progress .
But there is also the social aspect to take into account .
I agree that we must have time to coordinate matters .
We ought to look at how PHARE and TACIS are operating .
I know very well that the PHARE and TACIS people are concerned about what I am now saying .
But the time has come to set up a real Baltic Sea programme , in which we coordinate things in an entirely different way .
Secondly , I would refer to nuclear safety .
We have just been discussing the Adam report , and I heard Commissioner Pinheiro talking about safety and the nuclear situation .
I am anxious to repeat what I have said before here in the House .
If we do not solve the problem of Ignalina , which is a problem for all of us together , then in ten years ' time we shall have an even greater problem than the one we are confronted with today .
My third point concerns transport .
The Via Baltica and the Via Hanseatica have been referred to .
I would warn against making the same mistake that we are suffering from now in Central Europe , namely planning a mass of motorways .
The way out of the Baltic Sea is by water : it is the blue waves that should be the vehicle for a green approach , with the emphasis on rail and shipping .
Lastly , there is security .
It is quite clear to me that security in the Baltic Sea region can only be ensured through very close cooperation with Russia .
The closer and the better the EU coordinates its cooperation with Russia , the easier it will also be in the long term to create security in the Baltic Sea region .
This is connected with NATO , but also with the low-key form of security policy , namely economic security policy .
That is why our discussions are also bound up with the situation in Russia .
Madam President , the Gulf of Bothnia is also part of the Baltic .
I should therefore like to say something about the northern part of the Gulf of Bothnia , which is one of Europe 's growing ' economic arcs ' .
It is a 300-km long , industrialized area , straddling the Swedish-Finnish border , from Piteå in Sweden , via Tornio and Kemi , to Oulu and Raahe .
Despite its northerly location , very modern heavy export industries and state-of-the-art knowledge of advanced technology are to be found in this arc .
The area 's GDP is growing considerably more rapidly than the averages for Finland and Sweden ; its annual export earnings exceed 18 billion Finnish marks .
European regional policy has contributed a good deal to this dynamic development .
By providing high-quality living conditions and genuine opportunities for industrial development , it has proved possible to prevent emigration from north to south in Finland and Sweden .
Madam President , I should like finally to stress that in order for export industries to function all the year round it is necessary to develop the infrastructure .
Most of all , maritime transport must be feasible in all seasons , which requires the use of ice-breakers , but there is also a need for EU research funds to be allocated as a matter of priority to high technology .
I must again stress the very great importance of this area as a gateway from Finland to the Barents Sea and the Archangel region .
Madam President , on the whole I consider this to be a good report .
Our group will also vote for it .
However , it will be significantly improved if we adopt several of the amendments tabled not least by the Green Group , as they add something very important to the report .
After the end of the Cold War cooperation around the Baltic increased enormously more or less spontaneously .
What I believe is unique is that this is not simply cooperation at government level but also between voluntary organisations , towns , regions , universities - there are thousands of different kinds of links across and around the Baltic .
The job of the EU must be to support the cooperation which is already taking place and which is now growing spontaneously between the peoples and not to automatically create new structures .
I believe that the amendments by the Green Group add something of this .
Several of the countries concerned have membership of the EU as their objective .
They include the Baltic states and Poland .
This prospect naturally has an effect on many things .
The question is not simply how they adapt to us .
We must also ask whether the European Union suits them .
Is it appropriate for pan-European cooperation ?
This is not dealt with to any great extent in the report but it is mentioned in one point , Recital C , where panEuropean security cooperation is mentioned in connection with the Baltic .
I believe this is incredibly important as it is only together with Russia that real security in our region can be established .
This need is at risk of colliding with the EU 's plans for militarisation , for military powers etc .
We see today how Russia opposes NATO membership for the Baltic States .
When the EU starts having military ambitions it is possible that Russia will also oppose EU membership , and this could create a great deal of negative tension in the Baltic region .
I therefore believe that it is an EU which is less federal and which has no military ambitions but concentrates on what is really necessary that offers the best chance of contributing to stability in the Baltic region .
Madam President , I should like to begin by agreeing with everything my Swedish colleague has said .
Of course we also support the Toivonen report , but with the changes we would like made through our amendments , which would improve it greatly .
In my one and a half minutes I would just like to highlight two different points .
The first concerns how extremely important it is that we achieve a pan-European security system which includes Russia .
In this connection the neutral and militarily non-aligned countries which are now also Member States have something very special to contribute .
We also recommend a regional forum within the framework of the OSCE which should very quickly ensure the demilitarisation of Kaliningrad ; this would bring stability to the whole of the surrounding region .
The other point I should like to make is that all Member States must contribute to improving nuclear safety in the Baltic region , including the closure of the most dangerous nuclear power stations such as Chernobyl and Ignalina .
Measures must also be taken to deal with the disastrous situation involving military nuclear waste on the Kola peninsula which I believe presents the greatest threat to Europe 's common future .
Madam President , following our debate on the Commission 's guidelines for policy on the Baltic region last year , Parliament is now required to pronounce on a report which outlines the foreign aid extended to this region .
The Commission report gives a clear overview of the various aid programmes being implemented in the Baltic region .
On reading it we wonder what steps the Commission is taking to ensure that the many different programmes are coordinated and that policy remains coherent .
Mr Toivonen 's excellent report emphasizes the great importance of the Baltic region .
Many of the countries in this region are experiencing a process of transition , both politically and economically , which is difficult to complete without foreign assistance .
Some countries are also preparing for accession to the European Union .
Their efforts deserve our help both on moral grounds and on account of the fact that geopolitically the Baltic region is an area of intersection between East and West .
Relations with Russia are extremely important here .
As regards the type of aid which should be given we believe , as we made plain earlier in the debate on the guidelines , that the best way of giving aid is to allow these countries generous access for their trade to the markets of the European Union .
In addition to cooperation in economic , environmental and infrastructure matters , the Union and the Baltic states ought to cooperate in the fight against international crime .
One thinks of measures against drugs trafficking and illegal trading in dangerous substances , and effective action can also be taken jointly with the Baltic region against trafficking in human beings and child pornography .
Summing up , Madam President , this is a cooperation programme which we are happy to support .
Madam President , traditionally the Baltic has been the scene of struggles for economic , military and political hegemony .
Aspirations to power have dictated the conditions for cooperation in the region .
Only now do we find ourselves in a situation where genuinely concerted efforts are possible .
The objectives should be respect for the independence of the states in the region , functioning democracy and market economies , promotion of the rights of minorities , environmental protection and all manner of mutual interaction .
Now that Europe is no longer militarily and politically divided into two camps , cooperation in the Baltic has gained in force .
The EU has joined in the work of the Council of Baltic Sea States , which has created new opportunities .
At the same time as support is provided for the construction measures of the Baltic States and Poland , which seek accession , it must be ensured that Russia too can join in cooperation .
In due course , Nordic cooperation should also be extended to the Barents Sea region , which is rich in natural resources but is also of strategic importance .
In addition to their desire to accede to the EU , the Baltic States have expressed the wish to join NATO .
The security interests of Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania must be taken seriously .
At the same time , it is essential to avoid creating new spheres of interest in Europe .
This would directly increase instability in the Baltic .
It is important to establish a new European security system through cooperation .
Deepening NATO 's Partnership for Peace programme has a vital role to play in this constructive work .
A good example of the new type of action is IFOR in Bosnia , which is composed not only of NATO peace-keepers but also of contingents from Russia , the Baltic States and the non-aligned countries .
Each of the Baltic States must also be offered equal opportunities to negotiate membership of the EU .
Madam President , thank you for your courtesy .
Further to what Mr Pelttari has said , I should like to add that the EU also needs an Arctic policy .
The Toivonen report calls for the Union to invest in the Baltic Sea region at the crossroads of Europe 's planned natural gas and oil supply network .
The Commission has already responded to this challenge by proposing an updating of the list of projects for trans-European energy networks .
The Commission proposes adding to the list of projects the Nordic Gas Grid , to which Parliament gave its support in the spring .
The Committee on Energy will begin its consideration of the Commission 's new proposal on 30 September 1996 .
I hope that Parliament 's first reading can be completed according to schedule , at the November part-session .
I also hope that the Swedish parties will understand better than at present the significance of the project in meeting the energy needs of the whole EU and particularly of the Baltic Sea States - and particularly , too , to improve security of gas supply .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like , on behalf of the Commission , first of all , to thank Mr Toivonen for his report and his resolution on the Baltic Sea , which highlights the importance of the region for Europe as a whole and its very active participation in the construction of the European Union .
Indeed , four countries in the Baltic region are Member States of the Union and four others are associated to the Union through European agreements and very much involved in the process of cooperation , with a view to future accession .
Two countries , Iceland and Norway , are linked by agreement through the European Economic Area and NATO .
We hope that the partnership and cooperation agreement with Russia will soon be ratified so that we can also strengthen our relations with this very important country which is an active and fully fledged member of the Council of Baltic Sea States .
In April and June of this year , before the Baltic Summits in Visby and Kalmar , the Commission had the opportunity to put before the Chamber its ideas on its involvement in cooperation with the Baltic Sea region as a means of guaranteeing stability and prosperity for the peoples living in that region .
Following a request by the European Council , the Commission presented at the Summit of Baltic States in Visby , in May of this year , its so-called ' Initiative for the Baltic Sea Region ' , which sets out the way in which we are supporting cooperation with this region and , as has already been mentioned , brings out three main areas :
the first area , strengthening democracy and stability , including a reinforcement of civil society , the promotion of human rights and the fight against unlawful activity ; -a second aspect , which is economic development , a priority area in which we are continuing to develop our bilateral relations and also foster the development of relations between the countries in transition in the Baltic Sea area , so that a wider economic area can help to improve the economic outlook .
This part of cooperation also includes the rationalisation of legislative and administrative frameworks , the promotion of infrastructures and energy supply as well as the promotion of ecologically sound environmental policies and practices ; -thirdly , the Commission 's initiative promotes regional development , including the cooperation between subnational regions within national frontiers as well as active participation by local authorities.The European Union 's support in all of these areas , already under way , will be pursued on the basis of the PHARE and TACIS Programmes .
Furthermore , we shall also maintain access to financing through the European Investment Bank so that wherever possible we can carry out co-funding through other international financial institutions .
Wherever necessary , European Union funding in regions of the Member States of the European Union can be carried out using appropriations from the Structural Funds , in particular the INTERREG Programme .
As a member of the Council of Baltic Sea countries , the Commission has actively participated in the elaboration of action programmes adopted at the ministerial meeting in Kalmar which took place in July . The Commission 's initiative for the Baltic Sea complements this CBSS document .
As the Chair of the Working Party of the CBSS for economic cooperation , the Commission will monitor the execution of both of these documents .
For this purpose , meetings of experts will be held on the main areas of action , in order to identify areas where there are deficiencies or bottlenecks and to propose solutions .
We shall continue to play an active part in other CBSS bodies and in the HELCOM .
In addition to the direct results , regional cooperation contributes significantly to restoring confidence .
From this point of view , we must welcome the many initiatives and events which have taken place in the Baltic Sea area .
The Commission 's actions will only bear fruit if they support the policies and decisions taken by authorities and other bodies directly responsible for this region .
On this score , the European Union gives its full support to a strengthening of cooperation in order to construct a better future for all of the peoples of the Baltic Sea region and , by extension , the rest of Europe .
Madam President , I am sorry to prolong the sitting but we cannot let the Commission go like this .
Those were all things that are already going on .
We are talking about a document on strategies .
It is a question of strategies and in this respect I must start by pointing out that the partnership and cooperation agreement with Russia has already been signed and that it is for the Council to ensure that it is now ratified in the individual Member States .
Secondly , I would like to know whether the Commission has responded to Parliament 's proposals , namely in relation to channelling the aid in such a way as to overcome the difficulties between PHARE and INTERREG and between TACIS and INTERREG , and setting up model projects for cross-border cooperation , and whether this will get going in the near future .
Thirdly , I would like to know whether there will now be a follow-up document that really does tackle all the difficulties that are still unresolved .
It is not enough to pat oneself on the back and tell of all the things one has already done !
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I should like to raise a point which I think is of enormous concern to the people of the European Union and that is the reports which have come out this morning about the decision by the British Government last night to end the cull of British cattle believed or suspected to be infected with BSE .
It is a very serious concern and you will know the enormous impact this will have on the fears of the European people about their public health and consumer safety .
I would like to ask the European Commission immediately to respond as to how they are going to react to the action taken by the British Government , which seems to be a complete about-turn on the action plan that was presented by the British Prime Minister to the European Council when it last met .
Madam President , what Pauline Green has suggested in her capacity as President of the PSE Group also reflects the view of the PPE Group .
This is a very serious matter , and we must take note of it .
What is at issue here is not just health but the community of law that is the European Union - once a legal decision has been made , no Member State can unilaterally revoke it .
We support your suggestion , Madam President , that the Commission should make a statement on this in connection with Mr Funk 's report .
Thank you , Mr Poettering .
I can see that Mrs Green also agrees with this suggestion .
Madam President , I am surprised to hear Mrs Green making these remarks this morning .
It is these sort of remarks that add to the problems which the beef sector is currently going through .
That is the sort of inflationary , inflammatory type of remark which is creating the problem and making it even worse .
Let me assure the Members of this House that the decision taken by the British Government overnight concerns a more effective cull to get rid of the BSE problem more quickly and in that way we will all be able to get back to normality as quickly as possible .
Mr Provan , I have said that we are not going to debate the matter now .
Madam President , what has been raised here is a matter of immense concern to European people .
Of course none of us wants to damage further the beef industry but it is remarks like those we have just heard that have done such damage to the whole of the beef industry .
It is completely ridiculous that representatives of the British Government speaking here are not truthful about the fact that this is a major concern .
Their deception over many years has actually led to this problem .
It is time they faced up to that reality and treated the European people with some respect .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will discuss all this when we come to debate Mr Funk 's report .
Madam President , my point concerns the vote on Mr von Wogau 's report on excise duties .
Mr Pasty , two days earlier , did rightly warn us about the risks of clashes between the votes , parliamentary procedure and the committee meetings .
It now transpires , Madam President , that the vote on the report on excise duties was carried by a single vote .
The increase in excise duties on wine was carried by one vote .
Well , many members of the Committee on Agriculture , who are consequently most concerned by this matter , not to mention myself as representative of LanguedocRoussillon , the largest European wine growing area , were at that time attending a meeting of the Committee of Inquiry into bovine spongiform encephalopathy .
You yourself are a lawyer , Madam President , and you will agree that what we have here is a case of ' vice of consent ' , or consent given in error , in the form of a manoeuvre comprising the simultaneous arrangement of a committee meeting and voting , a manoeuvre which allowed a vote to be hijacked .
This is a perfect example of vice of consent , and of a vote which is null and void .
I find the use of these methods simply to fabricate a majority , methods which I fear I can only describe as somewhat crooked , to be unacceptable .
Madam President , perhaps we should find a different form of words and hold that vote again , since the result is fraudulent .
Mr Martinez , your point has nothing to do with any change to the Minutes .
At present we are in the process of adopting the Minutes , and I would therefore ask you to be kind enough to confine your remarks to the Minutes .
Having said that , I must admit that you have raised a basic , general problem .
What I suggest is that the Bureau consider this matter and say whether it is actually standard practice for other meetings to be held during voting time .
I believe that we should abide by the strict rule that no other meetings should be held during voting time - and I note , incidentally , that the group presidents share this view .
I also believe that it is important for this matter to be discussed within the conference of presidents .
Are there any comments on the Minutes ?
Madam President , I have a comment on the Minutes , and on yesterday 's vote to which Mr Martinez referred .
At the end of that vote , there was a very great deal of uncertainty as to what had actually been adopted .
I should like to take this opportunity to make it clear that we yesterday rejected , by a single vote , a motion calling for the introduction of a tax on wine , so that that part of Mr Martinez 's remarks is certainly incorrect .
Madam President , please excuse me , but what I have to say does not concern the Minutes .
I would simply like to support ....
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , in the roll-call vote on Amendment No 15 to the von Wogau report , my name appears as a vote in favour .
I voted against .
Mr Arias Cañete , we shall be looking into all this and making any necessary corrections .
Are there no more comments ?
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Votes
The next item is the report ( A4-0272 / 96 ) entered pursuant to Rule 52 , by Mr Vallvé , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament ( COM ( 96 ) 0102 - C4-0214 / 96 ) on small-scale coastal fishing ( budget heading B2-521 )
( The President declared that , in the absence of written opposition , the resolution was deemed adopted )
In view of the increasing energy-dependence of its Member States , it has become essential for the European Union to adopt a comprehensive and consistent strategy in dealings with the Central and Eastern European States and with Russia .
We also need to develop a policy of cooperation with these countries in the sector of nuclear security , partly to encourage exchanges in research and partly to prevent the recurrence of any diaster like that of Chernobyl .
Even so , it is important in this context to make the necessary distinction between civil and military installations .
With regard to the report before us , the primary need is to emphasize the priorities such as the modernization of the energy distribution networks and the creation of a reliable legal framework to safeguard foreign investment .
In this context , it is of the utmost importance to set up a body responsible for supervising the development of the gas industry in Central and Eastern Europe , and also in Russia .
To this end , we need to support the initiative aimed at setting up a joint Russia / European Union oil and gas centre in Moscow .
We must also support the idea of an operation of the same type with the Caspian Sea region .
The Caspian Sea basin , the Ukraine and the Baltic States will , after all , have a major role to play in the near future : linking Central and Eastern Europe to the high-growth economies of the Far East and South-East Asia .
As for the PHARE and TACIS programmes , they have not so far provided the hoped-for level of security .
In conclusion , the financial aid provided in the nuclear sector must , as a priority , be directed towards nuclear safety .
The industrial approach must go hand in hand with the constant concern for compliance with safety standards , resulting in the shutting-down of dangerous nuclear reactors and the modernization of the most recent ones .
As regards the future , it is important to stress the significance of projects such as the development of the future type EPR reactor , so that the 21st century can become the century in which a clean and safe form of energy is developed for future generations .
Toivonen report
It was not possible for my amendment to be debated in Parliament on account of procedural issues .
I intend to return to the question as soon as possible .
It is my firm belief that a coherent Baltic programme with its own budget line should be established within the European Union .
This would help coordination significantly since at present there are many different budget categories for Baltic cooperation to be found in a number of different programmes .
A Baltic programme of the same kind as the Mediterranean programme would enable the European Union clearly to demonstrate its intentions to enlarge the Union to the east and its desire to achieve social cohesion throughout Europe .
There can be no doubt whatsoever that a great deal of investment will be required to achieve social cohesion among the Baltic states .
There is no other region in Europe where there are such enormous social and economic differences as between the countries around the Baltic coast .
In order to achieve economic , social and political stability in the region , Baltic cooperation must have priority .
There is a strong risk that several of the Eastern European states will be transformed into crude market economies with only superficial democracy , major social insecurity and high crime levels .
Such a development would play havoc with stability in the whole of Europe .
Market organization in beef and veal
The next item is the report ( A4-0281 / 96 ) by Mr Funk , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 805 / 68 on the common organization of the markets in beef and veal ( COM ( 96 ) 0422 - C4-0447 / 96-96 / 0211 CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner Fischler , we are voting today on an amendment to the common organization of the market in beef and veal .
The Council and Commission had requested the urgency procedure for 4 and 5 September , but this was rejected by the coordinating committee of the time because we had no documents available .
The Council repeated its request for the urgency procedure on 10 September .
On Monday , 16 September 1996 , the Committee on Agriculture agreed to this procedure , while at the same time rejecting it with regard to amendments to the support regulations for crop plants and the efficiency of the agricultural structure .
These decisions were confirmed in Parliament by a large majority on 17 September .
The committee and Parliament rejected the Commission 's proposals for financing the beef crisis .
Press reports indicated that the Council , too , refuses consent to this form of financing .
Although the serious crisis in the beef and veal market does call for swift action , this must not be at the expense of the cereal farmers .
More than half of our beef farmers , Commissioner , grow cereals , too .
So what this amounts to saying is that the Commission 's idea is that they themselves should foot the bill for the damage .
The Commission 's statement of reasons includes the observation that beef and veal consumption has declined by 20-30 % .
This , then , is the Commission 's admission of the scale of the damage done .
We need not spend any more time on this .
In these circumstances , we have to develop new strategies - something which is quite out of the question unless consumer confidence in beef and veal can be restored .
The culling programme must go ahead , with no ifs or buts .
Yesterday 's resolution was counter-productive - it gets us nowhere at all .
Steps must be taken at once to introduce an obligatory system for identifying the origin and quality of BSE-free beef .
More must be done to provide information on BSE-free meat , and to advertise it .
The possibilities for easing the burden on the market have not yet been exhausted : cut-price campaigns aimed at the socially less fortunate sectors of the population should be arranged , an approach which previously brought good result in the case of butter .
Negotiations need to be conducted with the Central and Eastern European States , because we have a vicious circle there : we buy the calves , we fatten them , and then we sell the meat back to those states at a reduced price .
We do need to discuss the possibility of making certain changes in return for compensation .
We cannot avoid a short-term increase in the intervention stocks when the cattle are taken off pasture shortly .
However , this measure is the most expensive way of easing the strain on the market , because the meat comes back onto the market in due course .
In an attempt to reduce these large quantities of meat , my proposed amendments are designed to create new incentives to slaughter lighter-weight animals .
These animals are calculated in addition to the upper limit .
I am not calling the principle of extensification into question .
However , I regard it as virtually impossible , in democratic terms , to monitor three classes , and it creates confusion among farmers too .
You , Commissioner , have written in a major agricultural periodical about a successful programme in Austria , involving suckler cows .
Unfortunately , this good idea did not reappear in your proposals .
I would ask you and urge you to propose such things when they serve a useful purpose .
Our farmers are facing the collapse of what was formerly a functional market .
They have nothing but criticism for politicians .
I therefore ask you , Commissioner , to join with the Council and with us in seeking for a just solution to alleviate their plight .
Everybody has to play his due part in restoring the equilibrium between supply and demand .
What generally happens is that many of Parliament 's proposals are turned down flat by the Commission .
Well , never mind who has the better suggestions , Commissioner , what we need is the success !
We need an answer to the present crisis !
I don 't insist that my ideas are better - if yours are better , then I congratulate you on them - you make the proposals , as long as they are the right proposals !
That is what matters .
Everyone is affected - the farmers who have suffered losses , the butchery trade , the consumers who have lost confidence , the workers in the beef industry .
It is already apparent that political failures , omitted checking procedures and technical miscalculations are responsible for the disaster in the beef and veal market .
And more likely that not the farmers are the victims and not the perpetrators .
That is the critical point , and that must be taken into account in the financial proposals .
I call on Parliament as a matter of urgency to agree with my proposal .
The events of yesterday evening in the United Kingdom are another good reason why this report should receive our unconditional support .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , I want to thank Mr Funk for a report which was well prepared at very short notice .
It is a comfort to the farmers of the European Union that within Parliament there are voices that are sympathetic and well-informed .
I also want to thank the Commissioner for the leadership he has given in this most serious crisis and for the competence and skill he has demonstrated .
Open-ended demands for compensation to European farmers are not realistic in the light of the present budgetary constraints .
In the current year and next year the European Commission is proposing to spend a total of more than ECU 3 billion in support for beef farmers in this crisis .
We have to acknowledge that farmers will lose a further ECU 3 billion annually .
In the country I represent - Ireland - farmers who are highly dependent will lose at least a further ECU 300m off their incomes , in spite of these measures .
So there is no possibility that all these losses can be paid for out of the current budget of the European Union .
It is a bit difficult to present and debate a measure before the House without acknowledgment of what the cost might be and some idea of where it ought to come from .
It is the business of a parliament to ensure the resources are made available .
It is the opinion of the Committee on Budgets that these measures are to be welcomed but have to be financed through the resources that are available in the current draft budget .
Having looked at the out-turn in the budget for the last three years , and particularly in this year , when we have already provided ECU 1.6 billion to meet this crisis and when the Commission is still forecasting that a further ECU 460m will be available at the end of the year , I personally believe that the resources are available within the current budget to provide the ECU 1.33b which the Commission is proposing to spend on this measure , that it is not necessary to upset all the agreements that we made with the other sectors in the course of the reorganization of the common agricultural policy , and that the money can be found .
If the money cannot be found , we believe that a supplementary budget can be introduced at the end of the year to reintroduce the ECU 1 , 000m which the Council took away , and that the solution can at least be contained within the present preliminary draft budget .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that all of us , in this House and elsewhere , are fully familiar with the difficult situation currently prevailing in the beef and veal sector .
Since the start of the BSE crisis this year , consumption has fallen by 20 to 30 % in some Member States , and prices have followed suit . In two Member States , prices now stand at 63 % of the intervention price , in other words very close to the safety net .
Unfortunately , there are few indications of any improvement in this situation in the immediate future .
BSE is going to remain in the public eye , so that consumption will not return to its former levels in the foreseeable future .
At this particular time of year , the autumn , substantial numbers of beef cattle are going to come onto the market , and the necessary level of demand simply does not exist .
Intervention , as you know , is limited to 400 , 000 tonnes , a figure that we shall reach very shortly .
In these circumstances , all those who say that urgent action is needed are right .
But our general objective must be to ease the strain on the market and cut back production to a marketable level as quickly as we possibly can .
Because this House has accepted the urgency procedure only for the part of the package concerning beef and veal while rejecting it for the proposal on arable crops , which represents the basis for financing , the Council finds itself in a somewhat tricky situation : where although it is in a position to adopt measures to reduce meat production it is , on the other hand , in no position to pay for them .
Given this situation , it is apparent that the action taken can only be limited , both in terms of time and as regards its effects .
It will not really be possible to get to grips with the problem as a whole until you have given your verdict on the complete package .
This makes it all the more remarkable that , over and above the Commission 's proposal , the proposed amendments include yet more expenditure amounting to several hundred million ECUs .
The remainder of my remarks will be confined to the beef proposal and your request for amendments .
First , I should like to make it clear once again that the proposals before you are conceived only as stop-gap measures and not a definitive solution to the whole problem .
The BSE crisis as such has to be seen in the overall context of the beef and veal market , which - as I clearly stated within this House and to the Council at the beginning of this year - was already confronting a difficult situation .
The primary purpose , then , of the measures planned for the medium term is to create the necessary room for manoeuvre to enable us , at some stage , to reduce the intervention stocks again .
The key proposals to cut beef and veal production are a slaughter programme for calves and the introduction of intervention for feeders and young male animals .
I admit that the proposal on the slaughtering of calves is very contentious , but it is a relatively easy measure to implement , as can be seen in the United Kingdom and Portugal .
It is also the cheapest way of cutting back production , because it takes effect at the earliest point in the production cycle , and in my view , bearing in mind this exceptionally difficult situation , it can be put across successfully to the concerned consumer .
In addition to this , Mr Funk , our proposals do indeed include an early slaughter programme for suckling calves .
Another alternative which I noted in your proposed amendments was to reduce the suckler cow premium instead of slaughtering calves , but in my view this is not a feasible alternative .
Its effect , after all , would be to prompt the farmers to slaughter their suckler cows now .
And there are many reasons why , at this moment in time , that is not a good idea .
First , this slaughtering of additional cows at the present time would not reduce the supply of beef but would actually further increase it ; secondly , the reduction of suckler cow premium entitlements and the number of suckler cows would prejudge questions relating to the future arrangements for beef and veal .
I believe , then , that we would do better to judge this question in the long-term context .
Thirdly , a substantial cut - and we must always bear in mind that in the case of suckler cows , unlike male animals , we are dealing with individually assigned rights - would probably mean that we would finish up by having to implement a scheme to buy up those rights .
We know , however , that at present one million of these rights are not being used , in other words we would have to buy up a million rights without producing any effect at all by doing so .
If we reduce the suckler cow quotas , anyway , would we not also have to reduce the milk quotas , because the suckler cows probably account for the great majority of calves suitable for fattening ?
In summary , my conviction is that we must concern ourselves with the calves at this stage and not bother so much about the cows .
However , I am grateful for your support for my proposal that young male animals should be included in the intervention , and for your suggestions regarding age and weight in this connection .
I believe it is worth while to give consideration to this alternative .
In any case , I am currently having this question looked at by my experts .
Alongside the calf slaughter programme and the intervention for young animals , I have also proposed reducing the national quotas for the granting of the special premium .
As I see it , this should actually be acceptable to every Member State , because fewer premiums are going to be claimed in the near future as a result of the calf slaughter programme and because we selected the highest level of premium applications to date as the starting point for our proposal .
Each Member State starts on the basis of the applications recorded for 1995 , and is required to accept a 5 % reduction .
However , in this calculation , only half of the increase in applications over the number agreed in 1992 is taken into account .
I am aware that this measure is the subject of strong criticism , especially in those Member States which , in the past , to a large or very large extent , have claimed the arable premiums for silo corn land as compensation instead of the bullock premium .
However , I believe that a review clause would make it possible to take due account of this problem after a certain period .
Finally , in order to strengthen the measures for reducing production , I propose that the stock density for the granting of the extensification premium should be reduced somewhat .
To balance this , however , the extensification premium should be raised accordingly for those farmers who are prepared to manage with a stocking density below one large animal unit per hectare .
As regards the immediate future , we are going to have to raise the intervention stocks .
There is no way round it .
I do agree , however , with those who say that intervention must be as brief as possible .
It is and will remain a shortterm measure .
So the proposed increase will remain in force only until the other measures take effect .
I do wonder , though , whether the proposed period of 14 months - and stocks are to be increased only during that period - is too long a period .
Or are we not being too ambitious , as it is , to hope to return to the normal production levels within a year ?
When you also call for a reduction in the intervention weights , that has my full support in principle , though I believe we will realistically have to implement it in stages rather than all at once .
I have also been asked to comment briefly on what the Commission allegedly decided on Wednesday , and what the British government decided yesterday .
I am bound to say that all I know about this is the British government 's press release .
Let me make two things completely clear . Firstly , the Commission naturally reaches its decision on the basis of the conclusions of the Florence Summit .
Secondly , the Commission , at its latest meeting , merely took formal note of a report by me on the latest Council meeting .
I informed the Commission that I had told the Council exactly the same thing - that we would stand by Florence , and that furthermore I had already done , more than a week earlier , what I always do when we receive a new study - I passed on both studies to the multidisciplinary committee and the scientific veterinary committee , in other words both the study relating to the possibility of transmission of BSE from cows to calves , and the so-called Oxford Study about which we have heard more and more since then .
No decisions could be taken regarding any modifications , or anything of that kind , because no one in the Commission asked for any .
That , I believe , makes the position clear .
The Florence conclusions are as follows : first , the preliminary conditions must be satisfied , one of which is an additional cull programme .
Secondly , once the preliminary conditions are satisfied , the intention is to proceed stage by stage with the lifting of the export ban , the procedure first requiring the British government to submit a working document to the Commission .
The Commission will then pass this working document on to the two scientific committees .
If a positive recommendation is obtained from those committees , the normal decision procedure provided for in this case will be instituted .
I know that my package of proposals designed to remedy the problems in the beef market is the subject of controversy .
On the other hand , I imagine it is clear to every professional in the field that , in a crisis on this scale , it is a matter of simple logic that conflicting interests will necessarily result in a heated debate .
In addition , in this instance , the initial positions as between the various Member States could not be more different .
But one thing , I believe , is true for all of them - help given quickly is always the most effective kind .
I therefore ask you to give your opinion on the complete package as soon as possible .
Madam President , in view of the fact that I asked for the statement earlier on the latest news from the British Government , I have a question for Commissioner Fischler .
His proposals , on which Mr Funk 's report is based , are posited on the information that there would be an additional cull in the United Kingdom of 147 , 000 cattle which , we understand , has now been suspended .
If that is the case , what are the implications for the proposals which have been discussed here this morning in Mr Funk 's report ?
Madam President , Mrs Green , I should like to make it quite clear that the Florence conclusions relate to preliminary conditions which have to be satisfied before the gradual lifting of the export ban on the United Kingdom can be initiated .
The package which is under discussion today is not a result of the Florence conclusions but is designed to overcome the beef crisis , over and above that package on which agreement was also reached in Florence .
At that time , it was recommended that ECU 850 million should be allocated as direct income support for farmers .
That was recommended in Florence , but the measures at issue today concern all fifteen Member States , and in fact have no direct connection with the question of future steps to lift the export ban .
I believe we should make a distinction between these two things .
Commissioner , my question is fairly straightforward and I hope the answer will be too .
Are the decisions taken yesterday by the Government in London consistent with what was decided by the Commission ?
Madam President , Mr Martens , in my opinion the matter is absolutely clear .
What the British government decided yesterday relates to the further procedure in the United Kingdom .
That , if you like , is a British problem .
But if the preliminary conditions agreed in Florence are not satisfied , then the export ban will not be lifted .
The question which the British government has to address is what it is trying to achieve .
Until such time as it satisfies the preliminary conditions , and until such time as we receive a working document which we can examine , there cannot logically be any talk of lifting the export ban .
This has nothing to do with the question of whether we need , for example , a new regulation on intervention , where the 400 , 000 tonne limit will be exceeded in the course of the coming month .
Otherwise the beef and veal market will collapse throughout Europe .
That is the way I see it .
Madam President , as the spokesman on agriculture for the largest political group in the House , I have to confess that I am unable to vote seriously and rationally on the amendments .
I do not know , Mr Funk , who should be most concerned , you or I.
Ladies and gentlemen , you should in fact be aware that what we are doing today is not just opening the way for short-term intervention for beef and veal , to avoid the so-called safety net ; what we are seeing here is a farreaching reform of the regulation on the COM in beef and veal in Europe .
No great shakes at only ECU 1.4 m in 1997 but , worryingly , opening the door to reform of the CAP .
What , Commissioner , happened to those good intentions of involving Parliament from the outset in fundamental agricultural reforms ?
I had thought that the strategy of reflection documents , that began with wine and fruit and vegetables , was a permanent decision .
Months and months to discuss those issues .
In the case of beef and veal - no less complex an issue - we got the documents on 5 September and today , 20 September , there are about a hundred of us here , on a Friday , to carry out the reform .
It is a like a daydream , particularly in the wake of last night 's decisions which , in my view , Commissioner , objectively speaking , will again call this proposal into question because of the repercussions on the market .
But just to be clear as to where responsibility lies , urgency for short-term intervention could have been requested via a proposal simply amending Article 6 of Regulation 805 / 68 .
That is what the Council should have done , after our vote of barely two weeks ago , when we clearly rejected urgency generally .
Why re-present the whole package now , as if nothing had happened , instead of opting for the only reasonable course ?
In relation to Parliament too - I venture to say - the decision to divide up urgency in the same way as a rotten apple is cut in two , offering us the good half , that is spending , actually increasing it as stated in the Funk report , and returning the bad half to the sender , that is revenue involving cuts for cereal farmers , does not seem to me a particularly edifying prospect .
Are we the same Parliament that wants to contain agricultural spending in the 1997 budget ?
If urgency there is then I believe it concerns the use and distribution of resources in the agricultural chapter , but Mr Funk took the easy option of silence and referral , after having actually proposed to us an increase in resources .
I do not believe that we can pretend nothing has happened , particularly not after last night 's government decision .
Oh yes , Commissioner , because it does not seem to me to be acceptable that Switzerland should be setting the example for Europe .
Give us the bare minimum of conditions necessary to lend you a hand , and rest assured that our group is with you .
Madam President , our Group would firstly like to congratulate Mr Funk on his excellent report , which he produced in record time .
We fully support its contents . However , in addition , our Group would like to express its disagreement with the Commission 's strategy on this subject .
It is unacceptable that , in dealing with a major crisis in the beef and veal sector , we should be presented with a package of proposals in which , simultaneously , there is amendment of the rules concerning support for producers of herbaceous crops and relating to improvements in efficacy of agrarian structures , linking the three sectors in budgetary terms and requiring financial sacrifice in some in order to support others .
In the opinion of our Group , this technique is to be condemned because it involves the combination of urgent actions with reforms requiring lengthy consideration .
It involves an attempt to force the will of this House , obliging it to accept the unacceptable on pain of rejecting the necessary .
But it is also obvious that there were necessary elements in this reform which justified our Group 's position : accepting urgency in the case of one sector requiring solutions and rejecting it in others because , in budgetary terms , there is a margin which makes it possible to deal with the more urgent reforms and , in budgetary terms , it is possible , with a degree of imagination , to cover this House 's proposals .
We fully support Mr Funk 's proposals .
However , there are delegations within our Group who do not understand the reason for the opposition to the Commission 's proposal regarding the conditions for a reduction in intensive methods and improving premiums when the density factor is diminishing because , in the context of a crisis in the sector caused by disease , like the one we are currently experiencing , it is difficult for some national delegations to understand opposition to such a reduction and the natural feeding of livestock .
Lastly , the Commission has based its modification of the regional ceilings of premiums for calves on a dubious criterion , having very different degrees of coverage for countries with regard to actual culls which , in some cases , involve prejudicing the agreements acquired in the price package .
First of all my compliments too to Mr Funk for the speed at which he has completed his work .
Yesterday evening 's unilateral decision by Britain is reprehensible , primarily because it is unilateral .
And after hearing what Mr Fischler had to say I can only endorse the Commission 's position that we must stick to what was agreed in Florence .
I also agree with Mr Fischler that it is essential in the short term to provide for an increase in intervention stocks .
I can see no other alternative at this stage .
Other measures are needed too .
As far as these are concerned , I find the Commission 's proposals rather too one-sided .
They are too one-sided because they concentrate too much on extensification .
If we look at the position in Europe , there are some 20 million dairy cows and some 10 million beef cattle .
Meat production from the dairy sector is steadily declining .
Cows are producing more and more milk .
So the production of the beef cattle sector is steadily increasing .
I thus think that premiums for all these sectors should be reduced , including the premiums for suckler cows .
Lastly , the calves sector remains virtually unaffected .
I think it would be a good thing to reduce the carcase weight of calves by a given percentage for all countries of the European Union .
That may mean a significant flow from meat and dairy to calves and is far more attractive than killing calves at a young age .
My last point is not part of the proposal .
We think the Commission should come up with proposals for quality marks for beef in all the European countries as rapidly as possible .
We have to have a European quality mark .
And my very last point , we consider it a bad idea to take the funding for all this from the arable farming sector .
One sector must not pay the costs of another .
Madam President , I would like to start with a point of order , and I would ask you not to count the time against me .
After all , you did say to me earlier that I would have an opportunity to put a point of order now , and I would like to ask why it is , when we put questions to the Commissioner , that the larger groups have a prior claim to the floor .
I enjoy listening to Mrs Green , I even enjoy listening to her twice , and I enjoy listening to Mr Martens too - all their questions were very sensible - but are the other groups not to be allowed to ask any questions ?
Why do you pass over the other groups and deal only with the large ones ?
This is not an acceptable approach according to the Rules of Procedure !
So , please , when I ask for the floor to make a point of order , do treat that as a priority - our Rules of Procedure say that you must accede to such requests .
I believe this procedure is wrong .
I don 't known how you can justify it .
Now you can start the clock , because I am going to talk about the matter in hand .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , I am sure you realize that we are confronting a completely unexpected situation because of what happened yesterday evening .
A request was made for that matter to be added to the agenda .
As a result of Mrs Green 's intervention , we included it in the debate on Mr Funk 's report , and that was why we gave the floor to Commissioner Fischler .
I admit that all this was a little bit out of the ordinary , but , I say again , current events had made it essential .
Furthermore , at one point , Mr Jacob asked me for the floor - he will confirm that - and I didn 't give it to him because I was conscious of the fact that it was not right to refuse priority to speakers who had put their names down .
As you yourself , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , had your name down and were to have an opportunity to speak a few minutes later , I felt that it might not be necessary to give you the floor and then give it back to you ten minutes later , while other speakers who had also put their names down in the usual way were still waiting .
That was my reasoning , on the understanding that once we had finished the debate and Commissioner Fischler had had another chance to speak , then other Members would be able to do so including , obviously , the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I have been doing my best to deal with a quite unusual and unexpected situation , and now , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , I can give you the floor on behalf of your group .
Madam President , I respect your thinking , but I believe it to be wrong .
In such an unusual situation , it is customary for all groups to have the opportunity to put questions on it .
That is what has always happened before , and it is what should have happened this time .
But I shall leave it at that .
I take note of your explanation , and I shall now do as you have suggested and say what I have to say .
Commissioner Fischler , you said that the measures adopted by the British government would be that government 's responsibility .
But the result - as you are aware - will be a further increase in that loss of confidence which is also costing the other farmers in the European Union money .
It follows that the measures adopted by the British government are likely to cost money to people who actually have nothing whatever to do with them .
As for Mr Funk 's report , we welcome it and we largely support it .
We , too , are concerned with slaughtering cattle and restoring confidence in the market .
The only way we can do that is to make sure , in actual practice , that the consumer does start buying meat again .
And that in turn makes it necessary for our amendment to be adopted , in which we say that this premium should be paid only on meat which can be guaranteed and proven to originate from BSE-free stocks .
The same must apply to intervention , which is now to be preferentially based on weight : there must be proof that the stocks concerned are not BSEinfected , to ensure that , in a year or two , we are not going to bring this meat onto the market again and once again undermine consumer confidence , and so the market itself .
Commissioner Fischler , the elimination of calves is right , but not in the form of the ' King Herod ' premium .
Calves slaughtered must first have been able to put on meat , and that meat must then be put on the market .
This is highquality meat , and it must be supported to ensure that it doesn 't become more expensive than beef .
This would make it possible to clear the market , but not in the way you propose , by removing the meat from consumption .
Moreover , and this is my last point , the special premiums must also be subject to a limit of 90 animals , so that we have a staggered effect .
This is another motion from our group : as with the normal premiums , special premiums must not be paid on all stocks but only on the first 90 animals .
Madam President , I have never seen as many cattle in the fields as I have in this late summer of 1996 !
What is going to happen to the farmers , who are losing between 100 and 300 ECUs per head in this depressed market , when prices are going to fall everywhere in a sector of production where incomes are the lowest in agriculture ?
We share the view expressed in the Funk report , that the Commission 's proposals on supporting the market should be supplemented , and we share the view that this crisis is going to last .
But the report does not go far enough towards avoiding the bankruptcy of farms where stock farming is the essential source of income , which are likely to disappear from the less favoured regions .
This cattle crisis must spur us to expedite radical mediumterm reforms , with regard to two fundamental points .
First , changing the premium structure to provide more assistance to farmers raising grass-fed cattle , who are producing quality meat and helping to preserve fields and landscapes , especially in the mountain regions .
Secondly , relieving the burden on the markets without an excessive increase in intervention meat , by encouraging the early slaughter of calves , reducing premiums for intensive farming and granting additional aid to specialized farmers , because otherwise there will be a risk of a further decline in grassland in favour of arable land , which will then have to be aided or set aside .
The Commission is involving us in a vicious circle from which it will be very difficult to escape .
The additional cost announced will be higher than expected .
The minor economic measures envisaged by the Commission will not be enough .
It is necessary to have the political courage to realize this now , and to adopt the necessary budget lines to provide direct support to the farmers who are at risk .
In this context , the decisions of the British government are clearly catastrophic .
Madam President , in a manner of speaking Mr Funk has attempted the impossible , although our ideas are not the same because our particular interests differ .
At a time when incomes for all those involved in the beef and veal industry have been collapsing , is this really the time to repay ECU 9 , 200 million to the Member States out of the 1995 budget surplus and to reduce the preliminary draft budget for 1997 by ECU 2 , 750 million ?
We all know that these political decisions have one object only : to enable the Member States to meet the necessary criteria to join in the single currency , and more specifically to reduce the so-called ' excessive ' budgetary deficits of certain Member States .
And what proposal is being made for dealing with this crisis ?
Quite simply , internal transfer of part of the cereals budget , together with a change in the payment date for the oil seed premiums , so as to perform some budgetary sleight of hand without , of course , any guarantee of a prolongation of the budget or the EAGGF .
Mr Chirac and Mr Kohl even acknowledged , at their last meeting , that no sector of industry had suffered the kind of damage we are experiencing today .
Rather than fighting to defend the suckler-cow premium or the intervention level , I am going to propose on behalf of my group , together with other Members , three compromise amendments which will enable the premiums to be adjusted to take account of the realities of regional beef production .
I hope these amendments will receive the support of a majority , because European stock farming as a whole needs us to find swift and effective solutions .
Madam President , we are witnessing a cataclysm in both economic and human terms .
In France , we have seen farmers from Charroux , in the Vienne , setting out on foot to drive their cattle up to Paris as if they were going to see the king , because if the king knew he would not allow it !
We have seen peasants gathering in their thousands at Clermont-Ferrand ....
And your way of reacting to this cataclysm , instead of giving it careful thought , instead of putting all your cards on the table , is to get bogged down in a wretched technical debate .
We talked to you about financial responsibility and your answer is , ' budgetary austerity ' !
But , in actual fact , since the farmers are the victims here - their hands are clean , as the lawyers say , a fundamental principle in compensation for damage - we , as normal people , were talking about responsibility , responsibility which ensures that in environmental law the polluter pays : we say that the industrial poisoners should foot this bill , and when I say that I am thinking about the Mulder brothers .
You tell us : ' No , solidarity , not responsibility ! '
We thought you were talking about national and European solidarity .
Not a bit of it !
You are talking about ' solidarity between professions ' - you are stripping the cereal growers to clothe the stock breeders , and pretty miserably at that .
It starts with technicalities : ECU 1 , 300 million in compensation , reduce the set-aside premium , cut the suckler cow premium by 5 % , give preference to bullocks over grass-fed animals , fail to reach the guideline , quibble , hurl money to the ends of the earth , to Nicaragua , to Papua New Guinea , but nothing for our farmers !
Really , you are just perverse .
We know well enough what you are aiming at : Singapore is in preparation , the major 1999 negotiations are in preparation , and you are preparing to challenge the great 1992 agreement on the CAP .
Little by little , you are preparing to accept that the set-aside premium has to go , etc .
To put it another way , your are like those immigrants in early nineteenth century France who had learnt nothing , understood nothing .
You will not understand that your crazy agricultural policy is what created this situation .
Barthet-Mayer was telling you you have to follow a different line - labels , national traceability , knowing where the products come from - in a word , you would have to question your own policy .
Not a bit of it !
We attend the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry , and we shall find that over the last five years you have understood nothing , known nothing and this institutional crisis will not be resolved .
Commissioner , this ill wind has to blow somebody good , this tragedy has to achieve something !
Apparently that is not going to happen , and that is a sad thing for us all !
Commissioner , you are absolutely hopeless !
Madam President , the Commissioner has made three proposals .
This morning we are dealing only with the first , a proposal to improve the intervention access , changes to the various premium schemes and other changes in the beef sector .
We have refused urgent treatment for the other two proposals .
I welcome Parliament 's decision not to consider the Commission 's proposal to cut aid to cereal farmers .
The proposal was ill-conceived and can only destroy confidence in the whole farming industry .
In the CAP reform farmers were forced to swap guaranteed prices for income aids and much reduced guarantees .
They were promised over and over again that the income aids were permanent and would be fully financed .
Now the Commission has proposed a substantial cut in compensation payments to the cereal sectors .
Farmers cannot accept being treated in this way . The promises made must be kept .
If the Commission succeeds in cutting aid to cereal farmers it may later try the same action in other sectors .
I do not agree with all the details in the proposals before Parliament this morning .
However , the important decision is for Parliament to establish its position and thus let the agriculture Council bring in urgently needed changes .
Here I am referring especially to the increases allowed in intervention quantities for 1996 / 97 .
These changes are needed immediately , otherwise there will be a further collapse in the market for beef .
Commissioner , I know you are doing your very best in a very difficult position , but your remarks about the British Government decision yesterday are far too charitable .
In fact , they are almost - I would respectfully suggest - weak .
They ignore the damage and destruction caused to the beef industry in neighbouring Member States .
I am thinking particularly of my own country , Ireland .
I ask the Commission once again to consider , on another issue , an application to the WTO , or GATT , to have our beef export quotas increased .
I have already asked this and you have not seen fit to deliver .
We have not been able to fill our quota this year because of the BSE crisis .
Therefore , we should look for some flexibility on export quotas .
Our traditional exports are gradually being reopened for beef for most Member States .
I believe it is important to make the best possible use of these opportunities .
Finally , it is very important that we introduce a promotional scheme right away to try and stimulate the consumption of beef .
We have not taken that issue to hand satisfactorily .
Madam President , I represent the United Kingdom 's cattle heartland , Somerset and North Devon .
We have some of the finest dairy and beef herds but we also know everything about BSE , which has hit us more than other areas .
Many in my constituency saw our Prime Minister 's return from Florence in the same light as they saw Mr Chamberlain 's return from Munich half a century ago .
Not peace in our time , but beef in our time .
Now it is very clear that John Major is playing for time .
To me one of the first rules in politics is , if you are in a hole , stop digging .
Our Prime Minister seems to be suffering from mad mole disease .
We hope to see progress in this area .
It will not be achieved by the attitude of our Agriculture Minister on Monday and Tuesday at the Commission , like a bull in a china shop .
It may be achieved by the attitude of the wiser counsels of Sir Leon Brittan in his discussions with the Commissioner .
I welcome the Commissioner 's agreement to review the scientific evidence , the new evidence that has come forward , and if need be to look again at the Florence Agreement .
I believe that any unilateral decision by the British Government would be a breach of that agreement and a breach of trust .
I deplore any attempt by the British Conservative Party to restart the beef war in order to gain narrow party political advantage .
The real question to Commissioner Fischler is this .
Will a decision by the British Government to delay the cull affect the compensation that would be paid to British farmers under the schemes agreed at Florence ? .
That is the question to which I would appreciate an answer this morning .
I salute , as I know the Commissioner does , the Swiss Government 's decision announced earlier this week to cull one-eighth of their herd , despite the fact that they have had only 290 cases of BSE .
In Britain we have had 160 , 000 cases and we should have got on top of the matter more quickly .
Now that the problem is recognized we need to do everything we can in conjunction with our neighbours on the continent to sort this matter out once and for all .
( Applause )
Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Funk for his report which we will be supporting this morning .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for the remarks that he has made this morning because we are facing a very grave crisis in the beef sector .
I would like to concentrate on what has already been said regarding the culling policy this morning .
As far as I understand it - I do not know if anybody here is fully aware of all the facts of the British Government decision at the present time - the policy is to be sharpened and refocused , to take out the required number of cattle that will most effectively get rid of BSE as quickly as possible , thus restoring the confidence that is required , not only in Britain but right across Europe .
The Florence agreement had a policy for an accelerated cull involving a wide spectrum of cattle that had to be taken out to satisfy public opinion .
What the British Government is now proposing is a very much sharper focus of that culling policy .
We can only take out 30 , 000 cattle a week .
We will continue to take out 30 , 000 cattle a week , and nothing over 30 months will be going into the food chain .
What is important - and this is where the new scientific evidence comes in , and why the government has taken the decision that it has - is that we make that cull the most effective cull possible .
It has to be sharply focused ; it has to actually take out the cattle that are most likely to have the disease .
If we just take a wide scattering of cattle off the market and out of the herds , it is not going to be an effective cull .
I am surprised to hear Mrs Green saying what she has said in the House this morning because her own Labour Party spokesman in the House of Commons is agreeing entirely with the government policy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have followed the debate here with the closest attention . To be completely clear about what the actual issue is , I would like to emphasize once again what actually happens if , as it were , nothing happens .
In essence , and in terms of urgency , the problem is that when we get into a situation where we have reached the existing upper limits for intervention and cannot intervene any further , the only thing left to apply is the safety net .
In two Member States , this would result in a price cut of about 3 % , but in all Member States it would attain an order of magnitude of from 10 % to 15 % , which I trust is something no one in the European Union would want .
So it is absolutely essential to make the necessary arrangements to ensure that at least this channel is open .
Logically , the additional proposals we are making here are directly linked to that , because each of us here wants to limit intervention .
How can I keep intervention low unless I immediately stop the fattening of young animals ?
Otherwise the automatic result would be a lengthy period of intervention .
The next point at issue is one I made at the outset .
If , which is the automatic consequence , we are now going to get intervention stocks amounting to an order of magnitude of a million tonnes , this is no trivial matter .
We are going to have to think now about what we can do to get these quantities out of the intervention stocks .
All of this combined is still a long way from suggesting a long-term solution .
In the long term , I agree , we are going to have to come back to the beef and veal market in connection with the debate on the reform of the milk market and in addition to that we are of course , as a first step , also going to have to introduce a better labelling system and , associated with that , appropriate promotion of European meat .
A proposal to that effect is nearing completion , but it makes little sense to promote European meat now when , at the same time , we are discussing every conceivable thing leading to a situation where the consumer does not actually get the impression that European meat is particularly safe .
If this is going on at the same time , we do run the risk that any form of promotion will be counter-productive .
This is another thing we need to be clear about .
Finally , let me emphasize once again : we must abide by Florence , and nothing else !
Madam President , I think this is the right moment to make a remark .
The Committee on Budgets gave an opinion on the Funk report on Tuesday evening .
Mr McCartin , as the draftsman of that opinion , has already referred to it .
After the event , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has tabled a total of six amendments to the Funk report .
The effect of those six amendments will be that the total expenditure of ECU 1 , 381 million proposed by the Commission will be increased by nearly ECU 600 million .
These amendments were at no time the subject of discussion in the opinion prepared by the Committee on Budgets for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I should therefore like to point out that , in these circumstances , it is in my opinion impossible for a decision to be taken today , Friday , on the Funk report . In view of the increased volume of expenditure , no proposal for covering which has ever been discussed , there must be further consultations .
With the agreement of my group , therefore , I must ask that Mr Funk 's report be referred back to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to provide an opportunity for the appropriate consultations .
Thank you , Mr Samland .
Your group is therefore asking for the report to be referred back to committee .
Before we vote on that , it is possible for someone to speak in favour of it and someone to speak against it .
Who would like to speak in favour of referral ?
Mr Fantuzzi .
Madam President , for the reasons I explained earlier , I believe that what we have here amounts to far more than urgent intervention .
Urgency could have been requested in a completely different way from that used by the Council and , above all , in the light of last night 's decisions , I believe that there will be substantial amendments to this proposal when discussed by the Council .
In my view , there is no reason to decide today upon a package which , among other things , needs to be assessed as a whole from a structural point of view .
Thank you , Mr Fantuzzi .
Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert would like to speak against the request .
I should like to suggest that we should take this vote today .
After all , it is not fault of agriculture that it is facing this crisis .
Anyone who , at this stage , still has the nerve to put things off can hardly complain if the farmers come and tip all their beef in his front garden .
So I favour voting .
I shall now put the request for referral to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request for referral back to committee )
Madam President , our group voted against the request , because we did not think the argument in favour of it made sense . The increases in expenditure which have just been added on here are not right .
Intervention is reduced as a result .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , we reserve the right to ask the Commission , after the vote , whether it is accepting Parliament 's amendments .
If Parliament 's amendments are not , in essence , being accepted , we shall call for referral back to committee , so that we can negotiate with the Commission ; because this is the more important point as far as we are concerned .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
On Amendment No 22 :
Madam President , the Green Group 's Amendment No 22 is identical , apart from two points , with the Agriculture Committee 's Amendment No 16 .
The two points are the addition ' It shall come from BSE-free stocks , if there is a special premium ' , and the second addition that this premium is also limited to 90 animals .
I would ask the rapporteur whether , if we take that as an addition , we can then include it ?
There is a big difference : ' from BSE-free meat ' , I can agree with that , but not with ' BSE-free stocks ' .
If a farmer 's herd gets BSE and it is not his fault , then he is excluded from any subsidy .
The man is ruined .
If I say ' BSE-free stocks ' , then there must never be a BSE-infected animal in his herd , but when you say ' BSE-free meat ' - I agree to these amendments of yours , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , in other words ' BSEfree meat may only be the subject of intervention ' , etc. but when you say that a farmer is no longer to receive a premium if he has had anything whatever to do with BSE , then the man is ruined and it may not even be his fault .
From what I hear from the Committee of Inquiry , there is so much going wrong with this whole business , Commissioner , that I can no longer tell a farmer what may happen to him if he is entirely blameless .
Before the final vote :
Madam President , before the vote on the legislative resolution , I should like to ask the Commissioner , on behalf of our group , to tell us his position regarding which amendments he will accept , so that we can then ask for referral to committee if necessary .
I did in fact announce this earlier .
The rapporteur can ask the Commission to make an additional statement on any accepted amendment , and he may propose to delay voting on a draft legislative resolution .
However , this cannot be done by any group or by any individual Member .
I must now ask the rapporteur his position on this .
Madam President , I ask for the vote on the report to take place .
The Commissioner told us earlier what he can accept and what he cannot accept .
The report has been approved and can no longer be referred back to committee .
We have agreed on this .
We have also agreed on the resolutions , and the Commissioner has told us what he is accepting and what he is not accepting .
I therefore ask that the final vote should be taken now , and that it should be a roll call vote !
Madam President , that is correct , according to the Rules of Procedure I cannot ask the Commissioner unless I am the rapporteur .
But I can ask on behalf of the Green Group for the report to be referred back to committee , and I now do so .
That again is no longer possible - that can only be done once in the course of the procedure , and the request was made earlier .
So this possibility no longer exists .
Madam President , our group voted against the report although we agree in principle that what really matters is to encourage marketing and not intervention .
Essentially , this has also been decided now , but the Commissioner has not expressed an opinion on it .
This means that the content of the votes need not be adopted by the Council .
It can be assumed from this that what Parliament has now contributed in the way of progressive thinking is not being taken up .
In addition , neither of the two amendments tabled by the Greens has been accepted , to the effect that both in the case of intervention and in the case of the early premium there must be a guarantee that this meat coming onto the market , or be used for intervention , comes from BSE-free stocks .
I regard this as a major omission .
On the one hand we are involved in a committee of inquiry to examine the possible errors by the Commission in dealing with BSE , yet on the other hand we are putting ourselves at fault by not ensuring that this meat comes from BSEfree stocks .
In addition , the amendment to the effect that the early marketing premium should also be limited to 90 animals has not been accepted .
This is important to ensure that , rather than the whole of mass production being involved in this premium , it should reflect a preference for production on smaller farms where animals are kept under the right conditions for their species .
That was why we felt compelled to reject this report .
We abstained from voting on all of the paragraphs partly because we consider that the EU 's entire agricultural policy is ineffective and wasteful and partly because we do not wish to contribute to the introduction of a new form of support , the financing of which is moreover uncertain .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I should be glad to know how the agenda for the rest of this morning looks .
I have just spoken to the sessional services and it seems that the debate on bioethics will not now be taking place .
I think that is a very poor state of affairs .
Why ?
Because the ministers are going to be talking about this very shortly and I should like to be sure , and this was the only reason for having this debate , that they can take on board the decisions which Parliament will have reached .
So I am asking if you see any possibility of bringing this debate on bioethics forward .
Because I think it is very important .
Madam President , this is exactly the same point of order .
It seems that at the beginning of the week there was a great deal of concern that we speak about this issue and we have been going at a snail 's pace today .
I wonder if we could move it up the agenda in some way .
I have already arranged for my car to leave later to go to Frankfurt airport , but I do not want to be leaving here at 3 o 'clock because I will not catch my flight .
Madam President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I oppose this request .
This debate is taking place under extremely dubious conditions , as I had occasion to say on Monday .
The vote will not mean very much , and I shall have an opportunity to say so shortly .
Under these conditions , I can see no reason to give preference to such a debate .
The debate is in fact on the agenda .
All we are considering now is a request to move forward items 361 and 362 on the agenda .
Is that correct , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ?
Yes , Madam President , first of all I would remind Mr Cot that he must respect the wishes of the House .
If the House voted last Monday to hold this debate today , then we must abide by that vote .
Secondly , Mr Cot says that he is speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group , but I have a few doubts on that score because I have the feeling , from other speakers in the Chamber too , that Mr Cot 's views are not shared by the whole of the Socialist Group .
Madam President , I ask you again to abide by the vote of this House and put a proposal to the House that this debate be held now , otherwise there is no point in it .
And Mr Cot can always say that he is not in favour .
Madam President , I am in agreement to the debate on bioethics taking place , but I would simply like to point out that I have a report on the agenda for which the Council has requested urgency , which was granted unanimously .
Consideration of the report will take five minutes and it is absolutely essential for a decision to be taken in order to avoid wastage in the EDICOM system .
So , if you like , you can move on to the bioethics debate , but please call my report after that .
Madam President , I must simply object to what Mrs Oomen-Ruijten said .
When I say I am speaking on behalf of my group , I am speaking on behalf of my group .
Madam President , the truth is that a good many Members of this House are involved in this matter .
I myself am one of them .
For example , I had the debate on a report in which I was to speak programmed for first thing this morning .
I am still here , waiting .
I do not agree with Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's proposal and would at any rate like to know whether the reports are going to be debated or not .
All of them , that is .
May we be told clearly what the order of debate is going to be for today ?
Madam President , in my opinion this whole reopening of the debate on bioethics constitutes an abuse of the Rules of Procedure .
The report on the subject which bears my name was voted back in July , and now it is being brought back to this House by means of a question .
To my mind , Mr Cot is quite right about this .
Madam President , a vote was taken in this House .
And I note , and this is a fact , and I say it again for the benefit of the honourable members of the Socialist Group , that a large majority of the House was in favour of holding this debate .
Now is the time to do it .
And I ask you to initiate the debate now .
You can propose it , Madam President .
We should support Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe is meeting next week , so it really is essential that we should vote on it this week , in other words as soon as possible .
I find it embarrassing enough that we have failed to adopt the Pelttari report in June , but it is even more shameful that such an important point , a point which really is a subject of heated public controversy in Europe , should be included as the final item on the agenda , so that it is possible that it will not be dealt with or completed at all .
So I will once again ask that we should make an immediate start , now , on the debate on the Bioethics Convention .
Well , we now have 9 more items on the agenda , and we have a request that the last of those items should be moved forward .
I will take a vote on that request .
( Parliament rejected the request )
So we will continue with the agenda as originally arranged .
Protection of calves
The next item is the report ( A4-0261 / 96 ) by Mr Rosado Fernandes on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 96 ) 0021 -C4-0133 / 96-96 / 0029 ( CNS ) ) amending Directive 91 / 629 / EEC laying down minimum standards for the protection of calves .
Madam President , I wish to situate my report against the background of events taking place in terms of beef .
This is an important report from a philosophical point of view , in that there are schools of thought and behaviour which can be detected by analysis of this problem .
It is obvious that I think that any effort to improve the living conditions of animals is laudable and , of course , I also know that any effort that does not trigger an even more serious crisis in the beef sector is also laudable .
The trouble is that it is difficult to reconcile the two .
However , I do think that everything that we are learning and hearing from the committees of inquiry on BSE , concerning the failure to implement proposals made by Parliament , common sense proposals , has led me to be very cautious .
I think that we would be dealing a death blow to the white veal meat sector if we brought forward the deadlines which the Commission set in its first Directive in 1991 , ignoring the investment channelled into this sector by veal farmers in recent years and not allowing them to pay off this investment - that would obviously do nothing but speed up the crisis .
Such a crisis could well be a huge one given that we have at stake here 840 000 tonnes of veal in the whole of Europe .
That refers to white veal . Only a small percentage is pink veal and the same would happen in this sector if the crisis were to be triggered ; 40 000 families occupied in this sector would be made bankrupt or unemployed .
There is no doubt that the powdered milk used so far in the pre-ruminant phase to feed animals will no longer be sold , and nor will whey be sold or used and , in fact , it will now be considered as a pollutant .
We all know that these measures take a certain amount of time to be applied .
We propose that there should be a bit of a breathing space so that farms can adapt to the new rules .
This has always been a Commission habit , to find the justification for certain quicker measures and to convene veterinary committees .
I have a lot of respect for science but , as people used to say in the Middle Ages , I am a friend of Plato but I am a better friend of Truth .
And the truth is that science itself is not always completely impartial .
Sometimes science gives in to pressures of a financial nature , especially when those scientists - and I have been one - are civil servants and that does not mean that they do not do a proper job .
The truth is that there have been contradictory reports in respect of the wellbeing of calves , in terms of haemoglobin levels , and in terms of the way in which calves are fed .
Of course , if I spoke simply about the way of housing animals this would be looking at the problem from just one small point of view and would not be of interest .
I have tried to get away from this kind of dialectic which I think is fallacious and believe that I have succeeded - especially since colleagues have made amendments which have very much enriched the Commission proposal .
I thank them for this , even when their opinion is not the same as mine .
This is , however , a social problem we are dealing with and one which might make the beef and veal situation in Europe even worse .
We all know that animals will have to be slaughtered at a more tender age than has been the case so far and I have no doubt whatsoever that one way of solving the question of the well-being of calves is to be able to slaughter them at an earlier age and at a smaller weight , so that they are better off and do not have to wait so long .
As for ' socialisation ' , I am partly in agreement ; taking an approach which I think is one of common sense I have accepted many amendments and am now willing to face the consequences of what I have written .
Madam President , consumption of veal has fallen steadily over the last ten years .
One plausible reason for this may be the debate on the conditions in which calves are raised in Europe .
The aware consumer of today does not only make a judgement on how the meat tastes or looks ; production methods and ethical aspects naturally also play a role .
If the confidence of consumers is to be regained effective and credible legislation is needed in the EU .
As the draftsman for the Environment Committee I propose a number of measures intended to improve the conditions in which calves are raised .
Calf pens must be designed to ensure that there is a dry area to lie down on .
In the legislation the dimensions of pens must be regulated in such a way that it is possible to check that the legislation is being observed .
Moreover , calves over eight weeks should be kept in large pens to foster their natural behaviour as herd animals .
My proposals on improved living conditions are aimed first and foremost at ensuring better animal care but also at giving consumers greater confidence in European veal .
As the EU 's only directly elected body the European Parliament naturally has a special responsibility .
Consumers ' demands for good food produced with due care for animals and the environment must be taken seriously .
The European Parliament 's stricter common minimum requirements for the raising of calves in Europe is an important step towards achieving this goal .
Madam President , I am afraid I have to take issue with our rapporteur when he appears to believe that it is more important to have white meat than to raise animals in the most humane way possible .
In fact , it is possible to provide white veal meat without these very cruel methods which have been the practice within the European Union , or certainly within some countries within the Union .
Thanks to one of our colleagues , Mr Sonneveld , I and two of my colleagues from Britain had the opportunity earlier this year of visiting a veal-raising unit in the Netherlands .
There we saw young animals being raised in pens , not in individual crates .
They were being fed on maize as well as milk , so that they were not anaemic , and we were assured that the resulting meat was top-quality white meat for which there was a very good market within Europe .
It is clear that there could be problems for some of the producers who have to invest in new pens from their existing crates , and we have therefore included an amendment which provides for assistance .
I ask for your support for that .
I ask this House to vote for all the amendments which ask for these proposals to be brought forward and against all those which propose either putting back even further into the future these improvements for animals or , indeed , allowing loopholes so that they can continue forever .
We should not in the European Union be continuing a practice of raising animals in a very cruel way of which we should be ashamed .
I ask your support for the amendments I have mentioned .
Madam President , I thank the rapporteur for his report .
Whilst I do not entirely agree with the rapporteur on this issue , I can say that on the whole I agree with the Commission 's proposal , although rather like Mrs Hardstaff I would like to see the matters implemented on an accelerated basis .
It is quite clear from the report of the Scientific Veterinary Committee that rearing veal in individual crates does cause serious welfare problems and therefore I believe that the phasing-out period should be no longer than five years .
Most people may not be aware that calves of one to three weeks of age travel in veal crates from various parts of perhaps the entire Community to one farm .
Three weeks is a sufficient period for the calves to settle down and for any health problems to be recognized and treated .
It is therefore preferable at that stage to get all calves into groups as soon as possible .
A young calf is a gregarious animal and it goes with the herd instinct as quickly as possible and I believe that to deny the calf that possibility is creating a hazard for the future .
I think that we have a report and some amendments before the House that we can all accept .
It is not as vitally urgent an issue as some other matters we have been discussing this morning .
These concerns have been around for a long time and it is appropriate that we should take the decisions here and now .
I also believe that it is appropriate that we do something to try and encourage the future of veal production and that we should do something to encourage the consumer to recognize that veal will be produced in a healthy and wholesome way , without infringing animal welfare issues .
Madam President , for me this issue is a question of whether one regards animals as living , sentient beings or as dead objects .
I believe they should be seen as living creatures .
Consequently , the principle must be that one should take account of their natural behaviour , their need for space , and ensure that they can behave as herd animals .
Their natural food should also be taken into consideration .
In practice , objections to this are made on purely economic grounds , whereas we argue from an ethical standpoint .
I should nevertheless like to ask those who use these economic arguments to think again .
What in fact is it that is persuading people not to eat this kind of meat these days ?
Yes , among other things it is cruel rearing methods , unnatural additives in fodder and the long , unnecessary journeys which animals make .
It is this that threatens a properly functioning meat sector in Europe , not the fact that we may no longer keep calves in crates or engage in other cruel methods of raising them .
We will therefore vote for the amendments aimed at tightening up the rules and against those that will make the Commission 's proposals even worse .
The night before last I was not far from here , in the Vosges mountains , visiting a farmer in the Munster Valley .
The calves were happily lined up in the byre with their mothers while others were accommodated in pairs in straw-filled pens measuring about 6 m2 .
They were healthy , beautiful and , I have no doubt , potentially delicious .
A young animal which is suffering will not produce quality meat .
The current system of raising calves , whereby they are hobbled in individual pens , has got to be changed , but there is no need for sentimentality .
We will have to allow a reasonable period for the farmers to make the change , and we shall have to provide them with financial aid for that purpose , without penalizing them unfairly .
I have tabled a number of amendments along these lines on behalf of my group , the first of which relates to a definition of the types of calf - to eliminate ambiguities - while the other concerns a physical breeding limit - up to 110 kilos of carcase - which is easier to monitor than the age of the animal or other factors .
In the near future , I should like to see all calves being kept as in the example I have just given , reflecting a new ethical standard of production and consumer protection , and encouraging the traditional method of raising suckler calves .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as we all know , the protection of animals is a subject which is becoming increasingly important politically .
Parliament , like many animal welfare associations , has repeatedly expressed a desire for the Community to adopt efficient legislation in this sector .
The Commission shares your view that effective Community rules are needed to cover the protection of animals .
The general public in the European Union , and consumers in particular , take a very close interest in this difficult topic .
The Commission completely understands these concerns and , I assure you , will treat animal welfare as a high priority .
The present proposal on the protection of calves , which has been formulated on the basis of the best available scientific and practical reports , will substantially improve the standards under which calves are farmed .
I would therefore like to offer my sincere thanks to honourable Members , and especially to the rapporteur , Mr Rosado Fernandes , representing the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and Mr Olsson representing the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , for their painstaking and positive attention to this proposal .
In my opinion , Amendment No 2 , the second part of Amendment No 7 and Amendment No 25 all genuinely contribute to improving and strengthening the text , and I accept those amendments gladly .
Unfortunately , I cannot accept the other amendments , for the following reasons .
Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 23 , 24 and 26 cannot be accepted because they would dilute our proposed prohibition on keeping calves in individual pens .
In the view of the Commission , keeping calves in individual pens is detrimental to the wellbeing of the animals and also unnecessary in health terms , except in the case of very young calves or if the veterinary surgeon has decided that an animal must be isolated for health and behavioural reasons so that it can receive appropriate treatment .
Amendment No 4 would restrict the scope of application of the Directive to herds of more than 10 calves .
In our view , however , the Directive is important for all calves and not just for those in herds of more than 10 .
Amendments Nos 3 , 21 , 28 and 33 are not acceptable to the Commission because it is the Council that decides which parts of the Commission 's Directive may be amended .
Amendments Nos 5 , 7 ( first part ) , 22 and 31 cannot be accepted because these are covered by the provisions of the annex to the Directive , which can only be amended by the Commission following a procedure within the Standing Veterinary Committee .
As far as Amendment No 6 is concerned , the rules governing farm installations built or renovated between 1994 and 1998 are already laid down in the present Directive .
They state that these installations may continue to be used only until 31 December 2010 .
In my view there is no reason to depart again from this 10-year transition period at this stage and set a later date .
Amendment No 8 , in my view , is already covered by the existing Directive and merely repeats the provisions of Article 7 .
Amendment No 13 cannot be accepted because the effects of the Commission 's proposal on the costs of keeping calves are acceptable , in our view .
Amendment No 18 cannot be accepted because the proposed article is a standard formulation which is not necessary here .
Amendment No 27 cannot be accepted because the proposal regarding space is not based on the report by the Scientific Veterinary Committee .
Amendments Nos 12 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 19 , 20 , 32 and 34 , which are designed to change the timeframe for implementation , also cannot be accepted .
The Commission has decided on a ten-year phasing-out period for two reasons . First , the new proposal , including the date 2008 , corresponds to the present Directive , which provides for the same period , and secondly this ten-year phasing-out period was chosen to ensure that farmers would not incur any additional costs because of additional investments that would have to be brought forward .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Madam President , in this matter of battery calves , and indeed in most agricultural matters , everybody is a victim : the calves are victims , the farmers are being forced into a crazy form of hyper-productivism - and mad cow disease shows us where that leads - and I am not sure that the consumers are any better off .
I am sensitive to Mr Rosado Fernandes 's arguments about the 100 , 000 tonnes of whey which are going to poison the planet , the 800 , 000 tonnes of meat that are going to make the market a little more unstable , the 42 , 000 families who are going to be back on the dole , the haemoglobin , the iron , etc ..
And yet the real choice is not between productivity and sentimentality but between a natural order of things and an unnatural one .
The priority must go to the natural order of things , which does not include keeping calves in concentration camps .
The situation is clearcut : a budgetary problem arises regarding the adaptation of the pens , and we need to settle that problem and put an end - starting with the calves - to this nonsensical form of agriculture which has brought us to the point of mad cow disease .
That 's all , Madam President .
A significant proportion of the problems surrounding animal welfare are the result of the general trend towards more intensive and larger-scale farming .
A development which has been very much encouraged by the policy trends of recent decades .
It would thus be unfair to lumber the calf-rearing sector alone with the welfare problems arising in that sector .
Serious consideration must also be given to the social and economic consequences of the new rules .
The housing of calves in individual pens must be curbed .
This production method falls short of the basic requirements concerning the freedom of animals to move around , their access to food , etc .
I thus broadly agree with the Commission 's proposals .
By opting in principle for the year 2008 as a starting date for the new directives , the Commission has chosen a realistic approach which will allow farms enough time to adapt .
It is doubtful , however , whether farms will be financially able to make the necessary investment .
Notwithstanding the public abhorrence of veal crates , the question is whether the consumer is prepared to pay more for more humanely produced meat .
I thus urge the Commission to look at the financial implications more closely and if necessary put forward proposals for a temporary subsidy to encourage the switch to group housing .
I am also concerned for the farms which have already voluntarily switched to group housing .
Because these farms have made a substantial investment , building barns , for example , their finances are currently very tight .
Many of these fattening enterprises do not yet meet the proposed standards .
If these pioneers also have to meet the new welfare requirements in 2008 they will be forced to depreciate the humane measures they have already taken ahead of time .
This means they will be penalized for their good deeds .
We should thus endorse the rapporteur 's proposal for farms already operating group housing to be given a postponement to the year 2013 .
Lastly , I also have my doubts as to how well the new rules can be monitored .
The Commission proposes that the minimum size of pens should be set in relation to the size of the calf .
This means the standards will , as it were , grow as the calves grow , which makes it difficult to monitor compliance .
Rules specifying pen size in centimetres would make the monitoring operations easier .
The fact that the amendment put down to that end by the Environment Committee was rejected represents a missed opportunity .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
In my view , we have an urgent interest in ensuring that the subject of bioethics is debated before the end of today .
It may not have been clear to many people during the earlier vote that the interpreter service ends at 1.00 p.m. , and you thought that the interpreters would work longer , so that there would be a danger that , for the second time , we would be unable to adopt a resolution . I would therefore like to urge you most strongly just to take the Lulling report - because it is urgent - without debate and to postpone the other reports , or alternatively to take them without debate as well .
I would strongly urge you to make sure that we are clear again about the sequence of events , because we are running the risk that the subject of bioethics is going to be deleted from the agenda .
So , for this reason , I appeal to you once again - I know , we could find ourselves starting a debate on the Rules of Procedure - to treat this matter as urgent and try to take the report without debate and then move on to the bioethics item .
Madam President , I absolutely agree with that , because I only need to say a few words about my report .
The fact is that I need to make an oral correction to our amendment .
That is the only thing .
I must do that , though , otherwise the House will not know what it is about .
I would agree with the suggestion .
That is very difficult .
We have a very full agenda .
I am sorry , but that is what the House decided , with the agreement of the group presidents .
I still have another eight items on the agenda , and I cannot simply ignore them and move forward one particular item .
We can 't work like that .
If the item on the agenda is called and there is still time , then everyone will have to show restraint and work quickly .
In practice , we can take items without debate if the speakers agree , but I cannot change the agenda at this stage , because , after all , we voted on it previously .
We simply must not waste any time .
If we work quickly , then we can vote on it .
I see no alternative at present .
Very briefly , I think we need to be completely clear now about whether the House agrees the other reports to be taken without debate .
Then we can get through this very quickly .
Anyone who does not accept that , though , will have to bear the responsibility if the European Parliament completely fails to express an opinion on this explosive subject of ' human dignity and biomedicine ' .
Mr Liese , although that is a very attractive suggestion , I can only say that the report was prepared by the committees and people do have the opportunity to speak here .
There is one thing I can do : when the report is called , I can ask whether the speakers are willing to forego their speaking time .
That is the only thing I can do .
Madam President , not long ago my colleague Jean-Pierre Cot , who had two reasons for being angry , made a very sensible point .
If a subject like bioethics is as critical as we hear - and it is - we certainly cannot skip over it in an empty House , between trains or between aircraft .
Mr Liese , I agree with you so strongly that the matter is of crucial importance that I am against skipping over it .
That is why it is stupid to deprive some of us of our speaking time in order to skip over a crucial debate .
Protection against specified zoonoses
The next item is the report ( A4-0237 / 96 ) by Mr Martinez , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 95 ) 0491 - C4-0527 / 95-95 / 0255 ( CNS ) ) amending Directive 92 / 117 / EEC concerning measures for protection against specified zoonoses and specified zoonotic agents in animals and products of animal origin in order to prevent outbreaks of food-borne infections and intoxications .
In view of the pressure of time , I shall forego my speaking time , though I would ask that what I have to say should be taken as an explanation of vote .
Madam President , Commissioner , the mere suspicion that BSE - mad cow disease - is transmissible to man has caused the virtual collapse of the European beef market .
Restoring consumer confidence is costing billions of ECUs from public funds .
BSE has plunged the European Union into a deep political crisis .
For months on end the British government has been crippling the Council , and it is going to go on doing so .
The British government played down the risks of the possible transmissibility of BSE to man for many years , and it now transpires that the Commission , too , was a party to this conspiracy of silence .
It would be nice to think that the Commission has learnt something , but obviously this is not the case .
I put a question to you , Commissioner , about the so-called bovine AIDS , a BIV virus which , like the HIV virus , belongs to the retrovirus group .
In your answer , Commissioner , you told me that this disease has occurred on one farm in the United Kingdom .
But in the very next paragraph of your answer you refer to a world-wide spreading of the BIV virus .
And then you go on to tell me - and I quote - on good authority that BIV and the other retroviruses found in animals have no effect on human health .
According to my information , there is a strong suspicion that HIV viruses were transmitted from apes to man .
But it would be misleading - your word , Commissioner , misleading - to talk about congenital immunodeficiency , in other words AIDS , because this disease does not result in AIDS-type symptoms .
At the same time , though , you say that further studies are needed to enable the Commission to assess the importance of this BIV virus .
Your line of argument here has a familiar ring to me .
We heard exactly the same kind of argument for years about BSE .
The Commission is now confronted by the shattered remnants of European agriculture .
The Commission must take immediate action to ensure that the ' polluter pays ' principle applies in agriculture , too .
And the Commission must also acknowledge that the plague-like spread of zoonoses is encouraged by intensive agriculture - that intensive agriculture which the EU subsidizes with half its budget .
Madam President , I wish to make clear straightaway that I do not mean any disrespect to honourable Members who were more interested in bioethics but , as the rapporteur , Mr Martinez , has properly stressed , this report which seemed destined to interest only veterinarians or a very few others , it is of very great interest and , above all , hugely topical , with the explosion of BSE and its discussion by the committee of inquiry .
We met yesterday for four hours with the committee of inquiry into BSE , and it was actually during those proceedings that gaps emerged , new concerns justifying continued discussion of the report , given that , of the some 200 zoonoses currently being studied in Europe , I would say the BSE is still by far the least well-understood , not only because of the effects it may have on man and therefore the possibility that it might trigger the notorious Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease but also because of its effects on the animals themselves .
This report therefore constitutes another reason for investigating further at a time of great concern for Europe , in the wake of the information Commissioner Fischler gave us even today .
This is not therefore a report of lesser importance than others ; it is not an opportunity to waste time .
It is a further call for a greater concentration of commitment and effort , for greater determination to tackle this with transparency and clarity but , above all , by making available adequate resources .
We learnt yesterday that , during the bad years of the so-called ' black hole ' in the fight against BSE , when , after the alarm was raised , practically nothing or very little was done to try to understand the causes or find remedies , we did not have the resources to organize the teams of inspectors , to pay their subsistence , to approach renowned scientists and ask them to help explain the epidemic .
That is cause for concern !
If that is what has happened in the case of one of the 200 zoonoses at this time , what can we say about the others which have hitherto been studied in part only ?
I would say that the main concern continues to be the same : first of all , the health of citizens , then , in second place , protecting the market .
But is specifically on account of citizens ' health that we are concerned about the information emerging from scientific studies .
It is said that it is not really certain that BSE or other zoonoses can affect the health of citizens and influence Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease .
Well , if the scientists lack the courage or are cautiously taking refuge behind the data that science makes available to them , statistics are unintentionally more forthcoming : the fact is that in the first four months of this year - to avoid inundating you with figures , I shall quote only certain statistics relating to this development - Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease has claimed two victims in France , three in Italy , one in Germany and eleven in the United Kingdom .
And is there anyone who still dares to say that it may be that BSE does not affect man ; that it may have nothing to do with that kind of disease ?
Is there anyone who will tell us further , Madam President , that BSE cannot be a negative factor in other forms of disease as yet unknown to us ?
That is why it is right to be concerned ; it is right that this debate should be taking place , and I promise , as a penance , to sit through the whole of the debate on biotechnology or bioethics .
Madam President , I really would like to do my bit to keep things short .
But I must make one thing clear : the reason why the Commission is rejecting Mr Martinez 's amendments is not because we were not interested in the best possible data on BSE but because accepting them would mean that the quality of information would deteriorate .
The frequency and detail of the information on BSE is , in fact , higher at present than it would be if the amendment were adopted .
In addition , I should like to say this to Mrs Crepaz : I shall be very happy to explain to her , outside this sitting , how things stand with the BIV virus , because what she had to say made it clear to me that there are certain gaps in her knowledge .
Thank you very much .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
The purpose of Directive 92 / 117 / EEC is to create a reliable system for reporting the occurrence of zoonoses .
By zoonoses we mean infectious diseases in animals which can be directly or indirectly transmitted to man .
This Directive needs to be reviewed , because the prevention and control of zoonoses have become enormously more important in recent years .
Until this review has been concluded , the Commission proposes that the current implementation period should be extended .
In Mr Martinez 's report , the Committee on Agriculture favours this extension .
The rapporteur also proposes that mad cow disease , BSE , should be added to the list of zoonoses in a new article as a potential zoonosis .
These proposals were accepted by the Committee on Agriculture .
As the spokesman for the EPP Group , I should like to support this proposal .
When the first cases of BSE occurred in 1986 , very little was known about this disease .
The origin was suspected to be scrapie in sheep .
No one would have guessed at that time that this illness might , indirectly , represent a hazard to man .
When a new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease was identified in March this year , suspicion that BSE might be transmissible to man hardened .
Despite intensive research , however , no scientific proof of this has yet been produced .
Since then , European agriculture has been facing its most severe crisis to date .
Consumer confidence has been replaced by widespread mistrust .
The beef market has virtually collapsed in extensive areas of the European Union .
Many farmers , not to mention operators of slaughterhouses and meat businesses , are facing ruin .
The most extreme reaction among consumers has occurred , primarily , in countries where there have been no cases of BSE at all .
What we need now , apart from financial support for farmers , are measures to restore confidence and get sales moving again .
We need effective controls and an obligatory Union-wide labelling system for meat , so that the consumer can identify the region from which the meat comes .
We need arrangements to guarantee origin , such as already exist in Germany .
By including BSE in Directive 92 / 117 / EEC as a potential zoonosis , the European Parliament is encouraging the systematic recording of this disease .
This will help to win back the confidence of Europe 's citizens in beef .
I am voting for the amendments in the Martinez report but should nevertheless like to state my objection to the erroneous statements made in the section on bread .
As far as what is described as ' Scandinavian fundamentalism as regards salmonella ' is concerned , one can only say that before Sweden became a Member of the EU we had more or less eradicated salmonella in Sweden , while our Scandinavian neighbour Denmark had a relatively high incidence of salmonella in its chickens .
I doubt whether this difference resulted from differences in the degree of fear of the infection or in the number of precautionary hygiene measures or health requirements .
The reason is more likely to have been that we were able to impose strict border controls and that we had limited use of antibiotics in animal fodder .
I never believed that in a public parliamentary report Sweden 's concern for public health and our successful battle against salmonella would be described as ' Scandinavian fundamentalism as regards salmonella ' .
The rapporteur also more or less accuses people in Northern Europe of being hypochondriacs where salmonella is concerned .
There are many theories as to why the number of cases of salmonella increases as one moves away from the Mediterranean towards Scandinavia .
For my part I believe that this is because of stricter health inspections and adequate medical care which mean that all cases of salmonella infection in Scandinavia are treated .
I do not believe that health inspections and medical care are as good in the Mediterranean region .
Members of the European Parliament should obviously distance themselves from the downright scandalous comments by the rapporteur in the section of his report entitled ' Different cultural perceptions of zoonoses ' ; such comments have no place in official reports .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Respect for democratic principles in agreements between the Community and third countries
The next item is the report ( A4-0212 / 96 ) by Mr Carnero Gonzáles , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Security , on the inclusion of respect for democratic principles and human rights in agreements between the Community and third countries ( COM ( 95 ) 0216 - C4-0197 / 95 ) .
Madam President , I will make my contribution as brief as possible to make it easier for us to deal with the entire agenda .
We are discussing , here , a matter of undoubted significance for the vast majority of European Union citizens who feel that the process of European integration should not be solely or exclusively economic or monetary in nature .
If we want a process to create a political structure , we obviously have to base it on the defence and development of clear democratic principles and inviolable human rights .
This House has always been more than ready to demand that the Union define a genuine policy for promoting human rights and democratic principles at the international level .
The combined pressure of civil society and this House has meant that , with greater or lesser resistance , the Council has gradually come to accept the principle that agreements signed with third countries must simultaneously include a political framework to promote democratic principles and human rights .
It is in this positive sense that we understand the content of the Commission 's communication to the Council .
In order for such a policy for promoting human rights and democratic principles to be possible , at least three things are necessary : firstly , it must comply with a certain strategy ; secondly , it must apply always and in all cases ; and , thirdly , it must be established and promoted by a number of players in collaboration .
In order to promote democracy and human rights the Union must firmly , simultaneously and carefully make use of the instrument which agreements with third countries represent .
Obviously , the goal here would have to comprise the elimination of dual standards and exceptions dependent on the economic significance of the Union 's contribution .
For this to happen , policy systematization is fundamental and should be based on the following : as clear as possible a definition of what is meant by democratic principles and human rights which , as far as I am concerned , must be based on the notions of universality , indivisibility and interdependence ; promotion and defence of democracy and human rights conducted both through positive measures and through the implementation of the sanction , and , in the decision-making process , maximum limitation of Council 's discretion when applying what we might generally term the ' democratic clause ' , since success now also lies in actions in this sphere fitting into the framework of a genuine common foreign and security policy involving all players in our society .
Parliament 's duty is to exert maximum pressure in this direction , taking account of the degree of judgement open to it , which , for objective reasons , is not available to governments .
We have to ensure that the demands of public opinion are satisfied .
The report I am submitting , with the unanimous backing of the Foreign Affairs Committee , is a significant contribution to this question , proposing , as it does , the inclusion in the new European Union Treaty of a clause implying the inclusion of respect for human rights in a statutory and general way , encouraging use of the most progressive clause , requesting that the Council and Commission take account of Parliament 's opinion and that the latter be able to make recommendations on the subject , also asking Council to take account , prior to action , of the criteria of the Council of Europe , the UN , ILO and principal NGOs , and , when all is said and done , asking Council to act in this sphere by qualified majority and not on the basis of unanimity .
Madam President , the Union 's credibility depends on its ability to be consistent in its day-to-day actions at all levels with the principles on which our democratic coexistence is based .
This is not the imposition of something alien on our friends worldwide , but has also to do with our being convinced that defence of human rights should never be seen in relative terms and should be at the forefront of our day-to-day policy activities .
Madam President , this will take no time at all .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation has produced a first-rate opinion and I refer the House to the written text .
I told my own Group on Monday how totally ridiculous I thought it was that the Carnero report had been put off to Friday .
But I am very happy to cooperate whenever Parliament works really efficiently .
I shall submit my written text to you and I compliment Mr Carnero on his excellent report .
You place me in a difficult position , Madam President , because this is an extremely important topic and , as there are subjects here which are linked with the Intergovernmental Conference , where we largely support the proposal tabled in Mr Carnero 's report , I would like to explain why we are not in agreement where other matters are concerned and , at the same time , I would also like to be able to inform this House of the positions the Commission is defending with regard to amendment of Article 228 of the Treaty .
However , given that most speakers have declined to participate , and if Mr Carnero does not regard it as a lack of regard for his report on my part , I have no problem with submitting the Commission 's document in writing .
The document follows the general lines of Mr Carnero 's report but , on some specific topics connected with the Intergovernmental Conference , with how to deal with not only the problem of human rights in extenso , but also that of social rights , the protection of children , hard labour , etc . , we have our own ideas as to how to move forward in the context of international agreements as a whole .
Madam President , I would ask you , as acting President , to submit a report to the Bureau so that it can be made aware of the lamentable level to which this morning 's work has sunk .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Madam President , I do not intend to give up my speaking-time ; in fact I would ask you not to count the time I need to comment on what I think is your interpretation that it is possible to make written contributions by way of speeches in a debate .
I think it extremely damaging if you allow that to happen .
Explanations of vote may be given in writing but certainly not contributions during the debate .
I move on now to my explanation of vote and would say that it is serious and regrettable that there are only about twenty honourable Members present , with Commissioner Marín , to debate such an important issue .
The inclusion of the human rights clause in agreements with third countries is a crucial victory ; it marks the victory of duty and the right of interference which the European Parliament has , over many years , at least since the days of Commissioner Natali , persisted in trying to bring forward .
It is with great satisfaction that we have to thank the Commission , and Commissioner Marín in particular , for continuing along that path and seeking to consolidate it in the best way possible .
Yesterday , we adopted a resolution on the International Criminal Court .
The idea I voiced yesterday , and that many honourable Members supported , is that , in future , it may be possible to incorporate into the ' human rights ' clause the jurisdiction of the International Court as a prerequisite for Community agreements with third countries .
This seems to me to be a very important issue ; it is sad that it has been debated with so few participants and all credit to the Commission for going ahead , if possible , and trying to include this clause in future agreements on Treaty revision .
I just wanted to explain this again : no one has been told that he may not speak , but each individual has himself stated that he will forego his speaking time or put his speech in writing in the form of an explanation of vote .
A speech is not the same thing as an explanation of vote .
In the line of the resolution , I wish to demonstrate my support for the Commission communication , which heads in the right direction of making progress in the system of promoting human rights in the European Union 's external activity .
This system has made important advances , in particular since the end of the Communist system , when the protection of human rights might have slipped into an ideological and geo-strategic conflict and so-called ' conditionality ' , might have been understood as something which would more than ever interest the peoples of third countries .
Indeed , the defence of democracy and human rights at international levels cannot be understood - and must not be practised - as a means of imposing a political system which is western or European and alien to sociological realities or local traditions , but instead as a means of promoting universal values and , thereby , guaranteeing peoples and individuals defence against despotic regimes and access to , control of , and influence over power , all of which is vital if everyone is to enjoy the results of development .
Thus , support for the Commission 's proposals presupposes a guarantee of respect , by the European Union and its Member States , of fundamental principles :
Universality , regardless of geographical , religious , cultural or political differences ; -Indivisibility between personal , civic and political rights and economic , social and cultural rights ; -The interdependence between human rights , democracy and development.This makes it inadmissible that the European Union or its Member States should , sometimes , appear to be more demanding vis-à-vis the situation in third countries than over what happens in some of our own countries .
We only have to look at the recent wave of expulsions of illegal immigrants to conclude that not everything is quite right in the countries which rightly claim to have a commendable human rights record .
We must not have double standards here , for Europe and the Third World countries or even for different Third World countries , for reasons which violate the principle of universality .
The end of the Cold War does not mean that we can continue to treat Saudi Arabia more leniently than Iraq , or that Cuba should be more strictly dealt with than Colombia .
European economic interests cannot legitimate the continued support for Suharto 's Indonesia or Mobutu 's Zaire .
No electoral farce can give legitimacy to people like Mobutu - one of many beneficiaries of a long-standing complicity on the part of various European countries .
The universal principles indicated do not , either , mean that we should demand more of weak countries in a depressed Africa , compared with the scandalous tolerance which is enjoyed by certain ' tigers ' in South-East Asia , just because powerful interests in a free-for-all universal market have forced certain politicians to turn a blind eye .
This globalisation also calls for global imperatives such as a guarantee of democracy and human rights .
It is unacceptable that we continue not to demand the respect of fundamental social rights in economic and trade relations .
We are against disguised protectionism which perpetuates an unfair international economic order and are for the inclusion of a social clause in international trade agreements .
Finally , we also support the proposals in the report aimed at strengthening the means of monitoring and providing technical assistance , as well as ' positive measures ' which can be used by the European Union .
In the end we must strengthen the consultative activity of the European Parliament , both in the European Union 's international negotiations and in the monitoring and sanctioning of the rules included in international treaties in the respect of human rights .
My compliments to the rapporteur on his excellent report .
Over and above the excellent communication from the Commission he makes a number of interesting suggestions for reinforcing the European Union 's external policy on human rights .
The EU has a good reputation for the importance it attaches to human rights and everything must be done to make this policy as efficient and as effective as possible .
The human rights clauses in the international agreements which the EU concludes are very valuable , but it is essential to check carefully that they are complied with .
So more work is needed to develop criteria which can be monitored .
And these criteria must be strictly applied .
This necessitates a good exchange of information between the institutions and the Member States .
So the analysis unit for the common foreign and security policy which the IGC has called for should certainly include a human rights section .
Part of its remit should be to report every year on human rights in those countries with which the EU has an agreement .
But I wonder whether this is necessary for every country every year .
Is all that paperwork really the most effective method of scrutiny ?
I attach great importance to the effective monitoring of sanctions and embargoes imposed by the Union on third countries .
Such severe measures must not be on paper only .
So they need to be monitored properly .
The drastic cutting of funds to monitor the upholding of embargoes , proposed by the Commission and Council in the budget procedure , is at odds with this and must thus be rejected .
Of course we should ideally strike a good balance between positive and negative instruments for checking the human rights situation in third countries .
Much can be achieved , not only by sanctions , but also by supporting democratic forces and by observing elections .
Lastly I am grateful to the Commission for the importance it has given in its communication to improving the coherence , transparency and openness to scrutiny of the communautaire approach .
The question of human rights must not be made secondary to economic interests .
This is a situation where we must put a stop to these tendencies that seem to be infiltrating the Council .
While , in the case of the association agreements , serious breaches of human rights could result in the partial suspension of the agreement , this provision is retained only in particularly urgent cases in the so-called Bulgarian clause . And now a substantial body of opinion is considering using the interim agreement formula to eliminate such reservations completely from economic agreements .
It was urgently necessary , then , for Parliament to put a stop to these tendencies by producing the CarneroGonzález report .
The next necessary step would be for the Commission finally to unearth the negotiation directives on the implementation of these clauses from the deepest recesses of its desk drawers and ensure that implementation of the human rights clause is directly enshrined both in agreements including the so-called Bulgarian clause and in all future agreements .
The incorporation of the international human rights clauses into the Maastricht II Treaty would be another step towards making the economic activities of the EU obligatorily conditional on respect for human rights .
The concept of human rights is the principle which acts as a bulwark to our democracies .
We must ensure that this foundation of our societies is not undermined out of a desire to tag on to it every new fashion .
But we must also emphasise , on the other hand , that it is a concept which must be one that moves with the times .
As a society fleshes out its social conscience and new forms of network crime crop up , of which the recent case of paedophilia is a sinister example , then the concept of human rights must be altered .
The same goes for the way in which society fleshes out its ethical conscience and is confronted by new problems resulting from scientific progress such as the cases of genetic manipulation or computerisation , which are alarming more than cynical .
Refusing to enrich the concept of human rights is in the end tantamount to condemning democracy itself - the very democracy which we wish to set as an example to third countries with which we sign agreements .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I should like to speak directly to Mr Marín and tell him , first of all , that I really am very sorry at the way this part of the sitting is going .
We greatly appreciate his efforts , and we would have preferred the quality of the work done by him and by the rapporteur to receive a much greater response from this House .
The socialist group would like to make the point here that , because the subject is unfortunately an important one , we very much hope that another debate will be held in this House on this subject , which really does involve the whole of Europe and all its values .
Secondly , I believe that a number of Members have not spoken because they wanted to protest against the fact that , in essence , this is a Friday morning .
We are well aware that those who remain really are the old guard , the hard core , or those who are going to catch a later plane - and , of course , those who are interested .
It was a positive protest , shall we say , and I hope Mr Marín will take it as such .
And then there is another attitude - the attitude of certain Members who would like to delay the proceedings , even for such an important debate as this .
Why ?
For a purely tactical reason : because they would like to get round quickly to a sneak vote on an important question - bioethics .
And so , of course , to get what they want with the bioethics vote , they are obscuring the debate on this extremely important report .
Personally , I regret this very much .
I say again that we really have appreciated our rapporteur 's efforts , and also , Mr Marín , that we have a great deal of respect for the views you have expressed , even though we do not always entirely agree with them .
Madam President , in general terms , the Commission shares the view of this House .
We do believe that there is a need to reform the Treaty and Article 228 thereof .
We are in favour of there being , if possible , a single human rights clause and we think that the model in the Cooperation Agreement with Bulgaria , including the suspension system , is the most correct version .
However , I would like to make one thing clear : the Commission does not agree with Parliament 's inclusion of the human rights clause in all the European Union 's international agreements .
We believe that there is a need for it in economic cooperation agreements , financial cooperation agreements and development cooperation agreements .
Let me explain : we set up international agreements in the maritime sector , for example .
Where is the sense in including the human rights clause in an agreement on the maritime sector ?
We set up highly technical agreements on double taxation , and there does not seem to be a great deal of sense in including the human rights clause in an agreement on double taxation .
We set up agreements on standardization within the internal market - a standard relating to washing machines , freezers , televisions and cars , for example .
There does not seem to be much sense in an agreement on standardization within the internal market including a human rights clause .
Telematic networks for statistics relating to trading of goods ( EDICOM )
The next item is the report ( A4-0274 / 96 ) by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the amended proposal for a Council Decision ( COM ( 96 ) 0319 - C4-0420 / 96 - C4-0421 / 96-96 / 0173 ( SYN ) ) on inter-administration telematic networks for statistics relating to the trading of goods between Member States ( EDICOM ) .
Madam President , this report will not be introduced for reasons of time .
I have elected not to introduce it because everyone agreed with the urgency procedure requested by the Council , to prevent any interruption of the EDICOM activities .
So we can vote .
I would , however , like to make one clarification .
We have tabled a minor amendment , in the form of recital , to place this EDICOM decision in the context of the general guidelines on trans-European telecommunications networks .
As the Council has not yet reached a decision on these networks , the reference to the date of that decision should be deleted from our amendment , in other words the text should end after the word ' telecommunication ' .
Otherwise I shall forego the right to present the report , and will give my proposed introduction as an explanation of vote .
There is one point I would like to make , though , Madam President .
If Parliament is unanimously agreed on granting the urgency procedure , for a text which is urgent , I cannot understand why it is not listed at the start of a sitting , even the Friday morning sitting !
It only takes three or four minutes !
I do wonder how agendas are determined in this Parliament .
Anyway , I move that we proceed with the vote .
I have no doubt that the Commissioner will also agree with me and accept this oral amendment to our amendment .
Mrs Lulling , the Commission has noted the modified amendment tabled by yourself and agrees to incorporate this item into its proposal in the new form you have submitted .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Having been unable to present my report orally , for reasons of time , I would like to set out the reasons why it had to be dealt with urgently .
We would have no reason to return to this matter , the initial proposal of which dates from 1993 , if the Council had listened to us , more than two years ago , when we disputed its selection of Article 235 as the legal basis , a selection which also conflicted with the Commission proposal .
We did of course make an application for annulment of the decision by the Council , which persisted in basing the EDICOM decision on Article 235 .
The Commission supported our arguments .
The Court clearly felt that we were right and set aside the Council 's 1994 decision .
As the Maastricht Treaty has come into force since then , the most appropriate legal basis now is Article 129b , dealing with the trans-European networks , and more particularly paragraph two of that article which specifically refers to action aimed at promoting the interoperability of the networks and comes within the scope of the cooperation procedure .
We therefore have good reason to be satisfied as far as the legal basis is concerned .
We also have reason to be satisfied with the specific activities that have hitherto taken place within the framework of EDICOM .
They are of great value to the private undertakings concerned , which , thanks to EDICOM , benefit from swifter and less bureaucratic procedures for making the obligatory statistical declarations that enable us to know what goods are being traded between Member States , data which are useful and interesting for the undertakings , too .
In order to prevent any interruption of these activities , steps need to be taken to bring about a new EDICOM decision , on the right legal basis this time , without changing a single comma in the content of EDICOM , which satisfies everyone .
That is the reason why the Commission has rapidly submitted to us an amended proposal for a decision , the reason why the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy adopted my report without delay , and the reason why this Parliament agreed to the urgency procedure to allow a vote today and so enable the Council to correct its error .
I hope that the Council will learn the lesson of the present case and abandon its stubbornness in selecting inappropriate legal bases , thus threatening to jeopardize activities on which everyone is in agreement and about which there is no dispute , ideological or otherwise .
Madam President , I certainly intend to speak on this report , first of all to object , as has Mrs Dury , to the way in which we are working .
It seems to me rather curious that a rapporteur for a topic such as this , which is rightly considered to be urgent and important and for which my group expresses its full support , should fail to present a point that concerns such an important issue - the trans-European networks - in which the House , as we all know , has a very keen interest .
I wish also to take the floor to protest at the way in which , as a result of inefficient working of this House , we have found ourselves in the Chamber discussing such an important issue .
I was appointed rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets for EDICOM .
I was appointed draftsman of the opinion and , while I was preparing to present my report , the Committee on Budgets discovered that , in the meantime , the committee responsible for the substance had gone ahead and adopted its report .
I therefore wish to be included in the minutes , along with my explanation of vote , this protest on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , because it was made impossible for the draftsman of an opinion to do his job .
I therefore insist that this be entered in the minutes .
Madam President , I would simply like to say to Mr Dell 'Alba that if the Committee on Budgets had drawn up this report , we would have annexed it , but there was ' danger in delay ' , if I may say so .
That is why we worked so quickly .
I would have explained this if I had had the time .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , I wish to congratulate you for taking the vote on the Lulling report after the explanations of vote , as should happen at every sitting and not just on Fridays .
I am deeply grateful .
That is a complete misunderstanding .
All we did was vote on the resolution .
The other vote came earlier .
Aid to shipbuilding
The next item is the report ( A4-0273 / 96 ) by Mr Moretti , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0309 - C4-0387 / 96-96 / 0165 ( CNS ) ) on aid to shipbuilding .
Madam President , the task assigned to me by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on 8 July last , on the proposal for a Council regulation on aid to shipbuilding , was completed in a very short time , thanks also to the help of very efficient officials .
As you will be aware , the report considers the difficult situation of the market for the shipbuilding industry .
To improve the situation and secure normal conditions of competition , an agreement has been concluded under the auspices of the OECD which should have entered into force on 1 January 1996 .
The agreement provides for a ban on aid and support for the shipbuilding industry , except for aid for research and aid of a social nature , and has already been ratified by the European Union , Korea , Norway and Japan ; all that is lacking is ratification by the US , due by 15 July 1996 but not obtained because of delays in adopting the necessary legislation .
Given that uncertainty , the Seventh Council Directive remains in force until January 1997 , and the Council is to state its position on future aid policy by 1 October 1996 .
If the agreement is not ratified by all of the parties , the subsidy system and support measures which distort the market will remain in force , and the Council will have to maintain mechanisms to protect the Community shipyards from unfair competition .
I therefore ask you to approve my report with the two amendments adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Policy .
Madam President , I should like to take up the theme of the anxieties expressed by Mr Moretti about the future of our shipyards .
We already know that employment in some Member States is facing a serious challenge .
I am thinking not only of Belgium but also of countries like Germany - I believe all our German colleagues are certainly interested in the future of the north and the shipyards - as well as France and Italy .
We have noted that the employment problem is not dealt with in the OECD agreement , nor is it adequately covered by any of the international bodies .
We are facing problems of reconstruction , shipyard closures , and this situation is liable to continue .
Since 1976 the European Union has lost nearly 200 , 000 jobs , and 14 , 500 in the last four years alone .
Meanwhile , the Korean shipyards have gained 9 , 000 .
Not that I do not welcome the fact that Korean workers have been able to find work , I am simply saying that we are not sufficiently well placed relative to our external competitors .
What we stress , first of all , is the need to be alert to the problem of employment in the shipyards . I am thinking , for example , of the ideas - which , incidently , have been emphasized in this House - about the reduction in working hours .
But measures of that type will need financial back-up and support .
Secondly , we call for a major research effort in this sector .
We know that if other countries are out-performing us , they are doing so in terms of technology .
Mr Moretti clearly emphasized this , because he calls for studies to be undertaken to give our shipyards the chance to compete where we should be competing - on the quality front .
Madam President , by way of an introduction I should just like to say that I find it regrettable that large and important issues should be dealt with at a time when only some ten Members are present in Parliament .
I would therefore like to begin by making a few brief comments on how we are all aware that the shipbuilding industry in Europe has especially serious problems .
However , to believe that state aid is the solution to this problem is probably the same as a dog biting his own tail .
The issue today concerns working vigorously to ensure that everyone signs the OECD agreement on ending support for the shipbuilding industry .
It is regrettable that there has not been a clear ratification procedure in the USA and that the Commission is proposing that the EU should also continue to provide aid for shipbuilding pending US ratification , though not beyond the end of 1998 .
However , this is a solution that could also have risky consequences , because at present only a few countries in the Union have abolished support for shipbuilding ; these include Sweden and the United Kingdom .
Other countries still provide state aid of 9 % of tender prices .
Obviously this support is something which should be abolished as it distorts competition .
If the consequences of this distorted competition are that Sweden and the United Kingdom reintroduce state subsidies , which the Swedish industry minister has said could be a last resort , this would quite clearly be a development in entirely the wrong direction .
There must therefore be a clear objective to put an end to aid and subsidies for the shipbuilding industry , even if this can only happen in a few years ' time because of the tardiness of the Americans .
In my view free trade and free competition must be a completely unambiguous objective .
Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Moretti for his report which we feel is in general agreement with the Commission 's viewpoint .
Given the problem we have today regarding time , Mr Moretti and Members of this House will excuse my limiting myself to clarification of the Commission 's viewpoint with regard to textual amendments .
Three amendments to the text have been proposed .
The first of these involves a review of the wording of Article 1 , paragraph 2 , of the Commission 's proposal and the effect of this amendment would be that the current directive would be indefinitely extended pending the entry into force of the OECD Agreement .
The Commission cannot implement this amendment for two reasons : firstly because this type of legal provision is always established with reference to a limited period of time and , secondly , and more importantly , because the adoption of an extension for an indefinite period could be interpreted as a weakening of our commitment to reach an agreement , thereby sending out an incorrect message at a time when both we and our partners are stepping up the pressure on the United States to ratify the agreements as soon as possible .
Therefore , if we were to propose an unlimited period of time , the United States might believe that the European Union is coming round to the US 's position instead of pursuing its demand to the United States that that country ratify the OECD Agreement .
In addition , by extending the life of the directive up to 31 December 1998 , as the Commission proposes , the European Union would keep all its options open , including the possibility of re-extending the directive from that date if this were necessary .
The second amendment is closer to the criterion upheld by the Commission in that it introduces the possibility of an evaluation study into the possible effects of there being no agreement as well as the consequences which might derive from the possible action policies which the Union would have to consider in the future .
The Commission fully acknowledges the concern behind this amendment and is in total agreement as to its basis .
In proposing an extension to the directive which covers a relatively long period of time , the Commission was of the view that , in the event of a continued delay in the entry into force of the OECD Agreement or of a complication relating to it , it will be necessary and appropriate to carry out an in-depth review of Union policy in this sector .
I can assure you that such an exercise , which would , of course , involve consultation with Parliament , would be carried out at a sufficiently early stage to ensure that the necessary decisions were adopted prior to the expiry date of the directive it is now proposed to extend .
However , the Commission cannot accept the form in which the amendment has been proposed , with the inclusion of a new Article 1a . If it should be necessary for the Council to adopt a decision prior to 1 October - we have to be realistic - there simply is no time for this between now and 1 October , should the Commission agree to submit a revised proposal to the Council .
I am sure that all Members of this House are aware that this is impossible within the legislative cooperation procedure .
As for Amendment No 3 , its objective is to define the area of study in respect of policy review and , on this matter , I can assure you that the Commission will be embarking on an in-depth review which might include the position of State aid in Member States .
However , the Commission is also producing an annual report on this subject whose scope is even wider than that proposed by Parliament .
Naturally , the Commission has no problem with this report being sent systematically to this House .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Madam President , I am also giving this explanation of vote , on behalf of my group , in order to have recorded in the minutes my protest that an issue as important as this should be debated with so few Members present .
This does no credit to Parliament , nor does it pay due respect to Commissioner Marín who is assiduous and punctual in attending : therefore I wish categorically to see my explanation of vote entered in the minutes .
Aside from that , I am from the major port of Livorno and so the issue of the shipbuilding subsidy is of particular concern .
In those terms , the Moretti report is very important because , despite our differences with Commissioner Marín , which I personally venture to dispute , I actually believe - and honourable Members have shown that they agree on the importance of the Moretti report - that the decisions taken are well-founded .
Those decisions are also a way of indicating to the Commission the need for greater involvement , necessary in regard to this issue which , as Mrs Dury rightly said , is primarily a problem of employment . It may be that this is not made sufficiently plain , is not sufficiently developed in the text , but it is certainly encompassed by our continuing demand that the point of reference for every proposal should be the issue of jobs and employment .
As I have already said , my group will be voting in favour of the Moretti report , in the hope that the Commission will review its stance and accept the two amendments tabled .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution . )
Utility models in the single market
The next item is the report ( A4-0216 / 96 ) by Mr Añoveros Trias de Bés , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the European Commission 's Green Paper relating to the protection of utility models in the single market ( COM ( 95 ) 0370 - C4-0353 / 95 ) .
Madam President , pursuant to Rule 131 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I move that the reports that follow , by Mr Añoveros Trias de Bés and Mr Kouchner , and the oral question by Mr Hughes , be adjourned until the Monday of the next part-session here in Strasbourg .
I ask that a vote be taken on this , to determine whether there are 29 Members willing to support my request , which I believe will be case , and that the oral questions by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mrs Roth should then be called next .
Mr Schulz , first of all , such a request can only be made for one item on the agenda at a time .
And , secondly , it can only be put by a group or by at least 29 other Members .
Before we come to that , Mrs Dury has a point of order .
I should like to say to the honourable Member that there is also an oral question from Mr Hughes .
It is an important question and must be dealt with now because it refers to the Conference of the International Labour Organization , which opens on 8 October .
The reason why Mr Hughes wanted to raise this question during the present part-session was that the conference is taking place shortly and the question relates to working hours in the maritime sector , which is one of the priorities of the socialist group .
Please listen .
At present we are dealing with the next item on the agenda , which is the report by Mr Añoveros Trias de Bés .
Mr Schulz has made a request about this report .
Was that on behalf of your group ?
I have asked you to check whether there were 29 Members willing to support my request .
I say again , this request can only be made by a group or by 29 individuals .
I will check whether there are 29 people willing to support it .
All we have had so far has been a request to take a vote on it .
We now come to the vote to determine whether this item , the Añoveros Trias report , should be adjourned .
Mr Dell 'Alba on a point of order .
Madam President , first of all I want to ask you if you have accepted the motion in respect of one report , as provided for in the Rules of Procedure , or two .
I think it is for one .
Mr Dell 'Alba , I said very clearly that we are talking about the next report on the agenda , the report by Mr Añoveros Trias de Bés .
I have allowed the request for a vote on it .
The vote will now be taken .
Mr Dell 'Alba , do you want to speak in favour of the request ?
Ladies and gentlemen , it is all well and good to try to approve an important issue with a handful of Members , but we have to respect the Rules of Procedure !
In accordance with Rule 126 , I have one minute to speak against the motion .
I consider the Añoveros Trias report to be very important . The Green Paper on utility models in the single market is a report included on the agenda : all of the groups agreed on its importance .
At the Conference of Presidents ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Dell 'Alba , you have misunderstood me .
The request was made on the basis of Rule 131 of the Rules of Procedure , and not on the basis you mentioned .
We will now vote on this request .
Mr Kellett-Bowman .
Madam President , it was clear on Monday that there was going to be chaos today .
Why has some better organization not been found for today 's agenda ?
Right , we are now going to take the vote which was asked for and is permissible according to Rule 131 .
Mr Dell 'Alba .
Madam President , I am speaking against the request by some honourable Members that the report in question be deferred .
It is therefore obvious that I wish to defend my view that the report should be kept on the agenda .
My explanation of vote against related to the fact that we had decided - and Mr Martens was present - to include this issue on the agenda .
I am therefore astounded that some colleagues now wish to remove it , and I reiterate the importance of voting against the motion by Mr Schulz .
We now come to the vote .
( Parliament decided to postpone the debate )
Madam President , I refer to Rule 19 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , according to which the President shall conduct and open a sitting and decide when it ends .
As 1.00 p.m. is usually the end of debating time , may I ask you , as the current President , to contact the interpreting service with a view to extending the sitting by half an hour .
I will take a vote on the request .
Until that has been clarified , we will continue with the agenda , so I am now going to call Mr Kouchner 's report .
Ninth EC-UNRWA Convention
The next item is the report ( A4-0280 / 96 ) by Mr Kouchner , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council Decision to approve the text of the Ninth EC-UNRWA Convention covering the years 1996-98 prior to signature of the Convention by the Commission and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees ( COM ( 96 ) 0257 - C4-0422 / 96-96 / 0154 ( CNS ) ) .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I move that this report , too , should not be debated today and that we should move on to the next item .
The request has been made by a group , and so we can vote on it .
Who votes in favour of this request ?
Madam President , surely we must take things seriously !
I am well aware that Mr Liese is obsessed - ever since this morning he has been visibly perturbed by events in this House .
The fact remains that the subject covered by Mr Kouchner 's report is an important one .
I therefore propose that we move straight to the vote , without debate , but I am opposed to suppressing a report which deals with Palestine , another priority of the socialist group , and I would call upon all Members to pay attention to any important subject .
Mrs Dury , if you would be kind enough to read Rule 131 , you will see that there can be no further debate after the request , and no more speeches for or against .
The Commission would like to say something more about this .
Madam President , I know the atmosphere this morning is not very calm , but I would like to inform the House that the Commission requires a decision on this report today , given that a decision has to be reached before 21 September .
The problem is as follows : firstly , the UNRWA is in an extremely delicate financial position , as is widely known .
Secondly , the European Union and Member States are the principal providers of finance for the UNRWA - i.e. the UNRWA is directly dependent upon the Community budget .
Thirdly , at this time , the Council is awaiting Parliament 's decision to authorize the Commission to sign the new financing Convention with the UNRWA .
I would ask you , please , to understand that , given the political situation and the fact that the UNRWA needs the money from the Community budget , we cannot further delay the approval of this resolution . And so that you can see that the Commission 's position is a neutral one , I would advise you that the Commission is not going to accept the amendments proposed by Mr Kouchner .
However , I do need the legal instrument in order to be able to sign the cooperation agreement .
I would , therefore , ask for your cooperation , although I do understand current difficulties .
We now come to the vote on the request that has just been made , to the effect that Report 359 should be adjourned .
There can be no more debate on it .
Who is in favour ?
( Parliament decided to postpone the debate )
Madam President , you have done something very serious .
I hope that the Conference of Presidents will put you right on this .
Rule 126 of the Rules of Procedure lists those items in respect of which the agenda may be changed and - are you listening , Mr Schulz , I am quoting : ' Only the following shall be heard on these motions in addition to the mover : one speaker in favour and one against and the chairman or rapporteur of the committee responsible ' . I therefore had the right to speak in favour of or against the motion tabled by my colleague in the Christian-Democrat group .
You have done something very serious , and I am asking you to put it right , because this was in breach of Rule 126 in conjunction with Rule 131 .
It is not my fault that we have violated the Rules of Procedure at this juncture !
Working time in maritime transport
The next item is the oral question ( B4-0851 / 96-0-0194 / 96 ) by Mr Hughes , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , to the Commission , on working time in maritime transport .
Once again , I should like to propose that this item be adjourned , or perhaps dealt with as rapidly as possible without debate .
On behalf of my group , I ask that this item be dealt with as quickly as possible without debate .
I find all this extremely tiresome .
But there is one thing I would say to Mrs Dury .
Following the vote on the most important report , Mr Funk 's report , we asked that the wish expressed by this House on Monday should be honoured .
That was a democratic decision , and I note that Mrs Dury , Mr Cot and a number of other honourable Members keep opposing it .
Different arguments are brought to bear each time and I say that it is a good thing that we should tell the European Council and the European Commission what decisions Parliament thinks need to be taken on this very important matter which is one of life and death .
I am thus in favour of Mr Liese 's proposal , Madam President .
Madam President , it was in order to avoid what is happening here now that I asked you to ask the interpreters whether they would stay until 1.30 p.m. so that we can debate Mr Kouchner 's report , Mr Hughes 's question and the bioethics question .
We have heard from the Commission that the Palestine question only involves a vote , and we can do that .

Mr Hughes 's question , too , only involves a vote , if we adopt the same procedure there as we have with many other reports today .

Then we shall have time to debate until 1.30 p.m. so I ask you , Madam President , are the interpreters now staying until 1.30 p.m. , yes or no ?
If so , then please let us vote on the Kouchner report and the Hughes question and then talk about bioethics .
It 's as simple as that !
I am responsible for ensuring that proper procedure is followed , and it is important that things should go smoothly .
So I will propose this : no more debate , but we will vote now on the three reports .
Do you agree to that ?
Madam President , we agree to vote immediately on the UNRWA report , and , as my colleague said , we are happy for things to take their normal course with the Hughes question and the oral question on bioethics .
I think we shall have time for that before 1.30 p.m.
Looking around the House , it seems to me that everyone agrees that we should get on with the voting quickly rather than discussing it any further and then starting a debate .
Mr Hughes has asked me to make this request .
I think that , for reasons of time , it would be sensible to adopt a procedure whereby we proceed immediately to the vote .
Now , this report is about extending the European Working Hours Directive to maritime transport , and an international conference of the International Labour Organization is taking place here in October and hopes to see a regulation to that effect on working hours in maritime transport .
That is the content of our motion for a resolution , and I would ask you to vote on it now .
I should have liked to hear the Commissioner 's reply , but , in any case , what we want is a commitment regarding support for the various ILO conventions on working hours in the maritime sector .
I should simply like to conclude by saying that my group deeply regrets the vote which has just taken place on the Kouchner report .
I believe we shall have a great deal of difficulty in explaining to the Palestinian authorities and the Palestinian refugees the attitude of certain Members in this House .
Madam President , I would like us to vote and to respect the wish of Parliament as expressed last Monday , and I would like us to deal with Mr Liese 's oral question .
Working conditions in maritime transport are not just a scandal - they are a cancer that threatens to spread to affect working conditions everywhere .
I should like to invite honourable Members to consider a theoretical experiment : what would happen if we had to steer this European Parliament , with all its different languages and working conditions , across the high seas - and without interpreters of any kind ?
It is long past time that we tried to find European solutions here - perhaps using the instrument of port state control , since it has proved impossible to prevent outflagging and second registration - and ensure that shipboard workers , too , once again have working and communication conditions which respect the rights of the workforce and promote safety at sea !
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , we have to enter the proceedings of this sitting in the minutes , and the Bureau will then be able to study them in the appropriate fora .
I believe this to be the first time in the history of this House that the Commission has deemed it inappropriate to answer an oral question - it was not a report , Madam President , it was an oral question from Mr Hughes .
I think this is all part of the madness currently afflicting our proceedings .
That has been noted .
Mr Dell 'Alba , the Commission would like to make a contribution on all points but , frankly , at the moment , what with all the files I have in front of me - 8 , to be precise - I cannot see how this is possible .
I admit that I do not know how I am to do this .
Please do not ask me to perform miracles when the situation here is changing every 30 seconds .
I can do no more than I am doing and am , quite frankly , disappointed .
Biology and medicine
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0852 / 96-0-0186 / 96 by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , Mr Tindemans and Mr Liese , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission , on the Council of Europe Convention on human rights and biomedicine ; -B4-0853 / 96-0-0192 / 96 by Mrs Roth , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on the Convention on humans rights and biomedicine.It is my understanding that the authors have decided not to move their oral questions .
Madam President , I heard Mr Martens say that people wanted to vote on the Kouchner report .
Could you not put that report to the vote , since we are all agreed on it ?
We are not asking for a debate , not a word , just put it to the vote straight away !
All right , so we will vote on the Oomen-Ruijten question first and 