Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament , adjourned on Thursday 5 July 2001 .
I hope that you have all had an excellent holiday and that you are ready to start work on this session .
Tribute
Ladies and gentlemen , I was very saddened to learn of the death of our fellow Member , Jacques Santkin , who passed away on 28 August .
As you know , Jacques Santkin had been with us since February 2001 and was part of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
He was a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and was also a member of the delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council .
I would like to ask you to observe a minute ' s silence in memory of our fellow Member .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , it is once again my sad duty to open this part-session with a further condemnation of the mindless and brutal terrorist attacks which occurred in Spain during the summer .
On behalf of the House , I would like to express our unwavering solidarity and our deepest sympathy to the families of the victims and I do so with a great deal of emotion and sadness .
The European Parliament today pays tribute to Justo Oreja Pedraza , a Spanish army general , Luis Ortíz de la Rosa , member of the Spanish national police , Mikel Uribe , member of the regional Basque police , and José Javier Múgica Astibia , town councillor in Leiza for the Union of the People of Navarre , whose family is present today . I would like to say to his wife , children and his sister-in-law that we admire the courage you have shown in the face of this tragedy , which has taken a loved one from you .
José Javier Múgica Astibia always stood up for freedom and democracy and he refused to bow down to terror .
Unfortunately , this cost him his life .
Terrorism intends to continue its reign of terror by placing bombs in airports , on railways or in towns where there are tourists .
Our thoughts are also with María Eraunzetamurgil and her grandson , who were victims of a horrendous attack . We still do not know who carried this out .
Despite the diverse political views held by its Members , the European Parliament forcefully condemns these barbaric actions , as they constitute an absolute denial of democracy and the fundamental values on which the European Union is founded .
I would like to ask you to observe a minute ' s silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity
By way of a letter dated 20 July 2001 , I received a request from the Spanish government , via the intermediary of the Spanish permanent representative , for the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Mr Silvio Berlusconi and Mr Marcello Dell ' Utri , which was drawn up by the Spanish judicial authorities .
Pursuant to Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure , this request is submitted to the relevant committee , namely the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
In order to assist matters , I would inform you that there are no grounds for the request for the waiver of Mr Berlusconi ' s parliamentary immunity , as he has not been a member of the European Parliament since 11 June 2001 .
Madam President , I would like to speak on behalf of the Socialist Group on the announcement you have just made . We take note of that announcement .
We believe it is a step forward . However , we would like to express our concern and criticism of the way in which this issue has been dealt with .
You and I are Members of Parliament . We have shared responsibilities in Parliament and we also share a legal training which reminds us of that aphorism , ' justice delayed is justice denied ' .
You have just shown how , in this case , justice is surely not going to be done in relation to one of the Members of the European Parliament , apart from the fact that the requests for waiver of immunity must also give the Members of the European Parliament the opportunity to defend themselves , something which has not been possible in this case for a year now .
I would like to point out on behalf of my group that we - independently of the electioneering considerations we have been accused of - have believed that this issue is important for the European Parliament , for our dignity , and we believe it is a step forward that the Committee on Legal Affairs is aware of this .
However , given that the Presidency ' s interpretation is in direct conflict with the integrating nature of Community law , I would ask you , Madam President , having become aware of this case , that we might resolve the issue of how we deal with waivers of immunity in this House in a positive manner and according to the integrating nature of European law .
Therefore , I would ask you once again to approach the Committee on Constitutional Affairs so that it may make a proposal for a reform of the Rules of Procedure which would clearly establish how we should act , not only in cases such as this , but in all cases of waiver of immunity .
( Applause from the PSE Group )
Mr Barón Crespo , you are well aware that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has already been working on a report on this issue for several months .
In addition , I believe the fact that the appropriate Spanish authority - namely the governmental authorities - referred this case to me is a most encouraging step towards a very positive outcome to this matter .
Madam President , I have only indicated my wish to speak because Mr Barón Crespo considered it fitting to take the floor here again .
I must tell you that , quite frankly , I do not think it was necessary to have addressed this subject here again .
Since this has been done , however , I would just like to say one or two words on the matter .
Of course , the process of waiving immunity is a difficult one , and we need common rules to govern this .
But , Mr Barón Crespo , it has already been decided that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market shall deal with this .
Therefore , your comment here was unnecessary .
I would particularly like to stress , Madam President , that , in all questions related to this process , you have conducted yourself completely in accordance with the law , and I would like to emphasise this here once again .
We would like to wish the former Member of this Parliament , Silvio Berlusconi , every success as Italy ' s Prime Minister .
We are certain that we also have the support of Italy in building a sound future for Europe .
( Applause from the PPE Group )
Thank you , Mr Poettering .
With regard to the membership of committees :
Madam President , we have been in correspondence about Mr Titford 's membership of the Committee on Fisheries , a very important committee for the United Kingdom .
We have expressed the hope that , since he never attends meetings of that committee , he might stand down as a member of it .
Agenda
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of Mr Napolitano who cannot be here .
It concerns these two reports about relatively non-controversial amendments to our Rules of Procedure .
These reports were adopted in committee last autumn and we in our committee were unanimously of the opinion that nine months is a long enough gestation period for any report .
We have of course enquired as to why the Conference of Presidents has not placed these two reports on the plenary agenda already .
We are anxious to know quickly because we need to know what will happen to these reports before we move to the general revision of the Rules of Procedure scheduled later this year .
It is therefore a matter of urgency .
We have been told that the Conference of Presidents has not had time to consider this in full because the matter is still being examined by the meeting of secretaries-general of political groups with the deputy Secretary-General of the European Parliament .
We all know about Coreper in the Council .
Perhaps not all of us are aware that there is a sort of Coreper in the European Parliament that filters reports before they come to the Conference of Presidents , before they come into plenary .
This is a highly dangerous way of proceeding and , after giving them nine months to consider the matter , it is now high time to put these reports on Parliament 's agenda , if not today , then later in the week .
I am sure the committee would be willing to accept an undertaking that they be put on for the next part-session .
But I must move this on behalf of the committee , supported unanimously by every political group in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
I am not sure that I understand , Mr Corbett .
I thought that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs was making a request for this item to be placed on the agenda of this part-session .
In my view , fellow Members must be clear as to what we are talking about .
Do you still request that this item be placed on the agenda of this sitting ?
We consulted the appropriate services to see if it could be included this evening , and as long as the House is in agreement of course , we could do that tonight .
Is this the issue that we are discussing and voting on ?
Madam President , that is the proposal formally put forward by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
We wish to make sure that this is properly addressed .
Madam President , we see how seriously my Party takes matters in this House .
As a Member of the Constitutional Affairs Committee , speaking on behalf of Lord Inglewood , I must say that it seems very nearly a year is sufficient time for the powers that be to have considered this matter .
If it is not placed on the agenda this week this is clearly going to cause difficulties for the committee in question .
I would urge all Members of the House , including my colleague Mr Provan , to vote in favour of this suggestion .
Madam President , I had the honour to represent Mr Poettering at the Conference of Presidents ' meeting , when this matter was discussed , as you well recall .
The issue was whether we had time to take a lot of reports , because the agenda for this part-session is already highly complicated and very busy .
I suggested that these two reports be taken with a major report from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs by Mr Corbett himself , and said it would be good to put together a whole package of changes to the Rules , because we need certain levels of voting throughout .
There did not seem to be any dissent in by the Conference of Presidents at the time and it was hardly questioned .
Therefore the recommendation of the Conference of Presidents was that these should be taken together as a package when Mr Corbett 's own report comes forward .
Madam President , I believe that this amendment of the agenda resolves an issue which remained somewhat in stalemate at the Conference of Presidents .
I do not believe that there is excessive divergence between the political groups , because we consider the three issues on the agenda to be important and we could deal with two very important issues in a more balanced way in the morning : the issue of the conclusions of the temporary committee on ' Echelon ' and the issue of terrorism .
I believe that this would resolve an issue which we believe was not sufficiently clarified at the Conference of Presidents .
) , rapporteur . Madam President , I note the proposal and if the report on terrorism is not moved by this proposal , then I would have nothing against moving it .
Mr Schmid has done an excellent piece of work with his report on Echelon and it is something which must be voted on by the whole House as soon as possible .
However , I tend to the view expressed by Mr Vitorino that one has heard of both God and Echelon but one cannot be sure that either of them exists .
I also take the view , which I believe , Madam President , is sustained and supported by your words at the beginning of today 's sitting , that it is extremely important that we debate and vote on the issue of terrorism - which is a very real one - as soon as possible this week .
Should Mr Barón Crespo 's proposal not have the effect of moving the report on terrorism then I would be very happy to support it .
Madam President , I submitted a request , which is different to that of Mr Barón Crespo , in that my request is to make other changes to the agenda .
Your request in fact arrived later than the request by the Socialist Group .
We shall , therefore , discuss it immediately afterwards , if the request by the Socialist Group is rejected .
This is the correct way of dealing with such a matter .
Is there a Member to speak against the request by the Socialist Group ?
There being no speaker , I shall put this to the vote .
( Parliament gave its assent ) Tomorrow ' s agenda will therefore be changed as a result .
I am sorry , Mr Lannoye , but your request therefore lapses .
I have another request relating to Wednesday from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , from the Group of the Greens , from the Confederal Group of the European Left , to end the debate on the conclusions of the G8 meeting at Genoa by tabling a motion for a resolution .
I shall give the floor to Mr Baron Crespo .
Madam President , at the Conference of Presidents , my group proposed that we hold a debate on the G8 summit in Genoa , essentially on its content .
Why ?
Because the European Union participated in the G8 summit in Genoa - and I refer to the graphic testimonials if anybody has any doubt .
The photograph of the leaders included the President of the Commission , Mr Romano Prodi , and the President-in-Office of the Council , the Belgian Prime Minister , Mr Verhofstadt , and , therefore , since they participated actively in the summit , one on behalf of the Commission and the other on behalf of the European Council , and since the summit dealt with a series of issues which are important to this Parliament , to Europe and to the world , we also believe that it is our duty to comment on the content of the G8 Summit .
I would also like to point out that my group proposed - and there is agreement on this in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs - that , in relation to possible violations of the fundamental rights of European citizens and the management of public order during the summit , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms should produce a recommendation with a view above all to learning from past mistakes , in the light of the Laeken Summit .
Finally , Madam President , please allow me to address the Members , particularly from the Liberal Group , because on this occasion it so happens that Mr Verhofstadt is a liberal Prime Minister of a coalition government and the most recent friends of President Prodi , at least the Italian ones , sit within the Liberal Group .
And I am addressing Mr Cox so that he might have the opportunity to send compliments to the representatives of his group who sat on the European Council .
Madam President , my group fully supports the suggestion to conclude our debate on Genoa by a resolution .
I do not propose , however , that we should enter into a debate on the content of this resolution .
That is something for the various groups to do .
My group believes that Parliament must deliver an opinion on the results - or the lack of results - of the G8 summit , as well as on the extremely serious events which took place during the summit , and on the extraordinary success of the initiatives of the Genoa Social Forum , which also concern us at a time when we are involved in a far-reaching debate on the future of the European Union .
Madam President , I am somewhat surprised that we are deciding now whether to have a resolution or not .
Our group had simply agreed with the proposal from the Socialist Group to revise the agenda slightly .
Admittedly , we made no formal connection between the two matters , but there was absolutely no question of there now being a resolution on Genoa .
Mr Wurtz , you have just indicated in your speech that we shall probably end up commenting on the very issues which we want to avoid here .
In any case , we do not feel that now is the right time to comment in a brief and hasty resolution on violent events , events which we take very seriously .
Our group is of the opinion that the issues of violence , menacing behaviour and the threat from globalisation should be very carefully looked at by Parliament and must not , through hasty or random decisions , be tied up in resolutions .
As we can see the risk of this happening , we completely refrain from passing a resolution and support what the Conference of Presidents decided last week - where I was represented by Mr Provan - that is to say that we should hold a debate and discuss all the aspects but not come to a hasty decision now concerning the contents of a resolution , or comment on the violence .
Rather , we should do this in our own time and with a great deal of care . Therefore , for sound reasons we are against a resolution on Genoa .
Madam President , I did not wish to speak at all but since the President of the PSE Group appears to be upset that I am doing too little to promote liberalism in Europe by not having a resolution , I should point out to the honourable Member that in my group we looked at the precedents .
It is not the first time a Commission President has attended a G8 meeting , or that a Prime Minister and President-in-Office has attended a G8 or G7 meeting .
The precedents will show the honourable Member , as they showed me , that it is not our custom to promote our friends in politics by having resolutions after such meetings .
I would also like to express my support for the motion for a resolution .
I do not believe that there is any political justification for failing to follow our debates by a resolution , when a political debate has been held in the presence of the Council and Commission .
The groups will negotiate the content of the resolution .
Therefore , if some groups do not want us to discuss the violence at Genoa , that is their right , but they will show their opposition by voting against any proposal made in this direction .
I shall therefore put to the vote the motion to table a resolution following the debate on Genoa .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Relating to Thursday : With regard to Thursday and the topical and urgent debate , I have a request for amendment from the Group of the Party of European Socialists to replace the item ' Foot-and-mouth disease ' by the sub-item ' Afghan refugees seeking asylum in Australia ' , which is currently under ' Human Rights ' .
Mr Baron Crespo , I do not know who is due to speak in favour of this request .
Madam President , the reason for our proposal is very simple : what is happening at the moment with the Afghan refugees and the treatment they are receiving from the Australian government - and I mean the Australian government because the Australian Federal Supreme Court is finding fault with it - does not only involve a violation of human rights ; it is an issue which involves a blatant violation of the principles of maritime law and humanitarian law ratified by all countries , including such an important European ally as Australia .
We must speak out clearly in this regard , by condemning a political attitude which verges on xenophobia .
Madam President , it is clear that the proposal concerning the Afghan refugees is a topic that must and can be open for discussion .
This is also provided for in the agenda . Given the new measures enacted in the United Kingdom in connection with the current spread of foot-and-mouth disease , we consider it vital that this matter be discussed .
Since these topics are not mutually exclusive , we would ask Parliament to cover this topic too .
Madam President , Mrs Maes has already put the point across very well .
What really matters is that we can specifically discuss the Afghan refugees under the heading of ' human rights ' .
However , we all appreciate the enormity of the problems there have been in Europe in connection with foot-and-mouth . It is therefore of major importance for the European Parliament to make its views known concerning foot-and-mouth .
We could combine both topics .
We could discuss the Afghan refugees under the ' human rights ' heading and foot-and-mouth disease under a separate heading in the topical and urgent debate .
In that connection , I would like to make an urgent appeal to our Socialist MEPs to leave the agenda as it stands .
Madam President , from what I have heard , there have been two interventions against and none in favour .
The comments made by Mrs Maes strongly reinforce the fact that the two items could both be dealt with , as I myself also said .
The situation of the Afghan refugees requesting asylum in Australia is already on the agenda , under ' Human Rights ' .
So , we will certainly be holding a debate on this issue , in any event .
So , how shall we deal with this ?
I think that we must take clear action and withdraw the item on foot-and-mouth disease from the agenda .
Fine .
I shall put to the vote the request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Regarding the sittings of 19 and 20 September in Brussels : There are no amendments .
Speeches relating to procedure
Madam President , on behalf of our group , I should like to ask you personally a question .
In connection with the Macedonian peace proposal , the Macedonian parliament must hold a debate as a matter of urgency .
Would you address the president of that parliament ?
We are all hoping for broad parliamentary support for the peace proposals , but this will not happen without any effort .
Parliament has a major role to play . Hence our request to you to ask the president of the parliament , in a letter or message , to discuss this peace proposal as a matter of urgency .
Mrs Maes , the response that I am going to give you will , I believe , exceed your expectations .
I am in fact going to visit Macedonia in a few days ' time , at the very request of all those people who are involved in this matter and who hoped that the President of the European Parliament would go to Macedonia , because this Parliament , I think it is true to say , is very well regarded and this certainly is a most encouraging sign .
Naturally , as soon as I can , I shall give you further details about this invitation , which I have only just received .
Madam President , on Wednesday of last week an aircraft of the Binter Mediterranean company , which flies between Málaga and Melilla , crashed near Málaga airport killing four and injuring seventeen .
It is the second time in two years that the city of Melilla has suffered a tragedy of this nature .
On this occasion , thanks to the skill and professionalism of the pilots - one of whom died - almost all the passengers survived .
Madam President , I would ask you to communicate our feelings and our solidarity to the families of the victims and the injured , with the conviction that the European Commission and this Parliament are demonstrating their concern for the quality and maintenance of the safety of air transport , as the debate we are holding this very Tuesday will show , when the European Commission presents its reports on this subject .
Madam President , yesterday in Vietnam , Mr Ho Tan Anh , a Buddhist monk , set fire to himself .
Last July , this Parliament adopted a very articulate , precise resolution , in which Parliament specifically requested Mr Nassauer , the chairman of the delegation for relations with South-East Asia , to organise a mission to Vietnam as soon as possible in order to meet , first and foremost , the religious leaders who are currently imprisoned , and to assess the situation with regard to religious freedom in Vietnam .
Therefore , Madam President , I am asking for your support and the support of the House so that Mr Nassauer can organise this mission in the coming days .
In my view , setting fire to oneself is extremely serious and it is a very clear sign that the situation in Vietnam is deteriorating and I believe that our delegation should pay an urgent visit to Vietnam , as Parliament had already decided .
Mr Dupuis , I shall pass on your request to Mr Nassauer .
He is not here in the House at the moment , but I shall tell him exactly what you have said .
Madam President , although I am sure that you will have done so already , seeing as this is our first sitting after the summer I would like to remind all the Members that , a few days after the last part-session in Strasbourg , a tragedy occurred in this city : a huge tree near Parliament fell on some people who were attending a concert and many died , including a number of young people .
I feel that , this being our first meeting after the summer recess , it is our duty to express our sympathy once again and send our condolences to the mayor of Strasbourg , the relatives of the victims and all the citizens for , apart from anything else , Strasbourg is our host city and the tragedy took place just a few metres away from the Parliament building .
Of course , Mrs Napoletano , as you already said , I immediately expressed our heartfelt sympathy and sent our condolences to the Strasbourg authorities as well as to the families of the victims .
This is a truly awful tragedy , and I wanted to express the feelings of this House by sending our condolences .
Madam President , I am obliged to raise an extremely unfortunate matter .
This Parliament is physically terrorising and persecuting a small Member State , namely Denmark , together with the Danish MEPs .
For many years , we ourselves have had to pay for being able to watch a Danish TV channel .
Now , it has been shut down , both here and in Brussels .
That is not good enough , and I should like to ask you not to delay a single day in turning to the only person who can solve this problem , namely our trouble-shooter supreme , our charming , wonderful , delightful and gifted fellow MEP , Mrs Banotti , so ensuring that we have Danish television again no later than tomorrow morning and that Parliament does not in future make life uncomfortable for one of the best Member States by practising this form of terrorism upon member countries .
Mr Blak , as I will be visiting Denmark in a few days , I shall certainly make it clear that there was no discrimination .
I am sure , however , that Mrs Banotti would like to reassure you of this fact straight away .
Madam President , when I heard that poor Mr Blak was in trouble again I naturally rushed to see what could be done about it as quickly as possible .
Apparently Denmark is now entering the digital age with television .
Consequently there has been a technical glitch with the reception of Danish television here , which of course I shall immediately attempt to rectify .
If my Danish colleagues want a particular radio or television station , they must agree as to which particular one they want .
This is a chance for my Danish colleagues to get together in a spirit of harmony and decide what precisely they want and I naturally will facilitate that as quickly as possible .
Madam President , now we can see why NATO forces in Kosovo not only made no attempt to apply UN Security Council Resolution 1244 , mainly as regards disarming the KLA , but declared it to be a protected body in Kosovo . They may not have arranged but they certainly allowed its equipment to be updated and , basically , they may not have encouraged but they clearly - albeit indirectly - allowed KLA criminals to penetrate the FYROM , where the present situation has now arisen .
This situation , Madam President , was the alibi that NATO needed in order to intervene , in order to apply this despicable agreement on voluntary disarming by the KLA and dictate constitutional change .
Thus , with the KLA being used as a lever and with direct support from the USA , yet another country is being broken up in order to create a new Bosnia-Herzegovina type protectorate .
In our view , not just the USA and NATO , but the European Union , which is supporting NATO action in the area , has a great deal to answer for .
This is not just our view ; it is shared by a great many journalists who , like us , are wondering what the next step will be .
We Greeks are particularly worried because we can see that the forces intervening in the Balkans are not working towards peace , they are working to stir up tension and armed conflict .
We are worried because , apart from anything else , we can see the fire spreading dangerously close to Greece , with the connivance of the Greek government .
As you are due to go there , we call on you to pass on our view that this policy should stop and that NATO should leave the Balkans so that the peace which existed before these interventions in our region can be restored .
Madam President , after the serious business may I end on a lighter note , with some good news for the region I represent , the north-west of England .
The English papers yesterday and today seem to be dominated by one issue , the memorable historic match when England beat Germany by five goals to one .
The reason it is such good news for us - and I offer commiserations to my German colleagues - is that the main architects of that victory came from the major clubs in the north west - although we did have a Swedish manager .
I hope this shows people that the north-west region of England is a centre of excellence , not just for football but for many other things as well and I invite you all to go whenever you can .
Madam President , thank you for giving me the opportunity of responding to the honourable Member so quickly .
I would like to congratulate him on the success of the English national team and at the same time point out to Mr Ferber , who is unfortunately not here , that the overwhelming majority of the German team comes from Bavaria !
Madam President , firstly , I would like to wish you all a good session this year .
I promise that I will only speak when it is absolutely necessary and I will start immediately by saying that , last Sunday , 26 August , I was in Genoa , my native city .
I was going to go for a swim in the sea - it was an extremely hot day - at the ' Italia ' bathing resort off Corso Italia , and I was about to dive into the water when I was recognised by an old childhood friend , a municipal councillor called Egidio Saccone , the owner of the establishment , who said to me : " Mr Fatuzzo , as a Member of the European Parliament , speak out and try to ensure that enthusiasts who practise all kinds of sports - swimming , boxing , field and track events , football , cycling , tennis and so on and so forth - receive a pension as well .
I am sure that they will listen to you , they will tell all the 15 States and they will do something about it . "
And ... then I went for a swim !
' Hand in hand for peace ' : that was the theme of the Adep demonstration scheduled to take place on 1 September in Ankara .
In actual fact , the demonstrators were unable to hold hands because the police prevented any demonstrating taking place : they entered the headquarters of Adep , which is a democratic party , and arrested hundreds and hundreds of people , going so far as to shut them in the stadium .
As we know , stadiums have been the scene of appalling , tragic incidents .
I therefore call upon the President to make representations to the Turkish government to ensure that the freedom of movement and speech and the freedom to demonstrate can be exercised by the Kurds and Turks , who simply wanted to be able to march together for peace , and to ensure that the people detained in the stadiums and Turkish prisons are released immediately .
I shall do so , Mrs Morgantini .
Madam President , I would merely like to expand on what Mrs Morgantini was just saying .
The ban on the peace demonstration on 1 September led to the death of one person who was fleeing from the police .
Today , 500 people remain in custody .
I ask you to do what you can to see to it that the 500 people still in prison are released immediately .
Once again , I shall certainly do so .
Madam President , I appeal to you to write to the Taliban authorities about the unfortunate case of Shelter Now .
Members of Parliament may have heard that a number of aid workers have been arrested by the Taliban authorities , largely on the basis that this is a Christian-based organisation which contravened the Taliban 's rules on religious intolerance .
I appeal to you to write to the Taliban authorities demanding fair treatment for those arrested and their rapid release .
They have committed no crime apart from trying to help Afghanistan and the Afghan people .
Afghanistan is one of the poorest and neediest nations in the world and it sets a very frightening precedent if aid workers are attacked because of their faith .
It will undermine aid operations throughout the world and especially in Afghanistan .
I would like to draw Parliament 's attention to the fact that these aid workers , both European and Afghans , may face the death penalty under Taliban law .
I urge Members of the House to support an appeal to the Taliban authorities to release those arrested .

Of course , Mrs Villiers , we are all well aware of the facts that you have described and this is further evidence of what I see as the insane and destructive nature of the Taliban regime .
You know that Parliament has expressed its view on this matter on several occasions and therefore I shall certainly be taking this action .
Madam President , before the summer break the Parliament 's Bureau finally decided that it would publish the names of all the assistants of Members paid under Article 14 secretarial allowances , but since then we find that the Bureau and the Quaestors have qualified their decision and are requiring the individual consent , of both the Members and the assistants , before they appear upon the list .
Surely , this makes a mockery of transparency and transgresses the principle that the names of all those who are paid from public funds should be published .
Can I ask you to request the Bureau and the Quaestors to review their decision ?
Mr Duff , in order to clarify matters , it was not the Bureau that reversed this decision - it is the directive on personal data protection which stipulates that this is necessary - and you will agree that it is difficult for the Bureau or the Quaestors to disregard the needed protection of personal data , which requires the consent of the persons concerned .
We have studied this matter very closely , in a strict manner , and , of course , the opinions of our legal service were absolutely firm on this point .
Madam President , a number of people have already raised issues relating to breaches of human rights and I also wish to raise a question of a serious breach of human rights .
A human right that every single person in this House would support is the right of little children to go to school unhindered and unterrorised .
As we speak in this House , four - five - and six-year-old children in a small area of Belfast in Northern Ireland are being terrorised by so-called protests .
I will not bore you with the arguments for and against these kinds of protests or the arguments of one side or the other - but these are political arguments between adults .
This should not involve little children going to school .
Madam President , I would appeal to you to write to all the parties in Northern Ireland , and the Irish and the British governments , to urge them to use every power and every means of persuasion at their disposal to stop these kinds of protests .
Let these little children go to school unhindered .
It seems to me that there is a view that terrorism only consists of bombs , guns and bullets .
But how will four-year-old children , going to school for the first day in their life remember that first day when they are surrounded by police who are armed because they need to protect them and who are seeking to provide them with a safe corridor to go into their classroom for their first day of school ?
It is an appalling situation and I would appeal to you to write to all the parties concerned .
While I am on my feet , may I also make the point that there has been an historic breakthrough in Northern Ireland .
As we all know , agreements to change things are not enough , there also has to be a change of heart .
There has been a new agreement on policing in Northern Ireland which is fundamental to the peace agreement .
The SDLP - the party led by John Hume who is in this Parliament - has given its support for the first time in the history of Northern Ireland to the police service there and they should be congratulated for that .
Madam President , last month in San Sebastian a booby-trapped toy seriously injured a baby in the arms of his grandmother who was killed by the explosion .
That lady you mentioned , was Maria Eraunzetamurgil , but you said that nobody knows who did it .
Six people have died as victims of the unofficial dirty war that has already killed 66 other victims since 1977 .
We expect those responsible to be put on trial .
Mr Barón Crespo said ' justicia aplazada , justicia negada ' .
I spoke about 1977 .
Mr Segundo Marey , who was kidnapped in error at the beginning of the socialist period of the dirty war , also died last month in Hendaía .
Those that were condemned as responsible for the kidnapping - high officials of the Spanish government and police - were released after only a few days in prison .
All those victims also deserve our sympathy and respect .
Madam President , the position taken by Mrs Morgantini and Mrs Uca on the situation in Turkey has our full backing .
I should like to add that it is now ten months since political prisoners in Turkish prisons went on hunger strike in protest against the government 's plans to keep them in tiny isolation cells .
The toll to date is tragic : thirty-two young people have died on hunger strike and a further thirty-one were killed in last December 's attack on the prisons by the Turkish authorities .
The most recent victim was Hulya Simsek , who passed away on 31 August .
She was the sixth relative of a political prisoner to die on hunger strike .
On behalf of the Communist Party of Greece , I wish to use this platform to condemn the criminal indifference of the Turkish regime and the hypocrisy of those who , while battling for human rights , have not lifted a finger to put pressure on the Turkish government to stop this intransigence in the face of the prisoner 's just demands and to respect human rights in general .
They include the European Union , which has a particular responsibility now that Turkey is a candidate country .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , indifference in the face of crime is tantamount to complicity .
Madam President , I am not absolutely sure whether this is a point of order , but it is a reply to a previous intervention .
This Parliament knows that the Spanish Constitution - probably because it was created following a dictatorship - is the most respectful constitution in terms of fundamental rights and public freedoms in the whole of the European Union .
This Parliament also knows that the person who spoke previously is an example of this because he has been able to take part in free elections , in which he has been able to express his opinions .
This Parliament also knows that when there have been violations of legislation in the fight against crime , those violations have been tried by ordinary courts with every judicial guarantee and there are currently people belonging to the State apparatus in prison as a result of those violations .
I cannot say the same about many colleagues from my party , from the Socialist Group or from other parties who , because they disagree with the opinions that have been expressed , have purely and simply been murdered .
And there are now around a thousand of them .
European Company Statute
The next item is the joint debate on :
Report ( A5-0243 / 2001 ) by Mr Hans-Peter Mayer , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Draft Council regulation on the Statute for a European Company ( SE ) ( 14886 / 2000 - C5-0092 / 2001 - 1989 / 0218 ( CNS ) ) , and
Report ( A5-0231 / 2001 ) by Mr Menrad , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Draft Council directive supplementing the Statute for a European Company with regard to the involvement of employees ( 14732 / 2000 - C5-0093 / 2001 - 1989 / 0219 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the idea of creating a European form of company obeying the same supranational rules in all Member States is almost as old as the European Union itself .
The Societas Europaea ( SE ) is the flagship of European company law .
The academic foundations were laid in the late 1950s .
In 1970 , the Commission submitted a proposal for a regulation on the statute of an SE .
It contained uniform law down to the last detail .
In 1989 , the Commission submitted an entirely new proposal for a regulation which excluded social and labour law , fiscal law , law on competition , protection of industrial property rights , insolvency law and industrial constitution law .
Finally in Nice , political agreement was reached on a Council regulation on the statute and on a directive on worker participation .
As regards the legal base : the 1989 proposal was based on the present Article 95 which establishes the right of co-decision .
The Nice proposals are based on Article 308 whereby Parliament would simply be consulted .
Article 95 is just as appropriate a legal base for the regulation as Article 308 .
For the purposes of democratic legitimacy - and in line with decisions of the Court of Justice - the legal base giving Parliament most say should be chosen in such a case .
Consequently , Parliament reserves the right , following adoption by the Council , to bring a case before the Court to examine the legal base .
As regards the regulation : pursuant to Articles 2 and 3 , there are different ways in which an SE can be established .
The capital of the SE must be at least EUR 120 000 .
There are two different systems of managing limited liability companies under the company law of the Member States .
The ' single ' system in Britain , for example , provides solely for an administrative body .
The ' dual ' system , applicable in Germany , for example , provides for a supervisory body and a management body .
European unification now requires that both systems be available in each country so that it is possible to choose freely between them .
Hitherto , company law of the Member States has been such that national companies can only transfer their place of business if they are dissolved and re-formed in another Member State .
With an SE , a transfer will not result in the company being dissolved or in a new legal entity being created .
The growing together of what used to be separate markets means that we must finally create organisational forms which reflect the new situation in Europe .
However , there are serious shortcomings in the structure of the SEs .
SEs will differ from one Member State to another .
There will not be one European SE , but an SE with French , Spanish or German features , for example .
Furthermore , even within the same Member State a variety of different SEs will be created to cover various company features such as co-decision making .
I consider it essential that , parallel to the entry into force of the regulation , accompanying fiscal rules should also be adopted .
The precise nature of the SE will , naturally , be determined in part by fiscal legislation .
To this end , the series of amendments from the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is to be welcomed .
In conclusion , I advocate launching the SE on its maiden voyage .
This will show where repairs are still needed so that one day it will fulfil our hopes and become the flagship .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Mayer pointed out that the idea of creating a European limited liability company was already being discussed more than 30 years ago .
The former President of the European Commission and Member of this Parliament , Mr Santer , made this form of company a more prominent subject for discussion in the second half of the 1990s .
Mr Santer and a number of his fellow campaigners here in Parliament wanted it as a way of attracting global players from Europe to compete in world markets .
The European limited liability company has hitherto foundered in the Council of Ministers especially because of the issues surrounding the position of workers .
In 1970 , a regulation on the European limited liability company one-sidedly stipulated just the German model of co-decision-making , although co-decision-making is simply not an item for export .
In the late 1980s , Parliament was presented with two documents which were intrinsically linked .
Dr. Mayer has already outlined these : a regulation on issues of company law - the statute - and the directive concerning the position of workers in the limited liability company or SE .
Three models were established , of which one had to be chosen .
Even in this matter , there was no general consensus .
It was only in 1997 that a solution emerged in the form of a proposal from Parliament .
This proposal was underpinned academically by the work of a group of experts under the chairmanship of Etienne Davignon , and the Davignon Report was signed by trade union members and members of employer associations .
Whichever way you look at it , this was a breakthrough because it fell back on the recipe for success established by the Directive on the European works council , a subject which we shall touch upon again in the next item on the agenda .
The following basic principles for the creation of a European limited liability company were now proposed : flexibility , negotiated solutions and minimum standards .
Thus , the customs of employee participation existing within the European Union were also skilfully incorporated .
In other words , in some countries participation is established through legal channels and in others by means of collective agreements .
Now these are combined : as regards the European limited liability company , a special made-to-measure collective agreement is drawn up between the founding board of directors and a special negotiating body of employees and , in the absence of an agreement , the minimum laws governing worker involvement shall be applicable for half a year to a year .
The Davignon Report calls these reference rules .
The EWC Directive talks of subsidiary requirements .
I think this is the better term as it refers to subsidiarity in an exemplary manner .
This idea was also decided upon in Nice .
We support the regulations governing participation agreed in Nice .
The report from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs proposes two significant amendments to the Council ' s draft .
Firstly , we would like a different definition of the term participation from that used by the Council .
The designated body representing workers is nothing more than a special European works council for the European limited liability company , incidentally with better legal powers , something which we should remember when amending the Works Council Directive .
However , there are , and remain , laws governing information and consultation .
It would be wrong to use the term ' participation ' here .
Secondly , the original Commission proposal made it clear that the procedure for electing employees onto the supervisory or management board is to be governed according to the provisions applicable in each Member State .
In Germany , therefore , employee members must be directly or indirectly elected in accordance with the election of members to supervisory boards pursuant to the German law on stock companies .
I am convinced that , in this regard , it is essential not to make a distinction in the electoral process .
Under German law on stock companies , members are elected . Under the arrangements governing the European limited liability company , employee representatives will not be elected .
The regulation and directive in question have retrieved the European limited liability company from the frozen depths of European legislation .
However , both - and here I agree with Mr Mayer - exhibit major shortcomings .
We must finally take the first step , however .
After six years , these two legal instruments should be tested and , if necessary , improved .
We must get a foot in the door .
The next gust of wind will open that door .
I think that , with this European model , we are on the right track , including where the social dimension of the internal market is concerned .
The European model is , of course , not purely a matter of market economics and , therefore , not purely a limited liability company either . Rather , it is a limited liability company also involving the participation specifically of the employees .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are delighted with the proposals that are before us .
Mr Mayer and Mr Menrad have already noted that there is still room for some improvement as far as those proposals are concerned .
Nevertheless , I believe we should be very pleased with the progress made on this extremely important subject .
Before , it was mainly the American multinationals that considered the lack of a European Company as a deficiency , because they wanted to work in Europe rather than in the individual Member States .
It is also for that reason that , as long as thirty years ago , Professor Sanders introduced the concept of ' Societas Europaea ' during an inaugural speech at the Erasmus University in Rotterdam .
We are pleased that the proposal is now before us after thirty years .
We regret the fact that it is still not possible now finally to bring the tax systems in Europe closer together and to gear them to one another .
This does not mean that taxes should be harmonised .
I believe that a band of competitive tariffs should remain in place , but I still think that it is important for a European Company to have the tax systems in the various Member States at least geared to one another .
Indeed , we may now have one European Company , but each Member State will still need to apply its own social legislation and its own tax systems .
It will ultimately be the market which will require that an actual European Company with its own statute be created , something which , at present , is still being hampered by the independent actions of the various Member States .
We therefore welcome the European Company .
We hope that the evaluations will follow promptly and believe that the market will eventually determine the European Statute a few years following those evaluations .
This will benefit a Europe that has the euro and the internal market .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Menrad and Mr Mayer on their reports .
I would also like to back up what Mr Mayer said about the legal base .
He is quite right .
We have had people playing fast and loose on the whole question of the legal base .
We started off with Article 95 as legal base and we have moved on to Article 308 because it suited certain people .
That is wrong and Parliament is right to say that at some future date we should be challenging this in court .
Concerning the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on Mr Menrad 's report on the information and consultation of workers , I take the two examples of Corus and BMW Rover .
The first thing workers knew about the situation they were facing was when they were driving into work and they heard it on the radio .
In this day and age that is totally intolerable .
Workers should be informed at the very start about the situation pertaining to their jobs because they are part and parcel of that company .
I should know .
I remember many years ago I turned up at my place of work to find that the gates of the factory were locked and all of us were standing outside .
We were told by someone who was sent out that we had all been made redundant .
I remember that quite clearly because the people who owned the factory still lived in big houses , still drove big cars and still went on holidays .
I was a worker in the factory and nine months later I had not received any redundancy money : all I got was my back pay .
That is the sort of situation workers should not be faced with ever again .
That is why I congratulate Mr Menrad on taking this small step on the information and meaningful consultation of workers because it is a step in the right direction .
It is not perfect . It will come back and we will improve it .
However , it is a step in the right direction and I support it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not wish to go into any more detail , but it has already been explained why the European limited liability company is so important .
That is why the circumstances in which this form of company arose and the problems with which we must deal here are all the more regrettable .
We all know that the Nice Summit was not exactly a raging success and , instead , produced a meagre result as far as the treaty negotiations are concerned .
With this limited liability company , the Heads of State and Government intended to be able to offer us , as a minor success of this summit as it were , something which would at least take Europe a step further .
In principle , this is of course to be welcomed .
However , it is regrettable - absolutely regrettable - that the Heads of State and Government have disregarded the law and the Treaty by actually changing the legal base on the basis of the motto ' we have now come to the agreement that , as regards this matter , Parliament is not to interfere ' .
They have replaced Article 95 , which was clearly the legal base for one part of the process , with Article 308 , which they have also used to replace Article 137 which clearly would have been the legal base for the other part of the process according to the text of the Treaty .
The result is no co-decision making ; the result is unanimity in the Council , with decision-making resting solely with the government .
Personally , I do not think that Parliament can accept this .
Therefore , by a large majority in the Committee on Legal Affairs , we have amended the legal base and re-established the correct legal base , in other words Article 95 and Article 137 .
It is also interesting that this has been expressly established in the recitals to the original proposal and that the legal services have given their support to this .
We have proceeded with consultations as with a co-decision procedure .
I would like to warn the Council of the following : If they amend the legal base for this important process again in its second reading , then they are running the very serious risk of legal action from Parliament in this matter .
I believe that we will win this action in the Court of Justice .
The practical value of the process is , in our experience , rather limited anyway .
I am referring to the letter from the president of UNICE .
We have already referred to this within the committee .
We have requested that fiscal regulations be revised , and I hope that this revision is carried out soon .
Mr President , my group and myself , a rapporteur many years ago , are in favour of the regulation , but not because we are particularly taken with it , since what is presented to us here as a European limited liability company is incomplete .
There will not be one European limited liability company , but 15 European limited liability companies .
What complete disorder !
I do not want to go into the details .
The Council has confirmed what is common knowledge : that the Council itself is the problem when it comes to European legislation .
The Council , not the Commission and not Parliament : the Council is the problem !
It still wants only to decide on matters unanimously , and if there is a legal base for doing so - in this case Article 308 - all the better .
So we do not need Parliament .
But we will - as Mr Lehne said - very carefully consider whether this legal base is adequate , and in emergencies we shall involve the European Court of Justice in the matter .
In the hands of the Council , Community law is becoming a new style of international law , with the difference and the practical advantage that it does not have to be ratified either by the European Parliament or by national parliaments .
This is the strategy of the Council .
Why should this European limited liability company be such an attractive prospect ?
Why should it be adopted ?
Is it not the case that this European limited liability company is threatened with the same fate as the previous company patent under the Luxembourg Convention ?
In this case , the Council , after many years of laborious work , also came to a compromise , and the whole of industry , all parties concerned , were not interested in it .
Perhaps things will not be different with this form of European limited liability company .
So what are the advantages ?
Why should we create a European limited liability company ?
What are the fiscal advantages , for example ?
I , for one , cannot see any .
Just one more remark : It may well be that the tenth Directive concerning cross-border mergers of limited liability companies will again be unearthed after this flop , by way of a supplement as it were , because nothing will come of this European limited liability company .
But hold on a minute , my friends from the Commission and the Council , nothing came , first time around , of the tenth Directive concerning cross-border mergers of limited liability companies and involving the abolition of participation , and nothing will come of it this time !
Now that we have come to grips with the European limited liability company as it were , I would like to remind you that other company forms are next on the list : the European association , the European mutual society and the European cooperative .
I hope that the Commission lays down proposals on these matters in the near future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to speak in this debate dealing with a key proposal for the process of European construction .
The possibility of having a genuine European limited liability company is in line with the thinking which has led us to a European internal market , to a monetary union and to the last phase of the full use of the euro , which we are now approaching .
Nevertheless , as one of the rapporteurs has pointed out , it has taken us thirty years to arrive at this thinking - a little more than thirty years - from the first proposal , in 1970 , until now .
My observation on behalf of the Liberal Group has two aspects to it : on the one hand , we will of course support the proposal ; we believe that it represents a step forward within the achievements of the process of the European construction .
We must also say , however , on the other hand , that we are not satisfied .
As the proposed amendments to both reports point out , the structure proposed for the creation of a European limited liability company is still too complex .
There are various options and the possible varieties of European company may even arise within a single Member State .
It is now thought that if the different methods and options are taken into account and a combined calculation is made , up to two hundred different figures may be reached .
We do not believe that this is the most appropriate way to consolidate a European company which would act in accordance with the reality which we have achieved thanks to the European internal market and the monetary union .
We have therefore also presented a series of amendments on behalf of the Liberal Group aimed at consolidating this key figure for the Economic and Monetary Union and we would very much like the Council to accept them .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of the Group of the Greens , I should like to say a few words on this subject .
Immediately before the summer recess , we experienced the difficult situation involving the Take-over Directive , the social aspect of which , in particular , appeared unacceptable to a majority of this House .
We can be very clear about this .
In this case , the Directive is certainly acceptable , although I share the view of Mr Rothley and others that it is still deficient .
However , that is due to a number of other factors .
Ideally , we should have liked to have seen a kind of package deal emerge , combining the Take-over Directive and the European Company Directive , which would also have taken care of aspects related to participation , information and consultation .
At the moment we are facing the difficult situation in which things happen in a certain sequence but in which we cannot entirely follow their interconnection .
In the final analysis , we naturally agree that , in the framework of what we would then term ' a European social model ' , use should be made of the information and consultation rules that have been included in the reports of Mr Menrad and Mr Mayer which are , by the way , excellent , in my opinion .
We should like this to be done in a non-Anglo-Saxon manner , as I indicated in connection with the Take-over Directive .
If we now compare the European works council , as it exists at the moment , with the legislation under discussion with regard to information and consultation , then this comparison works out in favour of the current model .
However , as will immediately be evident from the document , we still have the improvement of the European works council ahead of us .
A great deal needs to be done there , so much so that I am not sure what the exact outcome will be .
We therefore ultimately agree on this approach .
With regard to information and consultation , we are naturally keen advocates of what is being described as ' Rhineland working relations ' .
We accept this as what might be called a minimum guideline .
For a number of countries , such as Austria , Germany and the Netherlands , the transposition into national legislation will therefore be of the utmost importance , because they generally apply superior regulations , and adaptation could prove problematical .
Finally , I would draw your attention to the fact that I especially support Mr Menrad ' s Amendment No 7 concerning the definition of ' participation ' .
It is a challenge for the Commissioner to agree to this and also to handle the legal bases correctly .
Mr President , after 30 long years of negotiations , the Employment and Social Affairs Ministers managed to reach agreement last December on a statute for a European company .
The creation of a European company has long been seen as essential to a comprehensive body of European company law which promotes business .
In an increasingly globalised business environment , the arrival of the SE is timely .
Capital moves easily across borders as multinational firms seek out the most attractive business locations .
The Union can achieve a great deal in the creation of a single market for goods , services and capital .
There has long been a need to create a European company to complement this picture .
Members of this Parliament hail from 15 different sovereign states and are aware that company law differs widely from one Member State to another .
I welcome the fact that this regulation foresees five different ways in which an SE can be established .
Member States ' company law allows for two different systems of company management .
The regulation proposes that both systems be available in each country .
Hence companies will be able to choose the approach which best suits their needs .
In view of the slow-down in the US economy and consequently the world economy , it is essential that we , as legislators , do all we can to facilitate business and job creation .
The creation and management of European companies must take place with as few hindrances and bureaucratic obstacles as possible .
Companies must be afforded the flexibility they need to stay lean and move swiftly in a highly competitive environment .
The rapporteur refers to taxation .
It must be made clear that taxation policy is a matter for each Member State and its national parliament .
Any proposal that corporate tax be paid by SEs and could go into EU coffers is totally unacceptable .
The Irish government has a policy of low corporate tax to encourage investment .
Our 12.5 % rate has proved itself by actually increasing tax revenue while at the same time promoting sustained growth .
Ireland could not countenance any suggestion of harmonising corporate tax rates , especially in this period of economic slow-down .
I commend Mr Menrad and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for their work on employee rights .
We in Europe have long held that a partnership approach works best .
Companies are reliant on their employees .
There must be no erosion of the workers ' rights that have been won over time .
A European company without participation in some form is unthinkable .
There are a number of models of worker participation .
It is positive that the regulation avoids a one-size-fits-all approach .
In conclusion , the scale of employee participation will be decided through free negotiations between the companies concerned and the workers .
Madam President , I am speaking this evening on behalf of my colleague Lord Inglewood who has been shadowing this for the British Conservative Group and who has unfortunately been delayed due to the inadequacies of plane transport from here to Brussels .
He asked me particularly to make that point to you .
I broadly welcome this as a pragmatic proposal .
I do not want to reflect on what might have been .
I want to address a few remarks to the Commissioner about the implementation of this proposal because it is a welcome advance that we will actually get something into the market place - and that is how we should regard it , - because companies will have the option of whether to adopt this form of company statute or not .
It is entirely pragmatic and practical that we will initially have a proposal that will be subject to governments among the 15 Member States .
I want to say to the Commissioner that considerable attention has to be given to ensuring that the rules for this new company statute are consistently implemented across the Member States .
Currently , we have inconsistent application of company law within the existing Member States ' statutes on things like publication of information , timely publication of accounts , proper completion of accounts - all those sorts of issues are currently implemented differently .
This new statute has to be implemented consistently and we have to make sure that courts in Member States who will be responsible for this have the training and ability to do so .
I also join in what colleagues have been saying about issues to do with taxation and company law .
Mr Mayer , in an excellent report , wisely says at the conclusion that he advocates launching the European statute on a maiden voyage .
Well , it will show where repairs are needed - that is certainly true .
But we must not overload this with other expectations about aligning company law , particularly tax harmonisation .
I join with colleagues who have said how dangerous this is as a concept .
We must not overload this statute with things that it was not designed to carry , otherwise it will sink very quickly indeed .
Mr President , in relation to the last intervention by Mr Harbour , I must tell him that there is not much danger of the ship sinking , since it is travelling very light .
I have never seen such a light regulation or proposed regulation as this one .
It is so light that we are going to have practically no company harmonisation .

As Mr Rothley has said , what we are going to have is fifteen different national laws on the European company , fifteen different European companies and , as Mr Gasòliba i Böhm said , we are going to have more than two hundred possible combinations of different types of company .
This is truly the softest type of legislation I have seen in my life .
Secondly , the Council intends to take legislative power away from us : Mr Gallagher spoke of acting as legislators .
If we take the Council ' s route , Parliament will be deprived of all legislative power .
I believe that Parliament would probably take the correct route by challenging this decision before the Court of Justice , because the Treaties cannot be unilaterally modified by one Community institution .

Thirdly , as Mr Rothley pointed out earlier , the type of European company we are going to create is not going to provide any special advantage , above all any fiscal advantage ; if we do not take action in the field of taxation , it is going to be very difficult to bring about the creation of European companies and , therefore , it seems to me very important , as the majority of previous speakers have proposed , that the fiscal field be involved .
Mr Harbour spoke of the possibility of the ship sinking .
I would say that the danger is that the ship will capsize as a result of a lack of ballast .
Mr Harbour probably has some naval experience and he knows that , when a ship carries no weight , the easiest thing is for the ship to capsize and sink for other reasons .
Therefore , it seems to me that the important thing at the moment is : first , to insist on Parliament ' s legal prerogatives , and , secondly , to insist that in order to have a law on European companies we must also incorporate tax aspects .
Without taxation it will be very difficult for us to implement a European economic law , a European company law and a European commercial law .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive on the involvement of employees in the European company gives us our first opportunity to establish at Community level a precise definition of what is meant by the right to information , consultation and participation of employees in all companies .
The proposal determines the registration to a trade regime by companies which may choose this new statute following a negotiated agreement on employee involvement .
Under these conditions , the Group of the Greens is not turning its nose up at it ; the group supports Mr Menrad ' s report and its proposals , the aim of which is the swift adoption and effective implementation of this directive .
Of course , we will do this in the belief that this required condition certainly does not allow us to consider that European legislation genuinely fulfils current needs .
As soon as the vote is over , we must carry on and get back down to work on this issue .
You are aware that this directive will in future only apply to the employees of companies that choose this new statute , in other words , a small minority .
That is why we must obviously stop ourselves from celebrating and trying to make an impact .
We will only have made progress when we have simultaneously adopted this directive , revised the directive that we discussed earlier on European works councils and approved the Directive on Information and Consultation of Employees under conditions that differ slightly from the position adopted by the Council .
The co-decision procedure must be used in order to perform this legislative work under conditions which guarantee a genuine debate , involving society and citizens .
I would like to stress that the Group of the Greens rejects the pressure that inevitably leads to restricting its right to legislate , on the pretext of being efficient and swift , particularly because , as we all know , this dossier dates back a long way .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the two rapporteurs on the work they have done , which , while certainly not reaching the zenith or the high point which the studious amongst us may have wished for , nevertheless represents important progress in the development of what in the future will be a genuine European company with all the characteristics appropriate to that concept .
Max Weber defined the company as an organisation which , while controlling them , is intended to produce goods and services for a market .
Obviously , a company can be owned by a physical person or by a legal person , and it is general practice , also derived from the will of the individual businessperson to restrict their responsibility - particularly relating to property - towards third persons , that the businesses of certain economic entities adopt the form of companies .
Of course , the company means plurality , the organisation of goods , but above all of services .
It is therefore logical - and I am referring essentially to the social aspects - that there be particular study , analysis and regulation of the involvement of workers in the European company statute and that in a dual system , with a general council and a management and supervisory body , or in a single system , with simply an administrative body , the feelings and knowledge of workers be taken into account , listened to and accepted by means of their representatives , and that workers understand the progress of the company , the risks , the vicissitudes and the objectives it is pursuing .
I do not have time , and I believe it is unnecessary , to refer to the methods and degrees of participation , to the negotiating body or to the role of the European company in the structuring of European social life .
However , please allow me to refer to the role of the representatives of workers at the point of closure of all or some of the establishments in one or various nations , staff relations , the creation of subsidiary companies and , in general , to all the decisions which are essential to the ordinary life of the company .
Also important are the transitional period of three years , a high degree of uniformity in the application provisions of the regulation and the transposition of the directive , which would endorse the raison d ' être , facilitate the nature of the European company and help to create more Europe , to the benefit of companies , employment and consumers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when dealing with this subject we must also inevitably return to the events in Genoa .
We shall of course deal with the violation of civil rights later .
This evening , I would like to touch upon the protest of ten thousand , predominantly young , people against globalisation and economic power .
We must take more seriously than before their concerns surrounding the increasing division in the world between the rich and the poor and the exploitation of our natural resources .
Precisely because many problems can no longer be resolved at a national level , the European Union is specifically responsible for monitoring unbridled economic and financial dealings .
Up until now , the European Union has pursued this aim very hesitantly .
One of several possibilities open to us is to establish the legal base for employee participation , information and consultation before decisions are taken .
The European limited liability company - really an inevitable idea , and also a sensible idea in itself , within the European internal market - is however only acceptable to us as European Socialists with the appropriate inclusion of employees and their trade unions .
Company decisions are therefore only really thought out if employees ' points of view are considered .
Management alone cannot make important decisions .
The numerous failed mergers and events at Renault Vilvoorde , Danone , Marks & Spencer and in other companies in the past are , in our opinion , good evidence of this .
Additionally , I would like to thank the French government for reaching a compromise and for also finally convincing Spain that this legislation must be given the green light .
I would like to criticise the procedure decided on by the Council .
In this regard , I share the criticism of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
However , I would like to say , Mr Lehne , that I did not find the reasons you gave very convincing , since the Council has , of course , been able to count on the support of Parliament .
We have also pursued this procedure rapidly and constructively in the course of the Committee ' s work .
It is not because of us that the procedure would have failed .
So , there was essentially no reason to change the legal base .
I share the criticism and think that the Council should consider this carefully and also stipulate their reasoning , for we have not , to date , actually heard the reason for changing the legal base .
I would like to extend my thanks to Mr Menrad for working rapidly and constructively with us in the Committee on Social Affairs to bring this report to the vote .
I would also like to thank him for being more specific in response to proposals from my group .
However , I believe , Mr Menrad , that we are agreed that we must not adopt Amendment No 12 .
I have at any rate recommended this to my group .
Finally , I would refer to the appeal to secure a majority of votes tomorrow to enable this ship - as one member put it - to be launched on its maiden voyage , despite some reservations and also in spite of some inconsistencies , which we could not allow to go unmentioned .
I think , however , that it would be sensible to bring in a law that takes employees into consideration and includes their interests in time for the introduction of the euro .
The planned revision does not need to be deferred for six years . We can certainly carry this out earlier .
Mr President , is the directive on the European limited liability company a good thing or not ?
Last night , knowing that I would have to speak this morning , I dreamed that I was Mr Fatuzzo the MEP .
However , I was an older Mr Fatuzzo MEP with whiter hair and I was also rich , very rich , absolutely filthy rich , so rich that I could swim in a pool of gold like Donald Duck ' s Uncle Scrooge .
With me in the pool was Mr Menrad , the rapporteur , and you were there too , Mr President .
That is right , I dreamed that all three of us were swimming in euro coins .
Why is that ?
Because I had become rich when , following the adoption of the European limited liability company , I had become an industrialist , I had built factories throughout Europe and I had established registered offices of the European company in all 15 States of Europe .
This directive is excellent and is the first step along a path that will lead many people to the wealth that made me - the first to set up a European company in all the States - so rich , so stinking rich .
Well then , Mr President , to conclude my expression of support for this directive , I can only invite Mr Menrad , who has been working on his report and the directive for many years , and you as well , Mr President , to come for a swim in my pool full of euros , to come and stay with me for a holiday in my newly-acquired castle .
Only in your dreams , of course , Mr President !
Mr President , legal doctrine and politics talk a lot of the European social model and it should be pointed out that , at least in terms of the collective rights which regulate industrial and labour relations , European company law , as we are seeing this afternoon , is experiencing the trauma of a very difficult birth , after a pregnancy which has lasted thirty years .
I would also like to point out that , in light of the Treaty of Maastricht and the Social Protocol , since 1974 there has only been one legislative instrument adopted at European Union level .
Therefore , those of us who are tuned in to the thoughts of millions and millions of workers can today be satisfied because this second approximation is taking place , and then we will also see the reform of the Statute .
However , Mr President , the least we can say is that we are going too slowly and with so many preventions and precautions ( with regard to certain countries represented in the Council , including my own ) that , in the end we have frankly witnessed an anticlimax . Very little has been produced .
However , I am going to support it , of course .
After so much drought we have this little drop of fresh water which , although it is still insufficient , is beginning to eradicate this terrible anguish which our citizens are also suffering .
I would like to remind the members of the Council , as Mrs Weiler has said , that what is happening in Europe and in the rest of the world is that the people are extremely concerned , given the social advances they had achieved in each individual country , that the process of globalisation , the process of European Union construction - and next the enlargement of that Union - should not under any circumstances lead to a reversal of those social advances .
Nevertheless , we are seeing that many governments , and some sections of political opinion , as well as sections of business , now intend to remove many of the achievements which had been made at national level .
I would like to congratulate Mr Menrad because he has defended , from the point of view of the best Christian Democrat tradition , as well as our Social Democratic tradition , the social achievements made in his country of origin and intended for the whole of Europe .
That must be our perspective : to move forward and to take the direction of the most advanced countries , and not of the least advanced ; to take up the arguments of those who are thinking of the citizens , of the workers , and not of those who are considering how to remove the historic achievements of those citizens and workers .
Therefore , Mr President , despite many doubts , doubts about the legal basis - I believe we will have to make an effort to defend the rights of Parliament - we must not delay this company legislation for one more second since , together with the directive on information and consultation , it must make rapid progress .
And there will still be time , with experience , to improve on the current deficiencies .
Mr President , I should like to start my remarks by referring briefly to comments from the other side of the House , from Mr Medina Ortega , who complained about what this legislation does not do , with particular reference to social harmonisation and tax harmonisation - omissions which I personally welcome .
But from our different positions across the House we should not really complain about what this legislation does not do .
We should be happy about what it does do , which is to enable a European company statute to come into force after 30 long years .
As has been said , this is voluntary .
We do not know at this stage how many companies will be interested in starting up such companies , nor what flaws they might find in the legislation if they do .
We do not know what companies might be interested but are deterred from starting up such companies , again because of flaws in the legislation .
Other changes might be needed .
I discussed with one of the rapporteurs , Mr Menrad , the idea of putting into his report an amendment that this legislation should be looked at again within a reasonable period of time to see what improvements might be needed in the light of experience .
He was happy to support this , but very wisely suggested that any such amendment should be put into the main body of the statute report , in other words , the Hans-Peter Mayer report .
On that basis I did not table any such amendment here but would highlight Amendment No 16 in the Hans-Peter Mayer report which specifically covers all issues , therefore including consultation issues .
Too often EU laws get set in stone .
We need to become much lighter on our feet .
This should become the rule rather than the exception .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate and thank Mr Menrad for his tenacious and efficient approach to the dossier on employee involvement which has been a stumbling block in negotiations on the Statute for a European Company for several years .
Although the first proposal for a regulation dates back to 1970 , we had to wait for the Nice European Council before we finally reached an agreement on a draft directive on employee involvement , which supplements the draft regulation on the Statute for a European Company .
It was therefore a delicate balance that was found at the Council meeting on 20 December and it is vital to ensure that we retain this balance .
That is why Amendment No 4 , which requires Member States to make appropriate provisions for negotiations in the case of structural changes , seems hard to accept as it amounts to bringing into question the hard-fought agreement .
The same applies to Amendment No 7 which seeks to remove the exhaustive list of rights held by the body representing employees in the participation process , which , in practice , leads to a participation system that disregards specific national characteristics and casts doubt upon the safeguard mechanism of rights to participation , set out in the Annex to the directive .
Key players in the economy and society have been waiting for the Statute for the European Company for more than 30 years .
We must therefore ensure , ladies and gentlemen , that we fulfil the need expressed by companies for simplicity and flexibility and that we do not , as a result , complicate this statute by incorporating new restrictions which would discourage the companies concerned , and particularly small and medium-sized companies , from using this new tool that is at their disposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to offer my congratulations to the two rapporteurs , Mr Menrad and Mr Mayer , and also , and especially , to Messrs Gasòliba , Rothley and Lehne , who have added specific aspects .



I am glad that the Mayer and Menrad reports were discussed together because this also underlines the fact that we are endeavouring to live out the social market economy and , rather than play social policy off against economic policy , consider these as complementary and common factors and establish a symbol of unity .
On which basic conditions is this European limited liability company founded ?
Globalisation brings home to us what it means for there to be no borders ; the internal market is hopefully on the verge of implementation , enlargement of the European Union will unite the continent , and there will be notes and coins for economic and monetary union , with the euro as the visible sign of Europe ' s coming together , the symbol of a growing European identity and the expression of the Union ' s intention to be a resolute presence on the world market .
We are agreed upon the objectives .
However , transposition is often half-hearted .
The keys to this are the legal base , an absence of European fiscal regulation and essential discussions on modernising the regulations governing European mergers .
A number of tasks have failed to be undertaken in the Member States at the necessary pace and with the necessary determination .
The jurisdiction - the key word here is unanimity - corresponds to the realities of power politics , not however to the requirements of European politics .
Finally , I call therefore on the Ecofin Council to devote more of its time to fiscal assessment at Community level and to the necessary fiscal regulations and less time to proposals which undermine the stability pact and weaken the euro .
Mr President , may I begin by thanking the rapporteurs and others who have spoken in the debate this afternoon in the support of the Commission 's proposals relating to the European Company Statute .
As we all know , this has been one of the most laborious and long-standing matters which we have dealt with in the European Union , with over 30 years of painful and intricate debates .
Throughout this period , Parliament has always expressed its clear support for the idea of making a Community law form of incorporation available to businesses .
However you have on different occasions , most recently in 1990 , 1996 and 1998 , expressed serious concern about some of the controversial aspects of the texts which were then being discussed , notably with regard to employee participation , which clearly was the most complex issue involved .
The texts which were finally politically agreed by the Council following the Nice Summits reflect most , if not all , of Parliament 's concerns .
Those texts are not perfect , but they do translate the broad consensus which now exists within the Council of Ministers and Parliament on the rules which should govern this new form of company .
That consensus , as is well known , was extremely difficult to achieve and it must be safeguarded if we wish to see the texts finally adopted .
In five years ' time we shall review both the regulation and the directive after an initial period of experience with their application .
That will certainly be an opportunity to deal with their possible inadequacies and shortcomings , some of which have been rightly pointed out this afternoon .
For those reasons , and taking into account the delicacy of the consensus established within the Council , the Commission believes that the only realistic option at this stage consists in having the texts agreed in December 2000 adopted by the Council as soon as possible without any changes .
We are aware of Parliament 's reservations , as voiced by many speakers this afternoon , about the legal basis chosen unanimously by the Council .
The Commission has always supported the strongest possible role for Parliament and we regret that it has been deprived of codecision powers in this matter .
But we must admit that there are strong legal arguments in favour of the legal basis adopted by the Council .
Even though the Commission did in the past consider other possibilities , we recognise that the Treaty as currently worded makes it difficult to use a qualified majority codecision legal basis in this context , especially with regard to the proposed directive .
Since many speakers this afternoon have voiced their doubts on the matter of the legal basis , perhaps I can say a few more words on this important matter .
The Commission proposed , for both the regulation and the directive , two legal bases allowing for the adoption of the acts by qualified majority voting within the Council .
But at the end of last year the Commission was confronted with the fact that the Council had unanimously changed the proposed legal basis of both texts to Article 308 of the Treaty , which requires unanimity .
The Commission is aware of and very much regrets the fact that this change has deprived Parliament of its codecision powers on a matter on which it has always expressed a strong interest .
But the Commission cannot ignore the fact that the texts agreed by the Council in December 2000 follow very closely the opinions delivered by this Parliament over the years .
In addition , from a strictly legal perspective , the Commission can understand the reservations expressed by the Council on Article 95 as the correct legal basis for the regulation , since the regulation is not aimed at harmonising national company laws .
The rules in question address only the future societas Europaea and they do not affect other national provisions applicable to public limited companies at all .
So , although the Commission regrets that the legal basis was changed , there is substance to the Council 's opinion on the legal basis , and it cannot , just be dismissed out of hand .
Turning to taxation , which also has been mentioned by a number of Members of Parliament , you may know that the Commission originally proposed specific tax rules for inclusion in the European Company Statute , but the Council insisted on deleting them .
I am firmly convinced that tax rules are still needed and I am pleased that the Commission and Parliament seem to agree on this fundamental point .
The Commission will probably be producing its analytical study of company taxation in the internal market and a related policy of communication next month .
Amongst other things , these documents analyse the tax obstacles for cross-border economic activities by all companies in the EU and possible ways of dealing with them .
Members of Parliament only have to talk to business people in various Member States to know that those tax obstacles are extremely real and very serious .
The documents I have just mentioned also look into the specific situation of companies formed under the Statute for the European Company and the Commission believes that they will provide an excellent framework for determining the best way forward .
In particular , I believe that serious thought should be given to a comprehensive solution for the current company tax problems for businesses active in more than one Member State .
In the aftermath of the study I alluded to just now , the Commission intends to launch a broad debate on the future of company taxation in the internal market and the need for fundamental reform , not least in order to achieve the EU objectives of becoming the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , as agreed at the Lisbon European Council of March 1999 .
In this context we shall take up the tax issues relating to the European Company Statute and treat them as a priority .
Bearing in mind the specific issues involved here and the intention companies have expressed of creating European companies , I am confident that Parliament will support final adoption by the Council without further delay and I thank Parliament in advance .
European works council
The next item is the report ( A5-0282 / 2001 ) by Mr Menrad , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission report on the application of the Directive on the establishment of a European works council or a procedure in Community-scale undertakings and Community-scale groups of undertakings for the purposes of informing and consulting employees ( Council Directive 94 / 45 / EC of 22 September 1994 ) ( COM ( 2000 ) 188 - C5-0437 / 2000 - 2000 / 2214 ( COS ) ) .
, rapporteur . ( DE ) Mr President , in September 1994 the Council adopted the Directive on the establishment of a European works council .
The transposition of this Directive is the subject of a Commission report .
The report submitted by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopts a position on this Commission report .
In terms of sheer numbers , we can already talk about the European works council as a success story .
When the Directive was adopted by Parliament and the Council in 1994 , there were approximately 30 voluntary agreements governing information and consultation in respect of the work forces of companies and groups of companies throughout Europe .
In the meantime , this number has risen to above 650 .
The Commission report demonstrates that the Directive on the European works council was the main driving force behind this development .
In establishing European works councils , the solutions , more or less made to measure and reached at company level between the management and the special employee negotiating body , are granted priority .
As with the European limited liability company , here too the formula of flexibility , negotiations and minimum standards - applicable if negotiations have not reached a successful conclusion - applies . These are referred to as subsidiary requirements in the EWC Directive .
The shocking events at Renault Vilvoorde in Brussels demonstrated for the first time that the aim of the European works councils had not always been achieved , whereby the relocation of production should not be effected in the form of a commando raid but only after the employees concerned have been informed and consulted in good time .
However , every light has its shadow .
The directive has its weak points , and the Committee for Social Affairs is pressing for a revision .
We did not say that this should have been undertaken as early as 1999 or 2000 . In the discussion of the social agenda , the Commission specified the year 2002 .
Our motion for a resolution is intended to form the basis for discussion with a view to the amendment of the EWC Directive .
In a range of discussions , hearings and symposia , I have heard the complaint that , in some serious cases - especially in the case of emergency consultation - information and consultation have not been taking place in good time .
Therefore , the proposed improvements , which aim to ensure that information and consultation take place in good time , remain the main focus of the report , the object being that advice from the European works council is listened to , and can also be taken into account , prior to decisions by the management .
The report is in favour of an enhanced consultation procedure with a view to reaching agreement .
Today I would like to add the words : with a view to reaching agreement ' on the further procedure ' .
I am not saying that it shall be compulsory to reach agreement , though , as previously in the Committee meetings , I reject the right of veto of the European works council in accordance with Amendment No 5 , which was submitted today .
My report contains the more elegant solution , proposed by Mrs Ghilardotti , to hold , if necessary , a second round of meetings , as is also provided for by the Directive on the European limited liability company .
A broader right to information and consultation on the part of the European works council shall not affect an important stipulation of the directive , formulated in recital K of the present report at the request of Mr Bushill-Matthews .
The management ' s right to communicate directly with the workforce remains as unaffected as its right to manage the company .
Partnership and subsidiarity must also , according to the amendment , determine the contents of the EWC Directive .
There are principles of Christian social doctrine which , of course , has supporters in different parties .
Based on the initiative of the European Parliament , the legislative text of 1994 established an EWC Directive calling for the spirit of cooperation .
Partnership is not a soporific measure . Partnership is intended to provide a clear representation of interests , and also a balancing of the interests of employee and employer by means of information and consultation , which is also advantageous from an economic point of view .
The failure to provide information results in uncertainty , distrust and finally anxiety , which leads to blockades .
Providing information in good time is a sign of transparency , which breeds trust ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , we are referring to the working of the works council directive up to the period 1996 , i.e. before the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland signed up to that agreement .
The experience up until that point was positive , with clear benefits being brought about by this directive .
However , recent events have shown some weaknesses in the works council directive , noticeably in relation to restructuring as we have seen several cases recently of major restructuring in multinationals in which workers have not been consulted .
We should note that , even before the adoption of this directive , the Court of Justice in various cases held that works councils were parties concerned for the purposes of merger control proceedings .
That presupposes a duty to inform and consult on the part of the employer .
We should like to see a strengthening of the directive in relation to consultation in the event of restructuring .
The Commission in its report also refers to the vagueness of the requirement for an information and consultation meeting to be held with the workers as soon as possible in the event of exceptional circumstances which affect employees .
That also needs to be tightened .
Article 27 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights says that workers should be guaranteed information and consultation ' in good time ' , which is a rather more strict interpretation than ' as soon as possible ' .
The Committee on Legal Affairs would like to see strengthening in relation to that point .
In addition , we find that part-time workers are dealt with differently in different Member States .
We would like to see the Commission look into that aspect , and into the question of time off for activities in the works councils , which varies from Member State to Member State .
This should also apply regarding the matter of training , which also varies considerably .
We would like to see the Commission come forward with proposals to ensure that there is harmonised training across Member States in order to ensure that workers ' representatives are able to put their case as effectively as possible .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I would first of all like to thank Mr Menrad for having taken into account most of the proposals made by our committee , particularly - and I shall mention them briefly - on the definition of information and consultation , enhancing the procedure , enhancing the role of trade unions , reducing the thresholds for membership of these councils and reducing the time limits for establishing European works councils .
I would , however , like to stress three points that I consider to be vital .
The first point was mentioned in paragraph 12 with the reference to the 1998 directive on redundancies for operational reasons , which provides employee representatives with the possibility of notifying a competent authority on the basis of information submitted by the company ' s management , if they believe that alternative solutions have not been explored in order to avoid redundancies , site closures or if there is doubt surrounding the legality of the procedure .
I believe that , with regard to current problems in European-based companies , including sometimes those problems which occur when there are mergers and acquisitions authorised by the Commission and by its Competition Directorate , the issue raised , and which was also raised by Mrs Diamantopolou , the Commissioner for Employment and Social Affairs , in the wake of the Marks & Spencer case , is how do employees , their representatives and their works councils go about notifying the European Commission and showing that their social right is sometimes brushed aside because the issues involved are purely financial and stock market-related .
From this perspective , I support Amendment No 5 by Mrs Ainardi and Mrs Figueiredo , and personally I shall be voting in favour of this .
The second point , which is related to this amendment , is that of sanctions .
I believe that we must put in place considerable sanctions which will act as a deterrent , and also specify - and this is the underlying meaning of one of Mr Menrad ' s paragraphs , but I would have liked this to be clearer so that employees and citizens are aware - that , in the event of non-compliance with the procedures for information and consultation , decisions to make employees redundant or to close down sites can be overturned .
I will conclude , as Mr Menrad did , by asking the Commission to realise the urgent nature of this request by Parliament , not to wait until 2002 and to formulate a proposal that reflects the determination of the overwhelming majority of the groups to see an increase in the rights of employees of companies that are based in Europe .
Mr President , my colleague , Mr Menrad , has put a great deal of thought into his work and raises some interesting points concerning the perceived strengths and weaknesses of the existing directive .
However , it should be noted that certain countries only implemented this directive last year and that at least one country has not yet implemented certain provisions at all .
It is clear that companies and their employees still need some time to complete the learning process involved in establishing European works councils .
Premature changes to the rules can only cause confusion , though it is clearly useful for the Commission and Council to take note of Parliament 's views at this time .
As the rapporteur knows , I believe in information and consultation .
I support the principle of works councils , I share his wish for their success .
However , as he also knows , I am not at all happy with certain elements of his report .
I still believe it goes too far in reference to sanctions in reducing thresholds in terms of sizes of companies and - frankly - in pushing the trade union agenda as an end in itself rather than in promoting the interests of employees .
For these reasons , I have tabled four amendments , for which I have already secured some cross-party support and I also propose to vote against Recitals 5 and 7 , as he knows .
Having said that , I thank the rapporteur for accommodating some amendments in committee and I confirm that I am still willing to vote in favour of his whole report , despite my serious concerns , if the PPE-DE Group supports two of my amendments , in particular Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , as we have already discussed .
In that way we could show that our own mini-European works council of a German rapporteur , a Dutch group coordinator and myself from the United Kingdom have set a good example in achieving a positive result .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Menrad for his thorough work in drawing up this report , including the hearings he organised together with the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in order to examine closely the incorporation of the directive into national legal systems .
This study shows , without a doubt , that the incorporation of the directive into national legal systems is , for the most part , having positive results and that European works councils have been set up in around 2000 European companies .
In many companies , the directive has contributed to eliminating the barriers to information and consultation .
What is more , the timely participation of the Company committees in some of the decision-making processes has certainly yielded positive results , first and foremost for the workers in areas such as health , safety and equal opportunities but also for the companies in that the number of disputes has fallen .
Having said that , the Menrad report - which we support - also reveals a series of gaps in the directive itself , and I consider it absolutely essential that the Commission takes measures to amend the directive to deal with these gaps without delay .
I would , in particular , like to focus on three elements which , in addition to those cited by other Members , I feel are the most sensitive points and those which require swift action to be taken .
Firstly , the information timeframe : there is no clear stipulation in the directive regarding the timely provision of information and , in recent years - we have often discussed the matter in this House - we have adopted resolutions but have , I regret to say , had a great deal of negative incidents such as workers learning of their fate from the press or being presented with a final decision by companies .
In this regard , we could cite cases such as Ahlston , Adb , Marks and Spencer and many others .
Well then , if this is the case , it is necessary , absolutely essential for the directive to be more precise , for it to lay down timeframes which ensure that information is provided and consultation carried out before any decision is taken , to provide a real opportunity for negotiation , otherwise it will serve no purpose at all !
Secondly , I am sure the Members will agree with me when I say that there are no rules in a legal system which , if disregarded , lose their effect .
It is strange that it is only in the area of work and social rights that this is almost the norm !
There have thus been many disputes and incidents of recourse to industrial tribunals in recent years , precisely because the failure of companies to respect the stipulations of the directive does not on any account place in question the validity of the effects of the decision taken and certainly does not do so automatically .
It is therefore necessary for appropriate , dissuasive penalties to be laid down and , similarly , in serious cases of breach of the directive , it is necessary to provide for the suspension of a decision in order to allow negotiations to continue .
Mr President , I should also like to thank Mr Menrad for his report , even if I do not agree with all the proposals it contains .
The Commission ' s report on the European works councils shows that there is a fair way to go before the law is implemented in practice and all the undertakings concerned have set up works councils .
Is it therefore a correct response to require that still more businesses be covered by the directive and to demand tougher sanctions against those companies that do not implement the directive ?
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party cannot support reducing the size of those companies covered by the directive to five hundred employees in one Member State and one hundred in each additional Member State .
I am also sceptical about some of the requests for sanctions that have been put forward here in Parliament .
They may run counter to national systems which , in actual fact , operate well . Nor can it be reasonable for companies to be penalised differently for the same offence , as will happen if their managements ' actions are rendered invalid or if , by failing to provide enough information and by not consulting sufficiently , they are excluded from public subsidies or public procurement .
Mr President , the relevance that employees and citizens give to European social policy is being distorted further with each passing day , because of numerous cases of restructurings and redundancies .
The revision of the Directive on European Works Councils is obviously a crucial way of clawing back this credibility .
So what do the employees who are victims of these restructurings have to say about the possibility of using this directive ?
To take some examples , they say that the current legislation on the right to information and consultation is flouted on a regular basis by companies , due to the lack of precise definitions for these terms , that they have no administrative and judicial support which is needed in order to check compliance with the directive , that the directive only applies in very restricted circumstances and is not at all applicable in many transnational companies with numbers of employees lower than the current threshold , that it is inconceivable that authorisations for mergers are granted when the only criterion to be fulfilled is that of observing the competition law and that the social , regional or environmental impact of mergers is not taken into account , that they are powerless when mergers are taking place , during which previous consultation procedures are no longer used , since new procedures have yet to be set up , and , finally , that they are disgusted to see that the same companies which undertake these severe restructurings have occasionally received assistance from the Structural Funds .
In my view , Mr Menrad ' s report , which is the result of work that was carried out in an open , cooperative spirit , involving the social actors concerned and members of the Commission , which organised a broad public hearing on this issue , recommends bridging these gaps with a precise definition of information and consultation , by reducing , as proposed , the thresholds of employees required to establish a works council , by requesting that specific premises for consultation are maintained during mergers , by requesting that decisions made and which flout procedures can be overturned , and by introducing sanctions , including financial , for companies at fault and finally , by taking into account the opinion of employees and providing evidence that the procedures of the directive have been observed , prior to giving authorisations to mergers .
Within this context , these proposals have the support of our group .
Obviously , we still need to ensure - and this requires a combined effort - that the directive is revised quickly and effectively .
Mr President , as thousands of employees in Europe are faced with a wave of restructurings , redundancies and redundancy programmes , the Menrad report on European works councils , although it will not radically change the situation , will at least provide a new source of support for employees to enable them to cope with extremely difficult situations and to have some bearing on the decisions being taken .
At a time when growth is giving us cause for concern , we should give thought to the content of this growth and the necessity to develop it , by encouraging job stability and skills .
There is an urgent need for genuine consultation with employees , an urgent need to dispense with the attitude of treating men and women as goods which are no longer useful , because shareholders consider that they are not profitable enough , even in spite of the true economic situation .
Mr Menrad ' s report is the fruit of considerable labour , and I would also like to acknowledge his efforts .
The report is also the result of the willingness of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to listen to representatives of the employees of large European companies .
Using these meetings as a basis , the Menrad report was able to make a reliable assessment of the situation by showing the need for considerable amendments to the content of the directive .
I support many of the proposals made in the report .
I would like to reiterate some of them which in my view represent major steps forward for employees .
For example , the call , set out in the second paragraph , for information and consultation to take place at regular intervals before the decision by the company or group , so as to allow the workers genuinely to influence the management ' s decision-making process . Furthermore , in particularly serious cases , this information could even extend to giving the employees ' representatives the possibility of gaining a negotiating period before a decision takes effect , as described in item 14 .
I shall again quote the second item , which contains a clause that the decisions of the management will only be regarded as legitimate if an orderly information and consultation process as defined in the Directive has taken place beforehand , or item 13 , which proposes the introduction of sanctions for non-compliance .
Lastly , there is also the call for companies to repay funds and financial aid provided if they do not observe the law in this area , and to exclude them from public procurement .
These proposals are a step in the right direction , but I believe that to ensure action for employment is effective and to improve economic performance in Europe , we could have gone further with regard to the right of employees to participate in the future of companies .
This is the goal of the amendment that my group tabled , which calls for the possibility of employees ' representatives to have the right to a suspensive veto .
This would involve giving a guarantee to employees ' representatives that their alternative proposals would at least be examined and taken into account .
Many decisions which have spelled disaster for companies and for employment could have been avoided if employees had been able to influence these decisions .
This right , which is an expression of social justice and democracy within a company , also guarantees efficiency for the economy and society .
Once again , the Menrad report represents a considerable step forward and this is why it has the support of my group .
Overall , the progress made in implementing the Directive on the establishment of a European works council has been positive , since there are now approximately 650 European works councils , most of which were set up on the basis of pre-Directive agreements , in other words , on a voluntary and agreed basis .
There are still 1 200 companies , however , which have not established European works councils .
As the effects of globalisation demand new measures , the cornerstone of which are trans-national representation and information , it is advisable to consider the factors which stand in the way of European social dialogue in companies , and the report presented by the Commission which evaluates both legal transposition and practical application of the Directive in Member States now gives us that opportunity .
The debates which took place in committee were useful and I would also like to congratulate Mr Menrad for his preference for dialogue and the work he did to achieve conciliation .
Nonetheless , the broad consensus which existed within this committee on the need to develop information and consultation , on both a European and national level , must not hide some differences in approach which my colleague , Mr Bushill-Matthews pointed out .
I do believe that it is important to reiterate in this Chamber that genuine social dialogue in a company requires tools that are flexible and which can evolve , and not a standard , restrictive and detailed framework , such as that which some of our fellow Members would like to reintroduce when the 1994 Directive is revised .
That is why I would like to stress how important we consider that the imminent reform of this directive does not take the shape of a far-reaching reform of its spirit and particularly , that we retain the difference in terms of function between the Directive itself , which is the tool of social dialogue in a company , and its Annex which punishes the failure of social dialogue .
Furthermore , lowering the thresholds for applying the Directive must not be an aim in itself ; rather , this should be perceived as a straightforward option to extend this mechanism .
This is why I agree with Amendment No 3 , tabled by our fellow Member , and the French delegation will support this , but we are rather more puzzled by Amendment No 14 .
Finally , I would like to provide an explanation for the text included in paragraph 2 ( i ) , namely that information and consultation of employees must be carried out , with due regard for the principles of confidentiality of the information .
This is a very important provision which particularly refers to cases where timely information and consultation of workers , which is perfectly natural , could conflict with the law by virtue of the legislation on the securities market .
The provision is therefore fundamental in order to encourage competitiveness of companies in the global economy and the safeguarding of the European social model .
I hope that the Commission will take this into account when preparing its proposal for revising the directive .
Mr President , I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur for the quality , constancy , sense of responsibility and coordination , in addition to his attempt to obtain consensus , which has enabled him to present a report in which the need for both sides of industry to be able to deal with mergers , relocations and restructuring as painlessly as possible is emphasised .
On many occasions , these events take place with unnecessary complications that lead to other , equally disastrous consequences which , in turn , affect workers and the rights from which they benefit in the Member States , which are constantly being weakened by these so-called relocations and greater mobility .
I should like to highlight the rapporteur ' s comments about Article 127 of the Treaty , which lays down clear rules , which apply to both competition and social legislation , specifically on informing and consulting workers .
We must clearly enshrine the right of workers and citizens to freely choose their destiny and also where and how they wish to work . The truth is that the damaging examples of this much sought after mobility of companies and employers are still shocking public opinion in my country even today .
I shall take this opportunity to condemn what the representatives of one particular company - on this occasion it happens to be British , with headquarters in London and offices in the Republic of Ireland and in Portugal - are doing with vast contingents of Portuguese and Polish workers . These workers are placed , given the exceptional situation in Northern Ireland , in high-risk situations , with no contract , no protection , and no security , often being left to their unpleasant fate .
This may seem to be their bad luck , but this really does seem to be the fate of Portuguese workers who are simply looking for better salaries and better working conditions . Yet , they are stuck in the position of not even being able to return home .
Mobility is a threat not only to those who cling to it because they are socially disadvantaged , but also organised workers .
These provide a warm welcome for the aforementioned disadvantaged workers and choose to stand up for them , helping them to integrate .
And it is they who are their only resource , the workers representatives and their solidarity , as well as the unions , in these very distressing circumstances .
I would , therefore , like to see this law made effective and extended , since it is still a long way from achieving the social objective that the Community itself and the Treaties advocate .
Mr. President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur for the work he has done on this report .
It is important to bear in mind , given what we heard already this evening , that Lisbon was not about competition , but social cohesion as well .
Companies are increasingly being expected to behave in an ethical and socially responsible manner .
Sound employment practices and good working relationships with employees are key indicators for such ethical assessment and we need to see the recommendations in the report in that light .
The report points out a number of ways in which a revised directive could make works councils more effective and prevent some of the problems and breakdowns we have heard about : regular meetings , not the token annual meeting that is all 85 % of them manage ; increasing the representation of women , who are virtually invisible in many of these bodies , just as they are in too many boardrooms ; training to improve the quality of representation and communication ; and the facilities and safeguards to ensure that works council members represent all sectors effectively .
The sanctions for non-compliance are also critical .
We either want responsible social partners , or we do not .
My group does , so we welcome this report and look forward to seeing Commission proposals based on it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report is the result of a major piece of work undertaken by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , coordinated by our colleague Mr Menrad , whom I congratulate on the openness he has shown in considering the proposals tabled during the debate , including several from our group , although I personally think that the report could have gone even further .
We are all aware of the countless difficulties and serious problems of unemployment that workers and their works councils are facing , particularly those in multinational companies , in the processes of restructuring and relocation that have intensified over the last few years without the rights of workers being respected in the majority of cases . These workers have been treated on many occasions as mere economic commodities .
The current directive must , therefore , be fundamentally changed , particularly in terms of the procedures for informing and consulting workers and of the possibility of intervention by the European works councils , specifically through additional sanctions and a suspensive veto in cases in which restructuring , relocations and mergers do not take account of the reasonable rights of workers .
It is crucial that the Commission presents proposals for amendments to this directive , as we have already requested on numerous occasions , and that it at least includes the improvements contained in the Menrad report and approved by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , in addition to the proposal upon which our group insists .
It is essential that there should be a robust and timely consultation process for all workers and the possibility of the right to a suspensive veto on a decision that may have harmful consequences for workers , in such a way as to allow negotiations to take place and for these harmful consequences to be avoided .
It is equally important , as the Menrad report states , that companies that do not satisfy workers ' rights regarding their information and consultation and all other aspects of the directive , with the new amendments that we ourselves are proposing , will not only not receive any financial aid from Structural Funds and be obliged to return any Community or national aid that has been granted them , but they will also be excluded from public contracts and subsidies .
I hope , therefore , that the Commission accepts these positions .
Mr President , a few moments ago , when I spoke on the previous item on the agenda , I pointed out the definition of what we understood by a company and I stressed that a company , as an organisation , implies plurality and that a company consisting of a single person would not legally be classed as a company .
And plurality means the obligation to regulate the role of workers throughout the organisation .
I believe that Mr Menrad ' s report responds magnificently to this issue and we must congratulate him on the quality of his work .
The objective of the Directive is to improve the right of workers to be informed and consulted by the multinational companies or groups which operate in Europe .
It is estimated that currently more than 1 100 multinationals , which employ approximately 15 million people , would be affected by this Directive and by its modification .
I agree with the rapporteur when he asks for and expects the Commission to amend Directive 94 / 45 / EC , making information and consultation rights into a means for facilitating social dialogue as a key element of social and labour relations in the companies affected .
I also agree with him when he asks for the role of these participation , information and consultation bodies not only to be relevant at times of industrial transformation and crisis , but that they should be of a permanent nature in a global economy in which we see symptoms and characteristics of globalisation , and , furthermore , that the exercise of these rights be enshrined at the appropriate procedural moment .
And all of this is so that workers are guaranteed that their voice will be heard , not only at times of restructuring , but whenever decisions are taken which are essential to the permanence and future of the company and of their workplaces or delegations .
This is the content of the amendments I have presented and which the rapporteur has been kind enough to incorporate .
Every day we hear news of essential social importance which shocks us : all the delegations of a company are being closed in one or various countries ; the company is studying a massive reduction in jobs ; a merger is announced and the workers are wondering what will happen and how many will be fired or sent home , and these decisions are often taken for stock exchange reasons - to improve share prices - rather than for fundamental reasons .
Communication after the decision serves little purpose in these cases .
The company is an organisation , sometimes a community , with somewhat conflicting interests .
I would like to stress that the content of these rights must also refer to training , to ongoing learning , to health and to safety , to equality of opportunity , to the environment , to the incorporation of young people into the workplace .
All of this will make the company into a better-reconciled community , with less conflict .
This will increase productivity and increase employment , and will improve living conditions , thereby leading to a better Europe .
Mr President , many people are very concerned about globalisation .
They join forces in organisations , and the most extreme also throw stones .
In the meantime , the EU is blamed for making the negative aspects of globalisation worse .
I believe that the discussion we are having today and the discussion we had concerning the Menrad report in our committee demonstrate the very opposite .
They show that the EU can , in a very practical way , contribute to mitigating the negative aspects of the free market , in this case restructurings .
The EU cannot abolish these , and nor should it , for they are a part of a modern market economy and they can have positive effects .
However , we can try to mitigate the negative effects by properly involving employees in the process .
What we are doing today and what we shall hopefully do in the future by means of a new directive is , in a very practical way , to make the market a little more democratic .
The directive has already had an effect .
The Commission ' s report shows this .
Works councils have been set up as a result of the directive .
As other speakers too have said , there are , however , many things which can be improved , and I hope that the Commission will allow itself to be inspired by Parliament ' s report today .
Some of the improvements must take the form of cultural changes within companies .
Undertakings must realise that consultation and the provision of information are not a laborious and onerous duty but a constructive part of modern management and that creating partnerships also creates responsible employees .
At the same time , I hope that the Commission will lose no time at all in proceeding further with its deliberations concerning a new directive , and I should like to see an expansion of the topics on which employees are consulted .
I think that , in general , we must look at the position of our fellow workers .
We must understand that they are ordinary people from ordinary backgrounds who come together in the works councils .
They must be given time off work , and there is a need for premises , training and translation facilities so that they can carry out their tasks as employee representatives . I also believe that employees must be able more readily to involve trade union experts .
We must appreciate that there is a need to improve their conditions .
A future directive might properly implement the constructive changes proposed by Parliament .
These are not fanatical and far-reaching changes , but very constructive ones , and I hope that the Commission will take them on board when it proposes a new directive .
Properly designed , the latter can be a further step in the direction of a European social model .
Mr President , I am pleased to support this report .
I have spoken several times in this House about the recent loss of 3000 jobs in Wales when the steel company Corus announced massive redundancies .
When the Employment and Social Affairs Committee held the hearing in April this year and workers ' representative from Corus European works council told us that in many ways it was a model works council .
It met twice a year , it provided excellent training and it enabled experts to attend meetings .
Yet it failed to tell the workers that they were about to get rid of 6000 jobs even when there was massive public speculation about these job losses .
This report states that the main goal of the directive is to remove obstacles to information , consultation and communication with the workforce to enable dialogue to take place .
This is vitally important .
It must be more than paying lip service to consultation .
There must be a definition of consultation to ensure it is meaningful and comprehensive and carried out in good time , as others have said .
In other words this must happen before decisions are made and not after and there must be sanctions against those who do not comply .
I agree with Mr Menrad that we need a revision of the directive to prevent repeats of the Corus experience and to look at other issues he identifies such as the involvement of women .
I hope that this debate will help achieve that .
Mr President , I shall not vote against the report , for the sole reason that some trade unions are hoping that it will be adopted , whatever my views may be on their policy .
Even so , however , I shall not give my approval of the report .
In fact , in order to counteract a limited increase in the rights of European works councils , the report calls upon us to approve competition rules and the confidentiality of information .
The report also stresses that the role awaiting the councils is that of reducing the risk of conflict which may , the report claims , prove to be a factor in a company ' s success , or rather , in an employer ' s success .
In France , it is very clear that the final decision on all issues that affect workers ' lives is made by employers .
Works councils have been rendered powerless , such as when Moulinex , Aventis , Danone and many other companies made unacceptable redundancies , or they are tricked into approving the employer ' s decisions , or even into nominating the victims of redundancies , as was the case at AOM-Air Liberté .
Therefore , the only right which would , in truth , be a right for workers would be the right to employment , or a ban on redundancies , in other words , at least in companies that are making profits .
Mr President , the Commission was entrusted with the task of investigating the effectiveness of the European works council .
The European works council has become more and more important : in 1994 there were 40 , and in 2001 there are 650 .
In this respect , the European works council has promoted a European awareness outstandingly well and has furthered the interest of employees in transnational measures and in acts of solidarity in exactly the same way .
However , there are problems ; this we learnt during the hearing in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
It is totally unclear what is meant by appropriate information .
How can employees cultivate alternative plans if they receive information far too late ?
For example , if a radical restructuring of the company is envisaged , an enhanced consultation procedure must be provided .
Moreover , the European works councils usually meet once a year .
At least two meetings a year , if not three , should take place .
The European works councils must be able to get to know each other better .
They must also understand the different mentalities .
The former is the condition for promoting solidarity and ensuring sustained action , and as always women are seriously under-represented .
Women do not even make up 10 % of European works councils .
A great deal of motivational work is needed within the companies in this regard , and this must be expressed practically in votes later on .
I have spoken with many works councils - also within my constituency .
It is particularly important for them that we offer more training opportunities to compensate for language difficulties .
I expressly agree with Mr Menrad , who is in favour of language courses for EWC members .
Investment in training of employees is also essential - and I am thinking here of accounting regulations , employment law , social law - and we must work towards being able to say : What shall be on the agenda ?
The protection of health , the necessity of dealing with safety at work or the issue which Mr Menrad is always pursuing : employee participation .
The rapporteur succeeded in including 75 proposals from the Committee on Employment and other proposals from the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Indeed , he knew how to build bridges with us in the Committee , and 38 out of 38 were in favour .
May tomorrow ' s vote be just as successful !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Menrad , for the timeliness and the quality of his report .
Social dialogue within the European Union is a crucial factor for European integration itself .
Hence the need to re-examine this directive on European works councils in companies that operate throughout the Community .
Since 1994 , 650 European works councils have been created , in contrast to the 40 or so that existed in the past .
There is no doubt that this has been a success .
At the same time , great changes have taken place in the European labour market that require new responses and a stringent definition of the concepts of informing and consulting workers in companies operating throughout the Community , ensuring that this takes place in good time and under the appropriate conditions for a subsequent decision to be made .
The range of themes covered by this process of information and consultation must be further extended , and the range must also be improved in matters of particular sensitivity for workers as a whole .
Regular meetings for such a body are also necessary , for in around 85 % of cases they meet just once a year , which is clearly insufficient .
The size that a company must be in order to be covered by this directive also warrants our attention , with a more reasonable threshold being required , a point on which we agree with Mr Menrad .
The provisions relating to the protection and rights of workers ' representatives , who are freely elected by the workers , should be strengthened and there should be a balanced representation between men and women .
Currently , 90 % of the members of the specialist negotiating groups and of the European works councils are men .
Lastly , I wish to emphasise that the procedure for informing and consulting workers can lead to a deepening of the relationship between employers and workers in all Member States , thereby contributing to the development of a form of European consciousness .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in April 2000 the Commission presented a report on progress in the implementation of the 1994 directive on the institution of a European works council for Community-scale companies .
The report has a relatively positive outlook , for today more than a third of the companies affected have implemented these works councils , yet it must be said that recent history surrounding certain redundancy programmes have made this process of informing and possible consultation more necessary than ever .
New draft directives have therefore been added to the 1994 text subject of this report .
With regard to these drafts , I think that three different courses of action should be taken .
Firstly , the inclusion of measures so that , within a reasonable time , the majority of companies involved would have a European works council .
From this point of view , the idea of lowering thresholds of employee numbers above which companies are affected does not seem very reasonable .
We should in all cases honour the 1994 Directive .
The second course of action should consist of proposing a global text that is a combination of different texts , rather than a stack of directives .
The third measure should be to guarantee that autonomy and freedom in company management are preserved from the time when these companies can completely fulfil their duty to inform and consult .
The report by Mr Menrad , while I appreciate the work contained therein , has not been able to avoid certain pitfalls .
It must be said that codetermination , a management technique favoured in Germany but in that country alone , has led him to accept socialist amendments from our fellow Member Mr Harlem Désir , amendments that our group had , upon my initiative , rejected in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
I am thinking most notably of the thresholds above which companies are involved and the institution of part vetoes using sanctions in certain cases , which I truly regret .
Regarding the Socialist Members , it must be said that they demonstrate a degree of stubbornness when they reject , for example with the postal or energy services , the Commission ' s proposals with the view that what already exists should be applied , or vice-versa , as is the case here , to rely upon the widely perceived lengthy nature of proceedings to jump the lights when it suits them .
In my opinion , competition , the opening up of markets and the creation of an internal market go hand in hand with informing and consulting employees .
This is the reason why , with sadness but with certainty , I am going to abstain , if paragraphs 4 and 14 in particular are adopted as they stand .
Mr President , may I begin by saying that the Commission welcomes this report on the operation of the European works councils directive .
It will certainly form a very significant input into our review of the directive .
In particular I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Menrad , for the effort he has put into this report over a long period .
The report clearly reflects his profound knowledge of the subject .
I am also conscious of the time that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has devoted to this issue and in particular the extremely useful public hearing which the Committee organised earlier this year , giving all actors the opportunity to express their views .
The report acknowledges the overall success in the operation of the directive , while identifying a number of weaknesses .
The directive was the first piece of Community legislation to provide for a specifically transnational aspect of employer / employee relations and in doing so it broke completely new ground .
From that beginning we now have a situation where there are European works council agreements in 650 companies or groups in Europe , covering about 60 % of relevant employees .
In each of those companies meetings are now taking place between management and employees from several Member States .
That would have been almost unthinkable some years ago and it is a considerable achievement .
Because of the inherent flexibility of the directive , this has been achieved notwithstanding the wide variation in employee participation and industrial relations systems in the Member States .
As the report acknowledges , the directive has undoubtedly contributed to the development of a European consciousness among employee representatives .
In acknowledging the directive 's success , I should also like to acknowledge , as the report does , the role played by the trade unions , in particular the trade unions at European Union level .
Their input into and coordination of numerous negotiations has made a major contribution to the success of the directive .
To acknowledge the overall success of the directive is not , of course , to say that there have not been problems with this application .
The Commission 's report to Parliament and to the Council in April 2000 identified a number of legal and practical problems relating to the application of the directive .
Parliament 's report , prepared in response to the Commission 's report , has elaborated on that analysis and identified a number of weaknesses in the operation of the directive and it proposes a series of changes to address those weaknesses .
Parliament may be assured that we shall examine all its proposals carefully .
A key issue highlighted in the report , one which , as the report notes , has been the focus of much public interest of late , is the clarification of what we mean by information and consultation .
We need to ensure that employees are informed and consulted at the right time , when they can still influence decisions .
The report highlights some of the cases where , regrettably , employees have not been properly informed or consulted on major decisions affecting their livelihoods .
Since I share Parliament 's concerns on this issue and since I am determined to do all in my power to meet those concerns , I was extremely encouraged by the decision of the Employment and Social Policy Council on 11 June to adopt unanimously a political agreement on a common position on the draft directive establishing a common framework for informing and consulting employees .
The common position was formally adopted by the Council on 23 July .
As Parliament may be aware , the Commission 's proposal for this directive contained comprehensive provisions on information and consultation both as regards content and timing .
I am pleased to see that Parliament 's report has references to the Commission 's proposal as a benchmark in this regard .
I know that Parliament is now actively working on its second reading of the draft directive to allow for its adoption as soon as possible .
There will be issues to be resolved between Parliament and Council , most notably on the issue of sanctions , a subject which has been raised by a number of speakers this afternoon .
This is an issue where the Council 's common position is furthest removed from the shared desire of Commission and Parliament to see effective sanctions : sanctions for failure to meet information and consultation obligations .
Notwithstanding this , however , I believe that the political will now exists throughout the institutions to reach final agreement on this text quickly , thus putting in place a comprehensive framework for information and consultation throughout the Community .
Just as some of the issues raised in Parliament 's reports relate to the information and consultation draft directive , so others - such as the role of trade unions , the issue of training for employee representatives and the length of time allowed to negotiate agreements - are touched on in the context of the draft directive supplementing the Statute for a European Company with regard to the involvement of employees .
I am happy that Parliament has delivered its opinion on this text so promptly thus paving the way for its final adoption , I hope , at the October Employment and Social Policy Council .
Parliament 's report acknowledges - and it will be clear from what I have just said - that the revision of the European works council directive is closely linked to these two legislative texts currently under consideration , that is to say firstly on information and consultation and secondly on employee involvement in the European Company .
I have always believed that , because of that linkage , we should focus on finalising those two texts before addressing the revision of the European works council directive .
That remains the Commission 's strong view .
But now , happily , we have the final adoption of those texts in sight and therefore it is my intention to be ready , as soon as the information and consultation directive is finalised , to address the revision of the European works council directive .
The first stage of that process will , as indicated in the report , be a formal consultation of the social partners .
Before concluding , may I give some brief replies to two specific questions .
Firstly , a question by Mr Désir and Mrs Flautre on what the Commission are doing to address the social aspects of merger control .
In brief , the answer is that the Commission has indicated its intention to examine the interaction between Community competition law on mergers and the social consequences of such mergers .
The second question was put to me by Mr Désir .
He asked about the Commission 's plans as regards the timing of the revision of the European works council directive .
I would reply that the Commission plans to address the revision of the European works council directive as soon as the information and consultation directive is adopted .
The first step would be consultation of the social partners which , if conciliation on the information and consultation text is completed by the end of this year , could be launched early next year .
The Commission has consistently taken the view that the timing of any revision of the European works council directive is inextricably linked to adoption of both the information and consultation directive and the final adoption of the European Company statute proposal .
In conclusion , may I once again thank Parliament very much indeed for its in-depth and knowledgeable reports which will provide crucial input into , not only the Commission 's thinking , but also the thinking of the other actors in this important issue .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Monitoring application of Community law ( 1999 )
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0250 / 2001 ) by Mr Koukiadis , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Commission 's seventeenth annual report on monitoring the application of Community Law ( 1999 ) [ COM ( 2000 ) 92 - C5 ­ 0381 / 2000 - 2000 / 2197 ( COS ) ] .
Madam President , we should all look on the report on the application of Community law as one of the all important reports because this is the report which reflects the real state of the European Union , which measures its heart beat and how it relates to the man in the street on a daily basis .
This report is the first to be drafted for this new decade , which is also the beginning of a new century , and I think that it could turn out to be an opportunity to take a more integrated approach to the problems associated with the practical operation of the single market , the European Union as a whole , and the vision of enlargement .
In view of three new factors , impending enlargement on an unprecedented scale , the quest for the deepening of the European Union and the ever-increasing rate of legislative intervention , we need to radically rethink how we control the application of Community law .
This entire subject is inextricably bound up with the review of the Treaties and should be one of the top items on the agenda for the next Intergovernmental Conference .
The White Paper identifies the problems ; all we need to do now is to see how we can resolve them .
Unless we eliminate delays in transposing directives and unless we forge a uniform interpretation of Community law , there will be no single economic area and it will be impossible to promote the idea of European citizenship .
A citizen from one country who goes to work in another country and has trouble getting his professional qualifications recognised feels like a foreigner , not a European .
Competition rules applied selectively in various countries adulterate European competition and so on and so forth .
That is why the question of the application of Community law must be a matter of concern to each and every one of us and why we must put it at the top of our agenda .
It is futile to spend hours at a time debating whether or not this or that amendment will get through and then do almost nothing to check if a directive is being applied .
Greater importance needs to be attached to this report because it reflects real life in the European Union .
A second line of approach taken in the report is to question what becomes of suggestions by the European Parliament from previous reports .
I have read several previous reports containing interesting suggestions .
I was surprised to discover that most fall by the wayside .
However , more importantly , the Commission report contains no explanation as to why these suggestions were not applied .
We need to find a way of ensuring that Parliament 's suggestions are followed up .
The third basic comment is that , despite the improvements reflected in the data on the application of Community law , these improvements are not constant ; there are reversals and the improvements are not impressive enough to appease us .
The general diagnosis remains the same .
We should therefore pay serious attention to this phenomenon and deal separately with the multiple reasons and causes for it .
I should like to use the time left to draw a few general conclusions .
The best rate of transposition is in Denmark , with an average of 98 % .
As far as procedures for controlling infringements are concerned , we must remember that the control system as a whole is based on 4 stages .
Letters of formal notice , which constitute the first stage , ran into large numbers .
The three countries which received most letters were France , Italy and Greece , with 236 , 160 and 154 and the three which received the fewest were Denmark , Finland and Sweden , with 40 , 43 and 46 .
The number of reasoned opinions , which constitute the second stage , was fairly small , proving that this procedure is effective for certain countries and extremely effective for others .
In all events , the relative reduction in the time taken to send out letters of formal notice and reasoned opinions is one positive aspect of attempts to speed up the control procedure .
As far as referrals to the Court are concerned , the number of cases of non-compliance again fell significantly .


Our general conclusions are as follows : first , there has been a gradual reduction of 35 % -40 % from one stage to the next ; secondly , the order of countries committing infringements remains the same at all stages ; thirdly , at the third stage the number of cases of non-compliance is marginal for certain countries , with other countries persisting ; fourthly , the efficiency of control procedures should not be used to play down the fact that these procedures are used by the Member States as a way of delaying the date of transposition , thereby creating a new de facto transitional period .
The fact that certain countries with different systems constantly perform worst , while certain other countries perform best means that , basically , infringements are a matter of political will .
In other words , the problem of the application of Community law is a political problem and not a legal or technocratic one , as many believe .
It masks the clash between national sovereignty and European authority and reveals just how much the European conscience has matured .
Finally , the Commission has not analysed the circumstances or reasons behind these statistics .
I do not wish to take up any more of your time but I would like to say a word or two about the amendments .
I can accept two of the three proposed amendments .
I do not understand Mrs Thors ' amendment and it requires clarification if it is to be accepted .
Mr President , it should not surprise anyone , particularly if they have any legal training , that the control of the application of Community law should fall to the Committee on Legal Affairs .
That is obvious .
I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Koukiadis on his kindness - and I would go as far as to say his wisdom - in including the conclusions of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in his report .
I am speaking as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment , and this suits me because I would like to pose the question out loud , before you all , of what kind of Europe it is we want to build .
In 1996 in Turin , the French President , Mr Chirac , said that if Europe only makes progress along the economic route , the commercial route , it would be a failure .
He said that we had to deal with the situation of the Europeans , that we had to revive the idea of the European , and that that would herald the road to success .
Now that my country , Spain , is beginning to prepare for the Presidency , the competent authorities , the President , Mr Aznar , and the Ministers , talk every day about the idea of creating more Europe .
What does more Europe mean ?
Probably realising the contents of our Charter of Fundamental Rights , that is to say , a Europe which is concerned about Europeans .
That is why this report is important and essential , and I would like to highlight certain points in it .
Firstly , something that should be of concern to all of us - in the Commission and in the Council - and that is the transposition of directives , because it is precisely in the social sphere that a very low percentage of directives is transposed when compared to other fields or to transposition in general .
Secondly , there are certain especially sensitive subjects ; our professions always accompany us and , as a works inspector , I am enormously concerned that in the fields of safety and health at work , directives are not transposed more quickly .
Thirdly , equality .
I believe that we must demand from the Commission more power to impose fines , which would have sufficient coercive effect , greater inclination to coordinate the different governments of the Member States , in order to achieve that greater coordination and , in summary , greater intensity in its activities , so that the principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights might become reality .
Mr President , our debate today is somewhat absurd .
After we had prepared the report , two important documents came from the Commission .
I am thinking firstly of the White Paper on governance and secondly of the communication on the Information and Communication Policy .
Having studied these documents , I am quite confused about the way in which the Commission intends to help us supervise the application of Community law and about how it intends to prioritise the issues concerned .
Where , firstly , the Information and Communication Policy is concerned , the communication says that the future of what is known as the European justice system is in the process of being looked into .
In sharp contrast to what is stated in the communication , we in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market had been given to understand that this network of specialised lawyers , which can provide people with advice and which operates at the Commission ' s delegations in the Member States , was viewed as valuable by the Commission .
The June communication now tells us that the Commission is considering how the system is to look in the future and that the tasks of the lawyers concerned are perhaps to be transferred to national administrations .
Who , I should like to ask the Commission , believes that a national administration will help people obtain justice from the self-same administration ?
Secondly , I am confused about the fact that , according to the White Paper on governance , there is a desire for ' networks of similar existing bodies in the Member States capable of dealing with disputes involving citizens and EU issues ' , at the same time as an intention to improve people ' s knowledge of their rights under Community law .
How does the Commission intend that we should monitor the application of Community law ?
I believe that we need to do some serious thinking , and I think that the Commission could have been more practical when it came to how this very issue was dealt with in the White Paper .
Mr President , I wanted to speak in this debate on compliance with Community law because , as a member of the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Petitions , I am familiar with non-compliance with that Community law , above all , as previous rapporteurs have said , in the social and environmental fields .
It is true , as my Spanish colleague said , that there is a low level of transposition in the social field of only 71 % of directives , but it is even truer that in the Commission , on environmental issues , there is not only poor transposition , but flagrant non-compliance , which is the worst thing : lack of application .
This is something that we note every day in the Committee on Petitions , since it is the main form of non-compliance : 40 % of non-compliances reported by citizens to the Committee on Petitions relate to the environment .
As Mr Koukiadis rightly says in his report , the right to petition is the principle par excellence of the recognition of European citizenship and therefore we should be worried by this repeated non-compliance in the social and environmental fields , which are so closely related to the rights of that European citizenship .
If we examine each of the petitions which reach the Committee on Petitions - naturally I am most familiar with the petitions which come from my country - we will note the enormous interest amongst European citizens in collecting information and perfectly understanding Community law in order to report non-compliances with great rigour .
We therefore believe that in the annual report a section should be dedicated to petitions , as the rapporteur rightly says , because it is in that committee that a real contribution to compliance with Community law is made .
Mr President , with 1075 formal notices , 470 reasoned opinions , 178 referrals to the Court of Justice - twice as many as in 1998 - the 1999 balance sheet for the application of Community Law is proof enough of serious discontent .
To tell the truth of the matter , Europe legislates too much and too badly .
It even manages to legislate in areas where it has no competence .
It did this in 1979 with the ' conservation of wild birds ' directive and more recently , without any legal foundation , on the status and financing of European political parties .
If Member States drag their feet in transposing Community law into national law , if disputes have multiplied in number , it is because European regulation is often restrictive , finicky , unsuited to local realities and far removed from the worries of our fellow citizens , that is , when it is not directly opposed to their will and our republican principles .
Additionally , last year the French government proclaimed its disagreement with the ' genome ' directive .
Mrs Guigou , the Minister of Justice , felt that this directive , was " incompatible with French bioethical laws , with the code for industrial property and also the civil code that prohibits the marketing of the human body " .
Can we , in the name of Europe and its qualified majority , impose legislation upon a people who reject it ?
This is a fundamental problem .
Should we standardise everything and sacrifice our differences , our true European diversity ?
We do not think so .
In addition , in a democracy , it is not the business of the Court of Justice to create legislation through case law .
It is up to elected representatives . At the present time , MEPs , uniquely elected by universal suffrage , have no true right of legislative initiative , a monopoly that is jealously guarded by the Commission .
It is not by using the threat of fines and penalties in the unrelenting attempt to apply poor texts , as Article 15 so clearly wants , that Europe will solve problems .
Stubbornness has its limits and when a text is poor , there should be the clear-mindedness and the courage to change it , as we are proposing to do with Article 12 .
It would therefore be a good idea to legislate less in order to legislate better , to respect national will and democracy by applying the principle of subsidiarity to the maximum .
For example , regulation on the transport of hydrocarbons is becoming an urgent matter , but once again it has been postponed indefinitely for purely mercenary reasons .
Contrary to that stated in item M of the preamble , we do not think that strict application of Community law will lead towards the emergence of an unwanted European nationality .
We are too worried about the respect of identities , of democracy and the right to difference .
Mr President , the application of Community law is the cause of an ever-growing number of problems , for according to the Commission ' s own report , it has opened 2270 files on this subject since 1999 , compared with just 124 in 1978 .
This rapid increase is caused on the one hand by the constant proliferation of Community Law , and on the other hand , from the increased severity of a Commission that has at its disposal , since the adoption of the Maastricht Treaty , effective instruments of oppression , notably Articles 226 and 228 of the EC Treaty .
The report we are debating today in the European Parliament adds further to this sense of repression , for it urges the Commission to use these articles more than ever before , to threaten Member States with fines or penalties to a greater extent , and even to propose a new system of automatic sanctions applicable to those who do not transpose Community directives quickly or sufficiently enough .
So why do Member States , who are supposed to have accepted the Council ' s directives , drag their feet when it comes to applying them ?
This is the big question everybody seems to avoid .
As far as I am concerned there are three answers .
Firstly , a bizarre side effect of the extension of qualified majority voting causes institutions to have what I will call a type of regulatory illusion .
We think that because we have voted by a majority in the Council , everything is solved .
In reality , however , if members of the minority have good enough reasons and if application does not follow through on ground level , nothing is solved .
And to redress the balance , we launch Europe into a downwards spiral of repression that better consensus at the start would have prevented .
Second cause of non-application : the unsuitability of certain parts of Community Law , such as the 1979 Directive on the conservation of wild birds , toughened further by the Court of Justice behind the back even of the Council .
In a case such as this , which , take note , is from a unanimously adopted directive , what is lacking is the opportunity for an automatic revision to be made after a ten year period , at the request of a single Member State .
Finally , the third cause of non-application : certain directives are still not transposed or are badly transposed because the governmental representatives sitting on the Council wanted to turn over a new leaf in relation to Europe by closing their eyes to future difficulties that they of course knew would be inevitable .
This is for example what has taken place in France with Directive 98 / 44 on the patentability of living matter , which now proves to be non-transposable because it is contrary to several essential parts of our own law .
This is , alas , the usual behaviour of French leaders , up to the highest level .
Nowadays , we agree to sign such and such a European text , not daring to raise objections , and tomorrow we will have to deal with their application .
It is precisely this that has just taken place with the Treaty of Nice , and France will have a high price to pay .
Mr President , the rapporteur should be congratulated on his wide-ranging and important report and he has rightly identified the problems of transposition and application of Community law , mainly with regard to directives .
But we may have seen nothing yet , because we are moving into an era of new legislation - the era of co-regulation .
Will this in future form part of Community law , whose application and uniformity we should be looking out for ?
In its White Paper on governance , the Commission states that co-regulation will not be appropriate where rules need to apply in a uniform way .
Nor will it be appropriate where fundamental rights or political choices are called into question .
Yet this year we had to produce Parliament 's own-initiative report on the EEJ-Net , a European alternative dispute network set up by the Commission using a co-regulatory approach .
Yet what could be more fundamental than our citizens ' access to justice or the way that law is applied and dispensed ?
Will we be watching every arbitrator and regulator to make sure that Community law is correctly applied ?
We have enough trouble at the moment with the normal judiciary .
We need to be aware of these issues .
They are fundamental to our citizens and also to the rights of this Parliament as a co-legislator , not to mention their possible fragmentary effect on the achievements of the internal market if they are not very carefully monitored by this Parliament .
Mr President , as has been said , the application of Community law does of course constitute nothing less than the decisive turning point in the European Union .
The EU stands or falls according to whether or not a common , effective legal system is established .
Community law , the ' acquis communautaire ' and European unity are based upon European law .
However , the problem , which is illustrated very clearly in the Commission ' s report as well as in the previous reports and in this one , is that there is no such thing as European law , any more than there is such a thing as a single European people .
There are profound differences between the different legal systems .
The Roman-dominated common law and the Nordic legal traditions are incredibly different on a range of crucial points .
Legal systems cannot , as it were , be transplanted like flowers from one pot to another .
There are a number of structural , or what might be called cultural , differences , and that is also transparently obvious from this report .
Paragraph D contains a statement well worth noting . The European Parliament believes that one of the reasons for the poor implementation of Community law is the inability ' correctly to understand secondary Community legislation ' .
I thought that this was a translation error , even though the translation services are well thought of , but we find the same turn of phrase in a number of other languages : ' l 'impossibilité d 'une compréhension correcte ' , ' umuligt at opnå en korrekt forståelse ' etc .
It is therefore impossible to achieve a correct application of secondary Community legislation .
That is certainly an interesting acknowledgement .
It might even be imagined that , as previous speakers have suggested , integration and supranational regulation have consequently gone too far , but that is not the conclusion .
As is made clear , using almost military technology , on page 11 of the report , the conclusion is that we must establish a system leading to the ' elimination of national opposition ' .
If Community law and national legislation are inconsistent , respect for national legal traditions will decline , and this may perhaps be an explanation of why , not only in Denmark but also in Ireland and many other places , there is growing opposition to this system .
The report on monitoring the application of Community law that is before the House today is the seventeenth that has been produced in response to the request originally made by this House in a resolution in 1983 .
These reports give , as the House knows , an annual record of the work of the Commission in discharging one of the most vital parts of its role as guardian of the Treaties by taking action against infringements under Article 226 of the Treaty .
It is obviously right for the House to scrutinise these activities .
The Commission is gratified by the fact that Parliament has given a warm welcome to this latest report and grateful also to Mr Koukiadis and his colleagues for their work .
Every year , each of the two periodical reports on suspected infringements produced before infringement proceedings are open and each of the two reports on established infringements that are produced after notice has been given to the Member State concerned cover some 2 000 or so cases investigated by the Commission .
The bulk of these are individual cases of incorrect application of Community law by the Member States ' authorities .
Clearly it is only possible to deal with such a caseload with a procedure which combines the advantages of individual examination of cases , speedy processing and compliance with the principle of collective responsibility applied in the Commission .
The development of an efficient computerised system is also essential to fulfilling this task .
For this reason a single management database has been set up , covering all infringement files opened by the Commission and covering data on the transposal of directives by Member States .
One benefit of this system is that it enables the Commission to take action systematically against Member States which have not adopted national measures to implement directives before the time allowed for transposal is completed .
As the House will know , this is not an obsession with uniformity for some bureaucratic reason .
It is essential in the interests of equity across the Union .
The development of an efficient computerised system will also make it possible to report in greater detail to the public on the action taken by the Commission to monitor application of Community law whenever a decision has been taken to issue a reasoned opinion or to refer a case to the court .
The Commission is continuing its policy of issuing immediate press releases , which we first established in 1998 , and in addition , since January of this year , decisions giving notice of an infringement , issuing a reasoned opinion , referring the case to court or terminating a case have also been published on the European Communities ' Europa server as soon as they have been adopted by the Commission .
The peer pressure exerted by this greater transparency of decisions that relate to infringements by Member States may also help to promote more rapid conformity from Member States as they all now learn immediately of the decisions taken against each of them .
Greater transparency can also be seen as a guarantee of fair hearing of complaints .
The House will be aware that because the Commission has a privileged position in bringing infringement proceedings it therefore has a unique ability to safeguard the interests of complainants .
The guarantees offered by the Commission have been built up over time and they now mean procedural arrangements , which ensure registration of the complaint , strict confidentiality and information for complainants who may make their views known before any decision is taken to close the case .
We are dedicated to ensuring maximum strength and maximum dependability in these vital procedures .
In its reply to the Ombudsman on the criticism of the management of the infringement case concerning the award of the contract for building the Thessaloniki metro , the Commission has therefore pledged itself to consolidating the administrative rules for complainants in order to facilitate contracts between complainants and Commission departments .
Parliament will be informed of this consolidation as soon as it is complete .
The report adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market - which is the basis for the motion for a resolution before the House today - contains several findings and recommendations .
For brevity , I hope that the House will permit me to deal only with the main ones .
I begin by saying that the Commission does not agree with the report 's conclusions that the growing volume of infringements handled by the Commission departments , in particular on the basis of complaints , reflects a deterioration in the application of Community law .
The main reasons for that are as follows . Firstly , the overall volume of complaints and of cases handled is actually stable .
The number of complainants registered even dropped slightly in 2000 .
Secondly , account must be taken of successive Community enlargements and the expansion of Community law , particularly in connection with the Community 's wider powers and the growing public and business awareness of Community law .
These are all factors that affect the number of infringements handled by the Commission and on that basis the increase in the absolute number of cases handled is a positive development rather than something that should cause disquiet .
As Mr Koukiadis states in his report , it is important that every effort should be made to get to the root of infringements and find ways of reducing their number without relying exclusively on the standard infringement procedure .
As regards the interpretation of statistics in the annual report , the scope for interpreting the figures is still restricted because of the many causes of infringements , the Commission 's great dependence on complaints and the political dimension of the work arising from the fact that proceedings are at the Commission 's discretion .
The Commission is in a position to determine an order of priority for proceedings by reference to , firstly , the perceived damage to the Community legal order , secondly the perceived damage to the interest protected by the rule that has been breached , thirdly the recurrent nature of certain infringements which are the subject of individual or collective complaints and fourthly the harm caused to Community 's financial interests .
In addition , topical events in any given area of the Community law can also trigger an increase in complaints to the Commission and cause the Commission to step up its action to satisfy the needs of the political agenda .
The various stages in the completion of the single market were a good example of that .
The increasing awareness of the possibility of infringement of environmental law is another instance .
All of these points are of course made in very clear terms in the White Paper , which is , as some Members have reminded us , to be considered in this House tomorrow .
It must be borne in mind that the national courts are the first guardians of the Community legal order and therefore the Commission deals with a relatively small proportion of Community law infringements .
It also has to be recognised that , since much of this law is made up of directives which have to be transposed into the Member States ' domestic legal systems , once they have been transposed , the instrument concerned belongs to domestic law and any infringement must be dealt with by the national courts .
I know that is understood in this House , but I spell it out for the record in the hope that it might eventually trickle through to the understanding of the press in Member States and maybe eventually to the public , who are persuaded daily by the newspapers that there is a great centralising process going on in the European Union when in fact the opposite is the case .
The report from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market refers to the need to shorten the time taken to deal with complaints .
Naturally we sympathise with that objective and we are therefore contacting relevant Member States with a view to securing faster compliance with Community law and reducing Member States own handling times , particularly by greater use of the computerised system .
As I have already said , in the interests of greater transparency the Commission is now publishing its decisions to send letters of formal notice , to issue reasoned opinions , to refer cases to the Court or to close or withdraw cases immediately a decision has been taken .
I would also stress that specifically in response to Parliament 's concern , the 18th Annual Report relating to the year 2000 will contain a specific section on the management of exceptions to the harmonisation which Member States enjoy under Article 95 of the Treaty .
The Commission also notes Parliament 's concern about the need to improve cooperation between the Commission and the national authorities responsible for implementing secondary legislation .
As you know , there are regular contacts between Commission departments about specific problems with the application of Community law through package meetings and so-called directives missions .
However , the Commission is also looking at ways of improving the procedure for the notification of national implementing measures as an extension of the IDA programme for the interchange of data between administrations .
That work involves the networking of Community and national legal databases covering directives and national implementing measures and will also give the public easier access to Community law and assist with the training of lawyers in Community law .
The network will also provide direct access to the reports on domestic application of Community law produced by specific national authorities .
In conclusion , Commission action on monitoring Community law is crucial to fulfilling our essential mission of preserving the Community legal order , fairly , firmly , consistently , and with public understanding .
The active interest of this House in such activities is invaluable and we are therefore grateful to it for its continuing support and understanding .
Thank you , Commissioner Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Commission reform
The next item is the oral question ( B5 ­ 0330 / 2001 ) by Mr Harbour and Mrs Guy ­ Quint , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on Budgets , to the Commission , on the reform of the Commission .
Mr President , on behalf of all my colleagues I would like very much to welcome Mr Kinnock here to discuss the reforms .
I would like to say to him that it is not through lack of effort on our part that it has taken a long time to get this question on the agenda .
It has been very disappointing that we have not made progress with the Bureau to elevate the importance of this discussion .
Nevertheless we will make up for it tonight and it is a pleasure to have you here .
Clearly the reforms - and I know you will be able to tell us much more about them in a moment - are at a critical stage .
We know you have been consulting extensively .
In a way that presents us with a dilemma in Parliament .
You will know from the support for my report last year that colleagues have taken a very deep and intensive interest in the whole package of reforms and we have given you strong support for them .
Indeed , we have been very conscious of the fact that these reforms need to be implemented as quickly as possible so that staff do not get disillusioned and they can see that change is ahead of them and new working methods coming before them .
We have made some suggestions that are reflected in the question tonight .
We do not want to disrupt that process .
On the other hand when you send us the elements of the Staff Regulations , as legislators we need to make sure that those changes to the rules are going to work in favour of good administration and not against it .
You made out the case persuasively , as it says in our report , that in many cases the current Staff Regulations are deficient in that respect .
The question we have tabled tonight goes to what we regard - and I hope that you will share our opinion - as the very heart of the reforms you are putting together .
The achievement should be an organisation in which advancement is on merit , an organisation in which all members of staff in the Commission know that they have clear goals , know what those goals are , know that if they meet or exceed those goals their performance is going to be fully recognised .
They should know that they work in an organisation in which appraisals of their performance are not bureaucratic exercises that are carried out every two years and put in a filing cabinet and not referred to again , that the appraisal process is part of the overall quality of management and processes within the Commission , part of giving all members of staff the feeling that it is part of their personal development .
It is setting them goals , it is identifying the need for training for development , for promotion and identifying the things that they need to do to contribute to the development of themselves and to the organisation overall .
That question of appraisal links very strongly to an aspect of the reforms about which we know you are engaged in heavy discussions at the moment .
I hope you will not mind if I mention that tonight even though it is not part of our question .
That is the question of career structure and your proposals to move to a linear career structure .
It is clear that appraisal and career structure are inextricably linked together .
It is my argument - and indeed that was expressed in my report and supported by colleagues - that if the appraisal and development system works properly there are no obstacles to achieving the linear career structure - and that is the whole thrust of what you are trying to do .
There should be no reason for setting artificial barriers to people 's progress through an organisation .
If there is a need for qualifications or training to move to the next job the development process will identify that .
And so a properly designed and effective appraisal system , which we have asked you a number of questions about in the question we have tabled , is also linked very strongly to that move , and indeed it is the very foundation of a linear career structure as well .
My colleague , Mrs Guy-Quint , is going to cover all the detailed budgetary questions with her considerable expertise in that subject , but I would just like to mention two final elements of our questions , to set them in context .
The first is one that we have specifically asked you about as an aspect of a modern public organisation : a policy for whistle-blowing - and the English terminology is now being widely accepted as a very good way of identifying a policy where officials believe and are confident that if they find wrongdoing they can report it without fear of recrimination or their careers being affected .
The second links in with a debate we will be having later this week on the code of administrative behaviour : how do you see that as an integral part of the overall reforms ?
In conclusion we very much look forward to hearing your responses this evening and also your reassurance that the reforms are proceeding to plan as you would wish .
We hope you will also identify ways in which you would like more support from this House in what is for us an absolutely crucial development for the future of the Commission and indeed for the future of Europe itself .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , following on from what Mr Harbour has just said , I will now very briefly talk about technical problems of concern to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I would nonetheless like to tell you , Commissioner , that I am delighted with the advances that have been made in the area of cooperation since our last meeting in a plenary session .
In fact I , in addition to many other Members , regret that the Commission should make proposals and generate information , but does not really consult the other institutions , the trade union organisations or the staff committees of these institutions .
Now , since February , my prayers have been answered , because this procedure , thankfully , has been given a great deal of attention and has been widely listened to by the institutions you are currently consulting .
I know that you will notice that a wide consensus has been reached on many proposals .
On this subject , I would like to say something quite different to my colleague Mr Harbour .
It turns out that there are still two delicate points for us to consider in these negotiations .
To be precise , the structure of careers , that is to say linearity , or else the status quo , and also the pensions system .
If , recently , I understood you correctly , it appears that you are currently searching for a compromise between these two career systems .
It is my personal wish that a realistic and modern proposal will be found through your negotiations .
I would also remind you that as far as pensions are concerned , even if very often it is thought that a pensions system by pre-funding is the way forward , there are many of us , the trade unionists , employees and others , who think that the current system of distribution can be upheld or in any case combined .
I shall now come back to budgetary concerns relating to the reform .
Firstly , and as a matter of precaution , I have to remind you that the implementation of a system for early retirement has not received Parliament ' s endorsement other than upon the specific condition of budgetary neutrality , wherever it may be implemented .
In relation to the entirety of the reform , we would therefore wait for , as soon as is possible , a complete document stating the budgetary aspect of the current negotiations .
It is therefore very important that the Committee on Budgets should have better knowledge of your current predictions on the global cost of reform .
In fact , in March we heard talk of EUR 500 million .
Today , EUR 600 million is stated .
In addition , further measures proposed and the demands of other institutions have put a large strain on the funds required for the balance of category 5 , hence our concern .
Another element of doubt that makes the 2002 budgetary decision more complex is Council ' s failure to respond to the 2001 letter of Amendment No 1 on the implementation of early retirement schemes .
If the Council still insists on its proposal to raise the age for early retirement , we have a question : what will be the consequences for your draft , and , more importantly , do you think that it would be wise to continue under these conditions ?
We do not currently have a document that allows Parliament to measure the consequences of these positions .
Although we are very attached to the idea of reform , we cannot make blind decisions on choices that are so technically , humanely and financially important .
To decide in this way would be like signing a blank cheque to the Commission , which is not in our nature .
To this day , we can only remark that the preliminary draft budget put forward by the Commission exceeds the category 5 ceilings of 5 million and that Council is now putting forward a draft budget where these ceilings are most certainly respected , with a margin of 58 million , but where all the policies of the different institutions would not , as a result of this , be respected .
The solution : should category 5 support the two largest projects - enlargement and the cost of reform - on its own ?
Should we continue these efforts solely on reform or also on enlargement ?
In any case , we need a response .
Would it not be possible to extend reform over a longer period ?
On the eve of voting on the draft budget , we are aware that the responses you provide clearly depend on so many pieces of the same puzzle , but it is very important that you clarify matters in order for us to make a decision .
Mr President , I am very grateful to both Mr Harbour and Madam Guy-Quint for tabling this comprehensive question which permits me to make a full report to the House on progress with various aspects of the Commission 's reform strategy .
As I hope the House will understand , providing detailed replies to every part of this oral question this evening would take up all the time allocated to the debate .
I am therefore making a full progress report on all individual reform actions available today to honourable Members in written form .
Perhaps some honourable Members will have received that full report and here I will concentrate on the most salient recent developments with the human resources policy elements of our reform strategy and I also refer , as requested by Madam Guy-Quint , particularly to the budgetary issues .
I first report , without any complacency , that in the five months since the Commission adopted the detailed consultative document on reform and modernisation of human resources policy , progress has been sustained and progress has been satisfactory .
The joint high-level group chaired by the former Secretary-General of the Council , Mr Niels Ertsbøl been particularly useful in facilitating a very thorough constructive and productive process of consultation with staff representatives .
The Commission has conveyed its warm thanks to Mr Ertsbøl .
In consultations and negotiations on the complex matters of personnel policy , it is natural of course that some delays have been experienced .
I am very glad to say , however , that they have not been of a nature or of a length likely to cause any severe disruption to the reform schedule .
As I previously emphasised to the House , and Mr Harbour has repeatedly and in my view rightly emphasised too , the Commission is aware of the need to sustain the momentum of change , not only in the interests of the institution but also in the interests of our personnel and of the public which we serve .
We are sure that we can maintain the necessary pace while simultaneous achieving the understanding and the support required for fully effective implementation of the essential changes .
Against that background , the Commission adopted a document on 18 July entitled ' New orientations for the reform of personnel policy ' .
This has been communicated to Parliament but of course because Parliament rose at roughly the time we were producing that document , there was not an opportunity to formally bring it before Parliament at that juncture .
The document includes a timetable for the completion of the current negotiations .
By the end of this year the Commission will be in a position to adopt finalised decisions on all issues that do not require changes to the Staff Regulations and also to present a formal proposal for a revised set of Staff Regulations to the interinstitutional Staff Regulations Committee .
We hope that the intensive consultations undertaken with the Secretaries-General and Presidents of this Parliament and of the other institutions will facilitate the support that is essential to the changes that are necessary to fulfil , I remind the House , the clear reform mandate given specifically to the Prodi Commission by this House and by the European Council .
The Commission appreciates the supportive purposes of honourable Members in their reference in this oral question to implementation of the new career development policy ahead of formal agreement .
We advise the House , however , that such efforts would be certain to attract formal complaints and court cases and therefore lead to delays and indeed to unnecessary ill will .
We will therefore continue to fully observe the conciliation agreement which we reached with the staff representatives in March .
In any event , as the July timetable shows , discussions with Commission staff representatives will be concluded in the near future and many substantial changes in personnel policy that do not require amendment to the Staff Regulations will then be decided by the Commission and implemented immediately .
I am pleased to report that the basic objective of our February proposals , of which we are again reminded by Mr Harbour , of directly linking career advancement to proven merit has been accepted in the negotiations to date .
Changes in detail made as a result of negotiation and consultation have , I am glad to say , produced improvements in the proposal .
Details relating to these matters and to Mr Harbour 's questions on benchmarking , appraisal , management and pensions are available in the progress report which I am circulating to the House today .
To save time I therefore turn to the concluding part of the question put by Mr Harbour and Madam Guy-Quint relating to budgetary matters .
Firstly I note the reference in the question to EUR 600 million as ' a cost reform ' and I must say that the House is in danger of accidentally misleading itself .
It is essential to stress with maximum emphasis that a clear distinction must be made between the costs of meeting the Commission 's carefully measured request for 717 new posts including 118 posts in Delegations , submitted in the amending letter last September , and the far smaller gross costs of investing in reform .
The new posts needed to enable the Commission to fulfil its policy and operational obligations to 2006 , set out in fine detail in the amending letter and accompanying documents , will cost around EUR 542 million .
The gross cost of personnel policy reform to 2006 will be around EUR111.9 million .
The largest part of additional human resources spending is therefore not related to any significant extent to the design and implementation of the reform strategy .
I underline the fact that neither the request for Commission posts , nor any of the Commission 's reform proposals , would cause a breach of the limitations set down under heading 5 of the 1999 financial perspectives and the Commission will fulfil the undertakings to stay within the limitations which we volunteered last year both to this House and to the Council .
However , as Mrs Guy-Quint mentioned , the House should take account of the fact - as a table I am also circulating today demonstrates - that recent proposals made by institutions other than the Commission would have the effect of significantly increasing the forecast rates of growth of expenditure on personnel and administration under Heading 5 .
The institutions which are at present contemplating an above-average rate of growth in Heading 5 expenditure will doubtless want to give further attention to this matter .
It is conceivable that part of the estimates which they are making relate to the anticipated costs associated with enlargement .
That is a matter of interest and requires a focus from all of us .
The fact remains that , as things stand at the moment , any danger of breaching Heading 5 of the financial perspective emanates entirely , solely and completely from the ambitions of institutions other than the Commission and has absolutely nothing to do with the modest and temporary proposals that we make for additional investment associated with reform , which is a fundamental mission of the Prodi Commission , given to us by the overwhelming majority of this House and the unanimous decision of the European Council .
Although discussions with staff representatives are not yet concluded , the Commission wishes to emphasise that as examination of all relevant figures will show - and the relevant figures are in the documents that I have circulated today and in the document adopted by the Commission on 18 July - the increase in yearly expenditure under Heading 5 generated by Commission reform will be modest and temporary .
The figures published in the new orientations document in July show the maximum yearly increase due to reform - if the measures were adopted by all institutions - would be EUR 34.3 million higher in 2005 than in 2001 .
Thereafter , after 2005 , the cost will actually decrease , leading to permanent savings of EUR 23.5 million by comparison with 2001 .
Taking those factors into account and in specific answer to the question before the House , the Commission considers that our reform strategy does not require that we request a revision of the ceiling of Heading 5 and we will not make such a request .
Obviously following from that , we do not consider that it is sensible or necessary to make what would be a false distinction between urgent and less-urgent aspects of reform .
On the question of staging the reform over a longer period , I simply remind the House that first of all , a substantial part of the House argues - rightly in my view - for sustained momentum of change , for the sake of our staff as well as for the sake of the institutions .
Secondly , it was the explicit mandate of the Prodi Commission - not any other Commission - to undertake and achieve the reforms in its quinquennium .
We certainly intend to do that .
At EUR 111 million , over four years , with investments that would result in actual cost savings , as we have demonstrated , none of the reform investment is expensive .
All of the reform investment is essential .
There is no question of our seeking or accepting a blank cheque .
Every argument that we have made , every figure that we have put , every proposition that we have tabled is carefully calculated .
We expect no-one to take anything on credit or on trust .
It is clear that negotiations on modernisation of the career system have led to a consensus about the objectives of changing the system and also about conditions for reforming the system .
Those negotiations have not , however , yet produced agreement on the detailed practical means of implementing the sort of reform that is needed to produce a more continuous modern career structure .
The prospects of gaining such an agreement are , however , very much alive , I am glad to say .
Over the past weeks in August , work has therefore continued in order to produce fresh and detailed models and options , which will be the subject of resumed discussions with staff representatives and with other institutions this month .
It is realistic to anticipate that by the end of October the Commission will be in a position to take a final view of the whole of the human resource policy reforms , including a career structure that is more linear and in the best professional interests of the permanent and independent European public service .
To turn such proposals into reality the understanding and support of Parliament , both as a democratic assembly and as an employing institution , will be essential .
I am optimistic that support and understanding will be provided .
As Mr Harbour reminded us , last November the large majority of this House gave support to his report which explicitly favoured the principle of making significant change - not the status quo or anything like it - in order to establish a more linear career system for the European civil service , for all the reasons he was kind enough to set out again tonight .
I hope that such a positive stance will be maintained by the House and by the administration which serves the House .
Negative attitudes would frustrate the will of this House that was clearly expressed by a huge majority in September 1999 , in November 2000 and on several other occasions .
The reason that the will of this House would be frustrated by negative attitudes is that these would impede or prevent the Commission from making changes which are at the core of the modernising reform that has been explicitly required by the Council , by Parliament and by the European public .
I hope that the constructive and cooperative attitude to reform that has repeatedly been manifested by this House will continue strongly and consistently .
Mr President , I must talk about control issues , as I am sure Mrs Morgan will do . I would like to welcome her and congratulate her on recently becoming a mother .
Mr Kinnock , there is a Spanish phrase which says , ' the road to hell is paved with good intentions ' .
You have a very difficult task and I have the impression that , in order to progress from intentions to actions , you must put your foot down and take risks , as President Prodi promised us when he began his five-year mandate .
There are issues of budgetary control which I would like you to expand on in your written reply .
I remember that , a year ago , you told us that eighty officials were expected for the central auditing service to begin work in full in April on an evaluation of the management and control system .
We do not know whether this is yet under way .
We do not know whether centralised prior approval is yet under way insofar as a high degree of experience in the authorising bodies has been achieved .
We do not know whether specific prior controls are operating , on the basis of a risk analysis and according to the wishes of the authorising officers .
We have great doubts , Mr Kinnock , about the future of the financial regulation , which must be created urgently .
It will not be your exclusive responsibility , but we are very unclear about this .
We are worried .
You are going to produce a new version .
When will this be ?
What is happening with the Convention on the protection of the Community ' s financial interests ?
What is happening with the helpdesk which you were going to set up so that the measures in the White Paper could be consulted by officials ?
I could go on and on .
We have the impression that the task is enormous , that there is a timetable to be created .
You know that you have our support .
We want you to take risks .
We will support you if you make a mistake , as we supported Mr Prodi when he told us about it , but perhaps we need someone to put their foot down and timescales to be respected and promises to become realities , Mr Kinnock .

Mr President , when we embarked on this exercise all of us knew that the reform of the Commission was never going to be easy , it was never going to be smooth and it was never going to be quick , because we had 40 years of entrenched views and in trying to change that we were always going to have to overcome some problems .
Despite these obstacles , I have to say , having listened to the Commissioner , we have congratulate him on the progress that he has made so far and we also have to congratulate the staff trade union for having gone into negotiation and made headway in a number of areas of reform .
It is important that this question is down here because I would like to touch on a couple of points that some of my colleagues have raised .
Mr Harbour - rightly so - raised the question of timing .
Timing is important because , if you get the timing wrong , it impacts on the morale of staff and once the morale of staff starts to fall then that has an impact on career improvements , advancement , etc . , and once that starts - they do not move forward .
All these points go together .

I was glad that Mr Harbour touched on the question of the linear career structure , it is a big issue and one that we have to face up to as the Commissioner is well aware .
I would add that I agree that whistle-blowing is now in the public knowledge .
However , whistle-blowing has a different ramification in the west of Scotland : it tends to indicates flutes and that does not go down too well in my part of the world .
I slightly disagree with my colleague Mrs Guy-Quint .
On the question of consultation : we have been consulted at every opportunity .
She did argue again for a more protracted period of reform , but as we said , if we spin it out longer and longer it impacts upon the morale of the staff and that impacts on the performance of the staff .
We have to keep this as short as possible .
The whole question of retirement : I was the person responsible for piloting the question of the retirement package through Parliament and it is a wonderful package .
I would love to be offered the same .
Can I say to the Commissioner , we heard quite clearly about the breaking of the Heading 5 ceiling .
We realise that it is not in the domain of the Commission and maybe it is high time that some of us were to look at some of the other institutions and how they were getting on with on with that .
In conclusion , we have made significant progress .
It is important that we are kept informed of the progress .
I am glad to hear what the Commissioner said , because only by that and by monitoring what is happening can we have an impact .
If obstacles do occur , we can then start trying to tackle them , here and in the other institutions as well .
Mr President , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party also wants to say that we very strongly support the initiatives you have put in place in the personnel area , Mr Kinnock .
It is no easy task you have embarked upon , and it is therefore important for Parliament to offer its full support .
It has , of course , been a widespread feature of society over the last few years that organisations have been obliged to re-think the way they organise their work in order to maintain competitiveness and exploit the opportunities offered by modern technology and public administration and , in so doing , give the electorate full value for their tax contributions .
Moreover , it is precisely the electorate that has a lot of difficulty understanding why the EU ' s institutions maintain such a rigid and old-fashioned personnel policy in which promotions are made on the basis of very formal criteria rather than on the basis of effort .
There is no grass-roots understanding of why EU employees do not have to meet the demands for fresh thinking , flexibility and adaptation that apply in the rest of society .
In that connection , I should like , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to support the Commission ' s proposal for the linear career structure which has been mentioned quite a few times this evening and in which promotions are made on the basis of ability and effort .
I should also like to regret the fact that , in a letter to the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , the President of the European Parliament in actual fact went against Parliament ' s own views on this point , as expressed in the Harbour report .
Moreover , I hope that this has not created too much in the way of difficulties for the Commission in the negotiations .
It is vital that the Commission ' s reforms should involve a personnel policy that rewards commitment , hard work and adaptability , and that is something we must support .
Against that background , I shall look forward to the Commission ' s compromise proposal for a career structure . I should also like to acknowledge the Commissioner ' s pointing out what is creating the problems in Heading 5 .
I think that remark was rather apposite .
Mr President , I have not so far received a report , either in Italian or English .
Maybe they are in my office .
But if I understood Mr Kinnock correctly , in his opinion the only way to respect the ceiling of the Financial Perspective is to abolish the other ten languages and just keep the language that I am speaking now .
My problem is not English .
My problem is that I do not want to speak only English with a mother-tongue English-speaking Director-General of the Commission , for example , and I do not want one culture to have excessive influence .
Mr Kinnock , two years ago , in September 1996 , Parliament conferred upon the Prodi / Kinnock Commission a very clear mandate : reform .
Two years have passed since then , Mr Kinnock , and - as far as I am aware - the only reform which you have implemented is to take the gold medal for 20 years of service away from civil servants , which , in all sincerity , does not seem to amount to much .
In Italy , there was a Ministry of Public Administration Reform for 20 years , and then they removed the word ' reform ' because it was becoming rather ridiculous that reforms were taking 20 years and it became the Ministry of Public Administration , full stop .
It would appear that this reform - and it is not by chance that Mr Pomés Ruiz mentioned the Financial Regulation - is , so to speak , just a castle in the air : we have been talking about it for two years but I feel that all the proposals are raising difficulties and a whole range of problems .
Therefore , I wonder when this reform will come to an end , when there will be an end to this discontent .
I am sure you are not unaware of the fact that the European officials are not too happy with the way things are going .
I am not going to defend them as a corporation , but I will say that this matter is serious because it was the task of this Commission to reinvigorate the European public administration .
In my opinion , rather than reinvigorating it , the Commission is scouring it out .
Mr President , we all know how difficult it is to reform an administration : it is basically a case of replacing the current equilibrium , which is grounded in the inertia and routine of years and of habit with one that is different ; excellent in principle but uncharted territory and always experimental in practice .
This is , of course , a daunting challenge , and one that we welcome .
For this reason in principle we support , without writing a blank cheque , of course , the initiative for the reform of the Commission .
It is , however , worth remembering that this is not simply an administrative reform , but also a political reform , where in addition to the traditional balances it is necessary to be safeguard the traditional European institutional balance , in which issues of power are raised that cannot be dealt with in the same way as a reform of a more neutral nature .
So what is our main cause for concern ?
First of all , we need to know whether we are heading towards a strengthening of independence and autonomy in European public service , and I can offer good advice to those taking the decision on this matter , or whether the discretionary nature of career progression privatises the hierarchical relationship , making a European official very similar to an official in a multinational company .
Furthermore , on what objective criteria are these competences to be awarded ?
How can we prevent merit from being watered down into benefits , into obedience to management , creating a structure of senior officials , some of whom will be quickly promoted , others more slow to rise up the ladder ?
And how can we prevent this polarity from taking on the form of national considerations , the defence of national interests , in opposition to the actual purpose of the Commission , which is responsible for protecting European interests ?
These are the political risks of these reforms , our fears and our concerns .
It is your task , Commissioner Kinnock , and it requires your integrity and intellectual honesty to prove that these risks , these fears and concerns are unfounded .
The onus of proof , however , is on the Commission and specifically on Commissioner Kinnock .
Mr President , I have asked for the floor for personal reasons to speak just on the language issue , for the rest is a political matter .
I read in La Stampa on 15 August that Mr Védrine and Mr Fischer had been complaining .
I wanted to make an understatement and , as the Commissioner has pointed out , it is difficult to make a joke in a language that is not one ' s own .
I failed and I apologise .
It was , of course , a joke , as the Commissioner said .
The rest is clearly a different matter and I respect what the Commissioner has said .
My comment referred purely to the first part .
Thank you , Mr Dell 'Alba .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 9.52 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes from yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , a small error : in the English version of the Minutes , at the end of that section , it stated that Mr Napolitano is chairman of the CONT - I presume the Committee on Budgetary Control .
In fact , he is chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
We will correct that , Mr Corbett .
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , I wish to raise a matter of a highly sensitive nature for this House and which affects the debate about enlargement .
It concerns a statement by the Turkish Foreign Ministry about Mr Poos ' report on the accession of Cyprus to the European Union .
In that statement , the Turkish Foreign Ministry makes an unfair and slanderous attack on an honourable Member who presented his report to the relevant committee .
The committee accepted the report as it stood with only two votes against .
I can see that parliamentarianism in Turkey has not yet reached the stage where they can understand what is in this report and what responsibility , if we can call it that , Mr Poos has taken on .
It is a report of Parliament .
I would therefore like to see Parliament respond to this unfair attack .
Madam President , to give you just one example of the bad taste , it says here in point 1 of the statement :
' Mr Poos is known for both his opposition to Turkey and for his personal links with the government of Cyprus . '
( DE ) That is a slander bordering on the criminal .
I would like to see a response to this accusation from Turkey not from Mr Poos but from this House and also from the Commission .
Thank you , Madam President .
( Applause )
Thank you .
We shall look into this very carefully .
There are no other points of order .
I would just like to tell Mr Helmer that the officials are currently working to put the British flag back .
There was a problem this morning with the British flag , which we are trying to sort out as soon as possible .
Situation in the Middle East
The next item is the Council and Commission statement on the situation in the Middle East .
Madam President , Commissioner Patten , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by apologising for arriving slightly late , but I have come straight from Brussels .
I would like to thank you for your understanding .
Ladies and gentlemen , as Minister Michel said when he spoke before the European Parliament ' s Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy on 28 August 2001 , there has , in recent months , been an escalation of violence in the Middle East . The alarming result is the total collapse of trust between the two parties .
On the ground , this has created a profound sense of helplessness amongst all the people concerned .
Unfortunately , not a day goes by that is without bloody incidents and new acts of provocation , thereby indefinitely postponing a cease-fire , and an end to the infernal cycle of reprisals , all the while adding to the growing list of victims .
This situation , recently described by Minister Hubert Védrine as ' monstrous and revolting ' , is naturally giving rise to grave concerns about stability in a region that is on our doorstep .
The international community cannot tolerate such an escalation for much longer . It must strongly condemn the aggravating factors , namely the terrorism and the suicide attacks perpetrated by Palestinians in Israel .
Apart from the fact that these acts of terrorism are an abomination in that they target innocent civilians , they simply encourage Israel to pursue an increasingly repressive policy .
Shooting at Israelis , whether Jewish settlers or soldiers , by Palestinians activists from Palestinian-controlled zones , and also the excessive and disproportionate use of force by Israel only fuels the cycle of violence .
Using combat aircraft in residential areas , launching missiles to systematically destroy buildings housing police and security services of the Palestinian Authority , and assassinating Palestinian activists are hardly convincing components in a strategy geared towards achieving peace and security .
Israeli military incursions into areas that have been transferred to Palestinian control are violations of signed agreements .
The closure of Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem , especially Orient House , and the seizure of files are political measures that are not very likely to appease Palestinians .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if we consider the current prospects of resuming a direct dialogue , where would that leave us ?
To start with , it is against a very worrying backdrop of the radicalisation of positions by the different parties involved in the conflict that the Israeli Foreign Minister , Mr Shimon Peres , recently and publicly proposed resuming a direct dialogue with the Palestinian Authority in order to scale down the violence and to enforce a cease-fire , two objectives which have so far seemed out of reach .
During his recent visit to the region , the German Foreign Affairs Minister , Mr Joschka Fischer , managed to obtain an agreement from the Palestinian leader to set up a meeting between Mr Arafat and Mr Peres .
It is hoped that this meeting , which will obviously require very careful preparation and preliminary meetings at intermediary levels , will succeed in overcoming the current security deadlock .
It is , in fact , to help with these preparations that the EU Special Envoy , Ambassador Moratinos , visited the region at the end of August .
Unfortunately , his mission had to be diverted very quickly from its original objective when fresh violence and tension erupted following Israel ' s assassination of Mr Abdul Ali Mustafa , the leader of the Palestinian Liberation Front , on 27 August .
This assassination led to extremely violent clashes in South Jerusalem , where the Jewish settlement of Gilo is located , as well as in the Beit Jalla and Bethlehem districts , located in the border region of the Palestinian West Bank .
Under extremely heavy international pressure and through intensive shuttle diplomacy by Mr Moratinos , his security advisor and the team of European monitors , combined with direct telephone contacts between Mr Peres and Mr Arafat , a local cease-fire was arranged , prompting the Israeli Army to withdraw from Beit Jalla at the break of day on 29 August .
Also in the context of the preparations for a meeting and talks between Mr Peres and Mr Arafat , the High Representative , Mr Solana , assisted by Ambassador Moratinos , made a renewed visit to the region , arriving in Jerusalem on Sunday , 2 September last .
He will hold a series of meetings with the Palestinian and Israeli authorities on 3 and 4 September .
He will therefore be in a position to give the Foreign Affairs Ministers of the Member States his impressions and assessment during the meeting in Genval , near Brussels , on 8 and 9 September .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to efforts made by the European Union , I would like to stress that the Belgian Presidency set itself three objectives with a view to helping resolve the crisis in the Middle East .
The first is to promote a policy of impartiality , which is absolutely necessary if the European Union wishes to gain Israel ' s trust .
The second is to enhance the role of the European Union in the region , in particular by making optimum use of the trust which the High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy , Javier Solana , has earned since taking part in the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit and in the drafting of the Mitchell Commission report . The third is enhanced consultation between the European Union and the United States , given the key role that the Americans will be playing in resolving the Middle East issue .
Let us return for a moment to impartiality , whose principle and justifications are not always correctly understood .
Some go so far as to claim that the European Union must henceforth align itself with the Palestinian and Arab positions .
In my view , this is an aberration .
First of all , we should remember that one of the difficulties is precisely due to the fact that Israel is opposed to any UN involvement in resolving this conflict , as it believes that the organisation would be biased against it , because the 22 countries of the Arab League and the 55 members of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference would outnumber Israel and abuse its numerical strength .
Attempts - and now it is a question of more than mere attempts - to compare Zionism with racism , as at the Durban Conference and , therefore , to transform the Israeli-Arab conflict into a racial and religious conflict , when in fact it is a political conflict requiring a political solution , will certainly not have helped matters .
Fortunately , UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan has personally been able to win the respect and trust of Israel , with his much more measured approach .
Next , still on the subject of impartiality , how could the European Union justify its preference for one of the parties in the conflict , when it is involved in a partnership with both Israel and with the Palestinian authorities ?
The European Union is , in addition , working with Syria and Lebanon within the Barcelona process , one of the aims of which is precisely to establish an area of stability , peace and prosperity in the Euro-Mediterranean region .
Lastly , ladies and gentlemen , the principle of impartiality is wholly in line with the Oslo accords .
These accords rule out any action that could prejudice the outcome of the final negotiations in which the parties will negotiate directly with each other for the permanent settlement of the Palestinian question .
Having mentioned the aims of the Belgian Presidency , let us now consider progress in the recent efforts made by the European Union .
The European Union backed the report of the ' fact-finding commission ' , widely referred to as the Mitchell Commission , whose recommendations were published in New York on 21 May 2001 and accepted by both parties .
The European Union also lent its support for the Tenet cease-fire plan that came into force on 13 June 2001 with the agreement of both parties .
We are aware of our progress with regard to observing this agreement .
In spite of this , the plan aims to increase security cooperation between the Israeli and Palestinian security services .
In order to fill the vacuum created by the absence of any direct dialogue , the European Union agreed upon a strategy of ensuring a presence in the region through an uninterrupted string of visits by prominent political leaders .
In the run-up to the Belgian Presidency , Foreign Affairs Minister Louis Michel personally visited the six countries most directly concerned , during a six-day tour from 18 to 25 April 2001 .

Since then , there has been a steady stream of foreign ministers , as well as the Prime Minister and Mr Solana , visiting the region . Most recently it was the turn of our German and Italian colleagues , and visits by the Irish Foreign Affairs Minister and Jean-Claude Juncker , Prime Minister of Luxembourg , will soon take place .
Despite having a very busy agenda , the Belgian Presidency hopes to be able to return to the region shortly , in early November , for example , if circumstances allow .
Madam President , I would have failed in my duty to acknowledge the efforts made by several institutions and key figures within the European Union if I also failed to highlight the extremely active role played by Commissioner Patten to ensure not only the financial survival of the Palestinian authorities but much more besides .
Of course , he does much more than that .
Clearly - and I cannot stress this enough - the European Union has hereto been the most important donor for the region and the Palestinian Authority and , without our financial assistance , without the imagination and ingeniousness that we have to use to continue to supply the authorities with adequate funding to enable it to function , the situation would be infinitely more difficult .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the General Affairs Council meeting of 16 July 2001 , the European Union clearly set out what it expects of the parties involved .
So as to ensure that peace returns to the region , the European Union said that it was particularly in favour of the principle of establishing an impartial monitoring mechanism , considering that such a mechanism would be in the interests of both parties .
This proposal was included in the brief statement made by the Heads of State on 21 July 2001 , at the end of the G8 Summit in Genoa , which I should mention at this point .
The Fifteen are continuing to reflect on the means of implementing this mechanism .
Lastly , the Presidency , on behalf of the Council , has of course issued statements whenever it was deemed to be necessary .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would like to say in conclusion that this insane cycle of killings - and there is no other way to describe it - carried out by the continuing violence and terrorism is proving with each passing day to be totally ineffectual as a way of resolving the crisis .
The serious deterioration in the security situation and the complete lack of trust between the two parties probably render unlikely any prospect of seeing the protagonists putting an end to their conflict by themselves .
Outside help now appears essential .
With this background , an impartial monitoring mechanism , even on a small-scale , would be in the interests of both parties as a means of ensuring full implementation of the Tenet plan and the full and immediate application of the recommendations of the Mitchell Commission , respecting its deadlines and the planned order of events .
( NL ) In the meantime , it is the responsibility of both parties to ensure that calm is restored .
This means that they must each review their attitudes .
On the one hand , the Palestinian Authority must adopt measures to stem the flow of violence and terrorism , without which any attempts to relaunch a political process would fail .
For its part , Israel must create conditions that will favour a return to the negotiating table , mainly by lifting at the earliest opportunity all restrictions imposed on the Palestinian population .
The so far very local cease-fire which the parties agreed upon on 28 August for the Beit Jalla / Bethlehem-Gilo sector and which is being complied with must be consolidated and extended to include other hotspots of conflict and tension in the Gaza Strip and on the West Bank .
The creation of direct dialogue must allow the parties - provided that the situation on the ground becomes stable -to gradually make the transition from a crisis management scenario to a crisis resolution scenario .
In my opinion , the immediate aims of this direct dialogue are the gradual extension and observation of the cease-fire .
This should occur sector-by-sector as it were , together with the improvement of the living and working conditions of the Palestinians .
( NL ) This alone , however , is not sufficient .
Alongside this , it should also be possible to offer a political perspective very promptly .
This political prospect is set out in the Mitchell report which , in turn , should only be viewed as an intermediate stage towards the eventual relaunch of negotiations on a permanent status for the Palestinian regions .
It is high time we returned to the letter and spirit of the Oslo Accords .
It should be remembered that those Accords paved the way for significant progress , which must be safeguarded at all costs .
The problems that have arisen are less the result of the imperfections of those Accords than the product of the failure of the parties to scrupulously apply all aspects of the Accords .
( FR ) Lastly , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , although the intensive and so-called final negotiations , which took place between July 2000 and January 2001 , in locations ranging from Camp David to Taba , were not able to secure a framework agreement due to , on the one hand , mistakes made by all the parties involved and also because of artificially restrictive timetables , I still cannot stress enough the bold progress that was made in mapping out possible solutions to extremely delicate and highly complex issues of truly vital importance to both parties .
It will , of course , be very hard to climb that mountain again , but priority must be given , firstly to restoring the trust lost by both parties , and also to the chances of achieving a satisfactory negotiated solution .
That is why , instead of the current climate of pessimism that is now so deeply ingrained in public opinion shaken by the crisis , the leaders on both sides must quickly build new hope for a better future based on security , mutual respect and peace .
Only a political process - one which finally results in the exchange of land for peace , puts an end to the occupation and allows the emergence of a sovereign , viable , democratic and peaceful Palestinian state that is committed to coexisting alongside Israel , and is therefore also willing , of course , to acknowledge this right to coexist with Israel - only this situation can finally give Israel and , more importantly , the region as a whole the security , stability and peace , to which their people aspire .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot resign ourselves to the logic of war and violence developing in both parties .
The going will be tough , but we must get going .
( Applause )
I would like to thank Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck and I shall now give the floor to Commissioner Patten .
Madam President , the Minister has set out with great clarity and comprehensiveness the situation in the Middle East at the moment and , as the Minister has said and everyone in Parliament knows , the situation in the region has gone from bad to worse and threatens to become worse still .
In considering what I should say this morning I was struck once again , by the difference between the strength of the adjectives and the nouns that we use to describe the situation and the strength of the verbs we use in trying to resolve it .
It really is an intensely difficult problem .
The continuing violence - according to the news this morning there has been another suicide bombing in Jerusalem - and the endless recriminations and refusal of the parties to rise above their grievances and choose the path of peace is not only profoundly regrettable but also frustrating for everyone in the international community who is trying to find a way out of the current impasse .
Both parties , as the Minister said earlier , have failed to seize the opportunity offered by the recommendations of the Mitchell report , offered again in the Tenet plan .
But again we come back to the point that there is no better basis for an end to the violence , for laying the foundations for a peaceful and prosperous future , than Mitchell .
What is the alternative ?
The alternative is more bloodshed , with an international dispute turned into a bitter feud and continuing collateral damage internationally , as we are seeing this week at the conference in Durban .
So what can the European Union do in these circumstances ?
The Minister has explained , very clearly the extremely important role the Presidency has been playing , trying to mobilise international opinion around proposals which offer a way forward .
The Minister has also noted the efforts made by all the European Union foreign ministers and , of course , Javier Solana , who has been attempting to bring Israelis and Palestinians together and to get them to return to the negotiating table .
We obviously have to continue to urge all concerned to implement all and not just some of the recommendations of the Mitchell report immediately .
We will go on doing that and delivering that message .
We must also urge the parties to reduce the level of distrust which has been built up in recent months .
They must reaffirm their commitment to the fundamental long-term goals of the Middle East peace process , secure borders for Israel through the negotiated establishment of a viable Palestinian state on the basis of the relevant UN resolutions .
Palestinian leaders must make clear day-by-day their unequivocal condemnation of and opposition to attacks on the innocent and violence in all its forms .
It is sometimes suggested by critics that we in the European Union have not been sufficiently strong in our condemnation of terrorism .
That is a grossly unfair criticism .
For example , in its statement after the attack in Jerusalem on 9 August the Presidency unreservedly condemned the bombing of a Jerusalem shopping centre and it abhorred that cowardly attack , which mainly claimed the lives of innocent civilians .
After the attack in Haifa on 12 August , the Presidency once again put out a statement condemning recent suicide bomb attacks in the strongest terms and pointing out that these attacks targeted at Israeli citizens are hateful and repugnant in the extreme .
So we have made clear our opposition to terrorism in all its manifestations , but if we are to stand a better chance of ending the cycle of violence and weakening the position of radical forces . Palestinians need to be able to see a real prospect of an improvement in their daily lives .
This should include the implementation of existing agreements between Israel and the Palestinians .
For a start , the lifting of the closures , the transfer of tax revenues , safe passage between Gaza and the West Bank , reopening of the airport and creating export facilities that will allow Palestinians to benefit from their agreements with the European Union and with other partners .
I cannot , for the life of me , understand why anybody should suppose that further impoverishment of the Palestinian territories and increased employment among young Palestinians can have anything to do with the restoration of security .
I am sure that we all took away rewarding reading matter during our summer break .
I spent a good deal of my summer reading about the 1930s and about the relationship between economic impoverishment , economic hardship and political extremism in country after country .
We must go on reiterating the point that trying to do so much damage , putting such a tough squeeze on the Palestinian territories , is not to restore security or the way to lay the foundations for a future in which both parties can live happily and amicably together .
( Applause ) Third-party monitoring of the proper implementation of those agreements and a functioning dispute settlement mechanism would obviously help to address Palestinian frustration with the current non-implementation of existing agreements .
All this would help to bring about a revival of the Palestinian economy , give Palestinians a stake in their own futures and improve the prospects for a better future to be achieved by political negotiations .
These efforts need to be supported by a range of confidence-building measures to overcome the current deep distrust , not only between the leading politicians , but also between the two peoples .
This is an area in which Parliament has quite rightly taken a particularly strong interest .
I want to remind Parliament that in the past two years alone the Commission has allocated about EUR 50 million to peace-building programmes fostering Israeli-Arab and Israeli-Palestinian cooperation in particular .
These programmes promote peace through joint projects and awareness campaigns for tolerance and peace .
We have an important role to play in supporting the voices of moderation wherever they exist .
The sad fact is that the longer this dreadful situation continues the fewer moderates there are going to be , but they show considerable courage in their own communities and they deserve our continuing support .
The Commission stands ready to use all the instruments available to it to help alleviate the very severe financial difficulties facing the Palestinians .
Our package of support for the Palestinian authority is a successful example of how the European Union can deliver assistance in a sensible , fast and effective manner and I am extremely grateful to Parliament for its support in our work .
European support for the Palestinian Authority budget is secured until November and the Arab states are currently considering extending their budgetary support until the end of the year .
It is still too early for any concrete announcement regarding further Commission intervention .
We have just reached mid-term in our current support operation and we are awaiting Palestinian compliance with a number of conditions to be followed by an evaluation and assessment of the pretty grim macroeconomic and fiscal outlook .
Palestinian needs in 2002 , and the contributions of other donors will have to be looked at in the context of an assessment of the economic situation in the Palestinian territories currently being carried out by the World Bank .
It is expected that this exercise will be concluded by the end of September .
Once these data are available , the Commission will consider how best we can contribute further to international efforts .
Of course , we will keep in the closest touch with Parliament about our assessment of the financial requirements of the Palestinian authority and about our continuing determination to ensure that even in the present appalling circumstances our financial assistance depends , as far as the Palestinian side is concerned , on transparency , proper budgetary prudence and a commitment on the Palestinian side to fight corruption .
Those are all points that have all been made to us by Members of this House and they underlie our determination to secure a proper agreement between ourselves and the Palestinians before we started releasing money in budgetary support .
In the meantime , I can only repeat what the Minister said so ably a few moments ago .
What is required is a recommitment to Mitchell as rapidly as possible .
Unless we see that , the situation will get even worse , with considerable damage right across the region .
( Applause )
I would like to thank Commissioner Patten and I shall now give the floor to Mr Galeote Quecedo .
Madam President , it is true that the situation seems to have settled into a horrendous vicious circle in which there are threats and acts of violence from both sides , such as the attack just a few hours ago in West Jerusalem .
We should all be wondering how we have been able to get into this situation , when , in January of this year , the then Labour Government of Israel put forward a peace proposal which today seems almost unimaginable .
However , the Prime Minister , Mr Sharon , could also be asking himself whether the sense of insecurity which his compatriots are feeling today is greater or less than before he won the election comfortably .
Yasser Arafat could also be asking himself whether his people are living better or worse than eleven months ago when the Intifada began .
I do not believe that we should be attributing blame here and I do not think we should be indulging in a simplistic reading of the events , but there is no doubt that the break-up of the negotiations has had a profound effect on Israeli and Palestinian public opinion .
In Israel this has meant that broad sections of the left in that country , above all those who were most involved in the negotiations at Sharm El Sheik , Camp David and Taba , are deeply disappointed in the Palestinian leader .
This emotional reaction is combined with a more reflective reaction from some representatives of the right in Israel who agree on denying Mr Arafat the opportunity to negotiate .
My group , Madam President , believes that this attitude is profoundly mistaken and that it in no way contributes to a recovery of the peace process .
In the current circumstances it may be that Mr Arafat still has additional room for manoeuvre in terms of halting the violence , but he surely has less than the Israeli authorities are demanding of him .
And , in any event , there is not the slightest sign on the horizon of any alternative possibility of negotiation on the Palestinian side .
There is clearly nothing edifying about the situation of the Palestinian territories , whose citizens are living with a sense of humiliation and indignity , which is fertile ground for radical fundamentalism .
But now more than ever the Palestinian Authority should demonstrate that it is prepared to comply with , and ensure compliance with , a peace agreement which in no way is going to fulfil all their aspirations .
Despite the pessimism reigning on both sides , or perhaps because of it , the role of the international community is now essential .
The European Union now has a broader margin for action , which it must exploit through specific contributions , using its economic influence in the area for political ends , ensuring that its development aid is applied to projects which bring specific benefits to the population and that , of course , it is coherent with the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , and creating better and closer coordination with the negotiating forces of the US Government .
Madam President , on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Madrid Conference , the European Union must recover the principle of ' peace for land ' , which inspired the peace talks .
Like ten years ago , we Europeans now have to double our efforts , and my parliamentary group would therefore like to ask the Belgian Presidency to propose to the Council that we need to reinforce the team of our Special Representative , Mr Moratinos .
( Applause from the right )
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to express , on behalf of the Socialist Group , our condolences for today ' s latest victims and begin by stating one fact : that we have returned in terms of rhetoric and actions to a situation which had begun to unravel after the Madrid Conference .
I am not going to give a lengthy description of what is happening .
I do believe that we Europeans should consider ourselves committed to and involved in this process .
I prefer to talk about this than about equidistances , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , because there is no total equidistance between a consolidated , sovereign and democratic State such as Israel , and a possible embryonic State for a people which do not yet have a homeland .
I believe that that is an important element to which we should add - as a message to Mr Sharon ' s government - that the policy of ' an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth ' brings nothing but disaster .
We Europeans know something about this , because it is precisely that policy which we have abandoned by means of the European Union .
Furthermore , economic and human asphyxia is not the way to resolve the conflict and a policy of this type only serves to reinforce the extremists on both sides .
I therefore believe that , from the position of friendship that we feel for Israel , we must express this clearly .
Secondly , Madam President , for the first time we Europeans are signatories of an agreement .
We were at Sharm el-Sheik and the High Representative is currently in Jerusalem .
Our Foreign Affairs Ministers , Mr Fischer , Mr Michel and Mr Ruggiero , are visiting the area and I believe that this also demonstrates our European will .
I believe that we do not just have to express political will , but that Parliament has to help to find the light at the end of this tunnel .
That is why I proposed to the Conference of Presidents - and it has been accepted - that , instead of producing a resolution today , in the heat of the moment , without knowing the result of the consultations , we use the weapon granted us by the Treaty of Maastricht and produce a recommendation so that the Committee on Foreign Affairs can assess whether or not there is any progress throughout this month .
I believe that in this game of lethal symbols which the Israel and the Palestinians are engaged in , we should also ask for positive symbols .
One of them , which seems to me important , is that Orient House in Jerusalem be reopened , because it has always been a platform for peace .
I must remind you that , as President of the European Parliament , I had the opportunity to visit Orient House .
Nothing will be achieved by removing all the bridges to dialogue .
Lastly , Madam President , in the middle of this dramatic crisis , it is cause for hope that there are Israeli and Palestinian voices which have the civic and political courage to sign a joint manifesto .
I am referring to the appeal made jointly by some of the protagonists of the peace processes of recent years , for example Mr Beilin and Mrs Ashraui , who have signed a manifesto - I have the original text in English - in which , under the title " No to bloodshed , no to occupation , yes to negotiation , yes to peace " they say something which the directorate of the Party of European Socialists decided to jointly support at its meeting on Sunday .
I will quote a section of this manifesto which , in my opinion , sums up the will which we have to apply to this process .
It says the following : " We still believe in the humanity of the other side , that we have a partner for peace and that a negotiated solution to the conflict between our peoples is possible " .
That is the approach which we Europeans have to support .
We must ask the Americans to be more active and to try once again to guide the people of the region .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I am not going to insist on the seriousness of the situation or of the escalation .
However , I would like to insist on what Commissioner Patten has said : the violence has not perhaps reached the level it could reach .
Sometimes we say ' things cannot get any worse ' , but in this case the situation could get worse .
Therefore , our obligation is not only to resolve the problem but , of course , to prevent it getting any worse .
However , apart from the fact that we are trying to put an end to the violence by means of dialogue , I believe that I should add certain aspects , directly related to human rights , to what previous speakers have said .
Of course , the fact that there are innocent victims represents a direct attack on human rights .
It is therefore necessary to point out specifically and to insist , both to Israel , which frequently uses disproportionate State force , and to the Palestinians , who do not control their activists , that human rights are continually being affected .
I believe that the European Parliament should currently be sensitive to the fact , condemned by certain NGOs , that four Palestinians may be executed if Yasser Arafat does not commute the sentences handed down for internal activities within the Palestinian area or for collaboration .
I believe that this Parliament should try to prevent these executions .
Recovering dialogue : I would like , in the time available to me , because everything is getting worse and , of course , the Durban Conference has merely exacerbated the situation , to mention what I believe are the eight issues to which we should lend clear support .
Firstly , I believe that the priority should be to resolve the problem of impartiality .
I agree that impartiality is not the same as equidistance , Mr Barón , I agree with you .
I believe that impartiality is a necessary concept , but in politics impartiality is often not achieved without equidistance .
Therefore , equidistance may be an instrument , although I do not doubt that the objective is impartiality .
I believe that it is urgent and important to recover impartiality towards everybody , in particular towards Israel .
Secondly , we must clearly insist on the mission of impartial observers from the European Union .
Thirdly , the Mitchell report must continue to be the direction we take .
There is no other , at the moment at least .
Fourthly , we must prevent the inappropriate use of the Barcelona Process for the Middle East conflict .
The Barcelona Process suffers with the Middle East Conflict but it is not the appropriate course for resolving that conflict .
Fifthly , we must insist on the need for the United States and Russia to participate .
The sixth issue is that we must clearly promote as far as possible every type of contact , as is happening at the moment .
The seventh issue is that the actions of the Ministers , of the Commission and of the Council must be aimed at promoting dialogue between Mr Arafat and Mr Peres , between Palestinians and Israelis .
And in this regard , Madam President , we keenly await the report to be presented by Mr Solana and which Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck has announced .
Finally , and here I agree with Mr Barón Crespo , any symbol is positive ; any possibility , such as the opening of Orient House , is positive ; anything which will stop the conflict escalating is important and the essential thing is to return to peace and dialogue .
Madam President , the most tiresome political debates are the ritual political debates .
Debates in which everyone acknowledges the seriousness of the situation and subsequently repeats what they said last time .
The debate on the Middle East threatens to become something of a ritual debate .
We too , in Parliament , are always asking for the European Union to play a more active role .
The Council and the Commission subsequently respond : we are making every effort , but we cannot do anything alone and there is division in the ranks .
This position was expressed most clearly by Mr Michel last week .
It is clear to us , including myself , that diplomatic success is impossible without the United States .
But what is the United States doing ?
In this connection , I would concur with Mr van den Broek , the predecessor of Mr Patten as Commissioner for External Relations , who said that the United States is , in fact , pursuing a declaratory policy .
It says that things should be done differently .
It calls on the parties to stop what they are doing , and then nothing happens .
If the European Union wishes to adopt the same policy , that should be made clear , and we should then no longer talk about the European Union ' s playing an active role in the Middle East .
In this debate , I should like to make a fresh attempt to break the deadlock , in this case the ritual debate , by invoking the European Union ' s economic role .
If the truth be told , I am getting a little tired of the response by the Commission and Council who say : Mr Lagendijk , economic sanctions are ineffective .
As Mr Michel said last week : we know where we start but we do not know where we finish .
What I want , the appeal that I am making , is not for economic sanctions à la Iraq .
That is not what I want at all .
What is important is that it is unacceptable for the European Union to carry on as we have always done while the region is under threat of war .
We are doing business with the Israelis and are simply the Palestinians ' largest donor .
We cannot continue as if nothing were wrong , while the region is on the brink of war .
I only want to know , and I am addressing this question to the Commission and the Council , whether you would be so kind as to examine the options - and I am choosing my words carefully - for trying , via the economic ties we have with both parties , and I emphasise ' both ' parties , to apply pressure in order to bring the parties back to the negotiating table .
I was , from that point of view , pleasantly surprised that Mr Van den Broek , Mr Patten ' s predecessor , thinks along the same lines .
I appreciate that this is difficult .
It might even be impossible .
However , it would be unacceptable if the use of financial instruments by the European Union were ruled out .
The Council and the Commission have repeatedly stated that they are willing to make every effort to break the deadlock .
In my opinion , this includes that instrument too .
Even if it is painful , I do hope that the European Union does not make the same mistake as the United States , namely say that something must be done and subsequently do nothing .
( Applause from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance )
Madam President , the Middle East is currently experiencing its darkest period since , or even before , the signing of the Oslo Accords .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , in this context , it does not make much sense to talk of a policy of impartiality .
We are not taking sides against Israel by condemning outright the policy of its current government . This was a policy that the statesman Yitzhak Rabin had the insight and courage to turn his back on , an action which cost him his life .
Sadly , now that all prospects of a just peace for the Palestinian people have been dashed , bloody attacks are being made on innocent Israeli civilians , which exceed the boundaries of legitimate resistance by an occupied people .
These intolerable actions only serve to increase the hatred and feelings of vengeance .
A vicious circle was precisely what we feared most in the event of Ariel Sharon ' s election , and this is what we are now caught up in .
I support the comments made by Commissioner Patten .
We must concentrate on doing all we possibly can to help to find a way out of this impasse that is causing so many deaths .
In this spirit , and I repeat what Mr Barón Crespo has said , we can only welcome with great pleasure and profound admiration the eminently dignified and courageous work that a group of key figures , both Israeli and Palestinians , ministers , members of parliament , writers and lawyers , carried out this summer . The outcome of this collaboration was the publication of a joint declaration in which they made a commitment to work together , on the basis of principles that are acknowledged by the international community , to restore trust and hope in peace .
In conjunction with the laudable efforts of our diplomatic staff , I propose that we lend our support to this initiative by using all the resources at our disposal , by inviting , for example , the two main players - the former Israeli minister , Yossi Beilin , and the Palestinian minister , Yasser Abed Rabbo - or by awarding them the Sakharov Prize , or even by setting up a European committee to support their joint declaration .
In doing so , we shall , in our capacity as the European Parliament , be making a real contribution to peace .
Thank you in advance .
( Applause from the GUE / NGL Group )
Madam President , it is a matter of deepest concern and regret for us all that the prospects for a just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has receded in recent months .
We are all aware that the levels of violence have dangerously escalated and that the excessive and disproportionate use of force has resulted in the deaths of many innocent civilians .
It is clear that commitments entered into by various parties , instead of being built upon , are in fact being reversed .
The levels of violence and the levels of provocation have risen to new heights , and this is the primary reason why the parties are now no longer engaged in dialogue .
Dialogue is the only way forward if we are to end the violence in the Middle East at this time .
Where dialogue does not take place , the gap is only filled by mutual misunderstandings and ritual condemnations and fear .
One of the primary challenges now for the European Union and the broader international community is to ensure that there is a resumption of an active and effective mediation process within the Middle East .
There is an urgent need for a third-party monitoring system to be appointed in an effort firstly to end the violence which is taking place now on a daily basis , and secondly to resume peace talks .
It is also time that the obstacles to the implementation of the Mitchell report were removed .
We should recall for a moment that the key findings of this fact-finding committee include the following recommendations : the government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority should reaffirm existing agreements and immediately cease violence ; there should be a resumption of security cooperation ; there should be establishment of a meaningful cooling-off period and incitement in all forms should be discouraged .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Wurtz talked of the Middle East ' s darkest period .
Perhaps he was thinking of Mr Riad Al-Turk , the leading opposition figure in Syria , who was re-arrested today .
Perhaps he was thinking of the shocking images showing how 50 homosexual men were recently treated in Egypt .
Perhaps he was thinking of the trial of Nawal El Sadaawi , or perhaps of the trial of Mr Ibrahimi , also in Egypt .
Perhaps he was thinking of all the women in Saudi Arabia and other countries , who have absolutely no rights in their own countries .
This describes the Middle East of today , the Middle East that we do not discuss .
This is the Middle East that we encourage to reject democracy , to reject the rule of law , and we continue to consider and propose a policy of impartiality for Israel .
Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , I think that it is impossible in politics - and even less so in this particular case - to propose a policy of impartiality .
The European Union ' s policy must , of course , be a policy to promote peace , but , most importantly and primarily , it must be a policy to promote democracy .
Yet , we still have a great deal to do in order to achieve this .
We all knew , and now we know exactly how far Mr Barak stretched his profound determination to reach a fair peace agreement with the Palestinians , and we know that it was the determination of Mr Arafat and his democratic supporters alone that sabotaged and destroyed this peace process .
It is clear that some Members of this House would like Mr Sharon to conduct a different policy .
Unfortunately , Mr Sharon ' s policy is not very different .
Of course , he has made some mistakes , but in the main , he is acting in response to the deep-rooted feelings of the Israelis , who no longer trust Mr Arafat - I do not mean the Palestinian people - and I think we can understand why this is the case .
I think that this is the fundamental problem and the European Union cannot respond , Mr Patten , by considering sociological proposals to improve the economic conditions .
This is a political question and it concerns the involvement of the European Union in this process .
The Union has an historical duty to be involved .
Instead of continuing to advance reluctantly with regard to enlargement , the European Union has no choice but to propose that Israel , with its population of five million people , becomes a full member of the European Union .
This is the only way to ensure the security of the Israeli people and also , therefore , the security of the Palestinians and thus to guarantee peace for the future .
Any other suggestion is just hot air .
As Mr Lagendijk pointed out , we have said a great deal .
Perhaps we should now get down to the business of politics .
( Applause from the TDI group )
Madam President , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs last week , acting President of the Council , Mr Michel , did not pull any punches during his speech on the European Union ' s input to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict when he stated that the role of the European Union is very limited .
This is mainly due to two factors , as Mr Michel openly acknowledged : Israel considers the EU to be pro-Palestinian , in other words not to be an impartial external mediator in the dispute between neighbours ; and , secondly , there is no unanimity within the European Council as to a common strategy to be adopted for the Middle East .
How can the EU respond ?
It can , at any rate , moderate the Israeli criticism of pro-Palestinian partiality by resolutely distancing itself as the Council , the Commission and individual Member States from the unprecedented anti-Israeli smear campaign which is currently being conducted at and around the UN Conference against racism in Durban .
At the same time , the European institutions must openly condemn the behaviour of the President of the Palestinian Authority .
Mr Arafat ' s accusation , levelled at Israel , of pursuing a racist policy only fans the flames of Palestinian violence .
Meanwhile , the German Foreign Minister , Mr Fischer , is attempting to round up the EU Member States in order to revive the Middle East peace process .
His plans , summarised in a non-paper , have the backing of four major EU Member States ( France , Great Britain , Spain and Italy ) , as well as of the High Representative , Mr Solana , according to the German press .
Have the other members of the Council or the Commission been consulted ?
I would also add another question to this : has an understanding been reached with the US Administration ?
Surely , both the President of the Council , Mr Michel , and the non-paper emphasise the indispensability of Washington in order for the peace process to get back on its feet .
The essence of the non-paper is the mediation and arrangement of an initial meeting between the Israeli Foreign Minister , Mr Peres , and Mr Arafat .
This meeting should be the cautious beginning of a gradual peace process .
Certainly in the non-paper , the Palestinians demand an end to the violence , but that is no longer an absolute condition for Israeli-Palestinian talks .
Does the European Union not in this way , in fact , brook the Palestinian Intifada , which has now grown into a fully-fledged guerrilla organisation with fully-equipped paramilitary units ?
If the Council and the Commission are to avoid this elementary question , then all well-intended mediation attempts will irrevocably fail .
Madam President , as Europeans we will only be able to act as mediators if we are not only neutral towards both sides but also show the necessary respect for the needs and expectations of all parties to the conflict .
German Foreign Minister Fischer has perhaps shown us what European mediation could be like , by contrast to the embarrassing comparisons made by the Finnish Foreign Minister between the crimes of the national socialists and Israel and the aggressive attacks against Israel made by the Belgian Foreign Minister .
I was also shocked to see shops in Brussels with signs saying " We do not stock Israeli products " .
Perhaps some day European politicians will understand that no one is interested in their personal interpretations of the conflict .
Our task is to help to calm the conflict , and this will only be possible if we recognise the Palestinian people ' s need for independence and freedom , while also recognising Israel ' s need for security and above all , too , recognising Israel as a democracy .
Madam President , the latest attacks and actions clearly demonstrate that , at the beginning of this academic year , the spiral of violence is unfortunately not coming to an end .
This violence has cost the lives of more than 150 Palestinian children and adolescents and dozens of Israeli children .
Following the statements we have heard this morning from the Presidency-in-Office of the Council and from the Commission , it is clear that the European Union is not remaining , must not remain , impassive in the face of this situation and that the objective of sitting down at the negotiating table - although many of us are longing for another Madrid Conference - seems practically utopian compared to the objective of an immediate halt to the violence .
I do not know if the next meeting between Mr Peres and Mr Arafat will lead to that halt to the violence - time will tell - but what does seem clear is that , in order for violence to end , I believe two conditions are essential .
Firstly , the will of the two sides .
It is clear that this ' dialogue ' of suicide bombings and bombings by F15s and F16s must end .
The moderates must speak up , as Mr Patten rightly said .
I believe that this is the time for the moderates and , in this regard , the European Union must support all the options .
Secondly , the international community must act : the United States , Russia - where the Israeli Prime Minister is today - and the European Union , which must hold all the cards so that it can play its rightful role on the basis of two undeniable premises .
One was mentioned by the Presidency-in-Office of the Council : international law is being permanently violated and it must be reestablished .
And , secondly , the European Union must have a single commitment and that commitment is the cause of peace .
But two things must be taken into account : that peace must be the fruit of justice , Madam President , and that moderation becomes a vice when it rejects a commitment to a just cause such as the cause of peace .
Madam President , the Israeli Internal Security Minister has just said : ' Palestinian terrorism is trying to demoralise the citizens of Israel , change their daily life and impose fear with a view to the government granting political concessions ' .
Unfortunately , the Sharon government has been dramatically changing the personal and collective daily lives of the Palestinians for some time .
The Sharon government is mistaken in assuming philosophies such as that expressed by Minister Landau , because the Palestinians are not looking for the Israeli Government to grant political concessions .
Nobody can grant what is not theirs .
The Palestinians simply want the rule of law to prevail and the principles of international law to be respected and put into practice as they have been proclaiming for decades , though so far fruitlessly .
The Palestinian demands are clear and easily shared by citizens of good will .
They are simply asking for an end to the military occupation they are subjected to .
It must be remembered that they are not fighting the Israeli occupiers because they are Jews , but because they are occupiers .
They demand the evacuation of the Jewish settlements , established on their territory with the clear objective of making a viable Palestinian State impossible .
Finally , they aspire to the proclamation of a true and genuine independent State .
I believe that , before it is too late , the European Union is morally obliged to find a system which will lead the occupier to respect international law .
It is that simple .
I also believe that the forces of reason and of political intelligence in Israel should mobilise themselves in order to convince their co-citizens that the longer the occupation and repression lasts , the more radical the Palestinians will be .
I will end by congratulating Commissioner Patten , with whom I am delighted to agree .
Madam President , it was quite depressing to listen to the representative of the Council , given that she appears to believe that the Middle East conflict is being played out between equal parties whom we ought to treat equally , adopting a policy of equidistance .
Has the Council forgotten that we are dealing here with a militarily and economically superior occupying power which , in contravention of international law , is oppressing a native population and stealing its land ?
Moreover , the occupying power has the full support of the United States .
Why , then , must the EU treat Israel and Palestine equally ?
Did we treat Milosevic and the Kosovans equally ?
Did we treat Mandela and the apartheid regime equally ?
In occupied Belgium , did you treat your resistance fighters in the same way as the occupying forces ?
No , equal treatment would naturally have been absurd in every one of those cases .
In a report , our own conflict prevention network has recommended that we put economic pressure on Israel .
One is led to wonder , Mr Patten , whether you decided to close down the CPN because it comes up with uncomfortable truths .
According to yesterday ' s Süddeutsche Zeitung , the EU - or , properly speaking , the big five Member States of the EU ( we other , small countries are not asked ) - is now , according to a non-paper , to pursue a Middle East policy approved by the United States .
It is therefore a requirement that it be approved by the United States .
What has become of the EU ' s role as a defender of international law ?
What has become of the EU ' s ambitions for an independent foreign policy ?
What has become of its ambitions to supplement its excellent economic and administrative support for the Palestinians with a powerful and well thought-out policy ?
They seem to have evaporated into thin air .
That is something I regret .
Madam President , I would have preferred not to speak this morning because , in actual fact , words do more damage than the Palestinian stones .
I have had enough of words which are not matched by action and I am starting to doubt the power and effectiveness of Parliament and our institutions .
Sometimes , I feel like the little girl in the story " The Emperor ' s New Clothes " .
We all know exactly what is going on .
Mr Sharon speaks and acts clearly , and he says when he speaks in parliament that his intention is to bomb and kill , targeting , in particular , the Palestinian leaders , and to raise houses to the ground , not just in order to destroy the houses but as part of a clear plan .
When I was in Palestine and Israel between 23 July and 22 August , I saw houses raised to the ground in the settlement areas to gain more territory for Israel ; I witnessed the taking of Orient House and saw the Israeli flag hoisted immediately - a totally colonialist gesture .
Therefore , Mr Sharon is going ahead with his plan , which is to restore only 42 % of the territories to the Palestinians , who are forced to live in bantustans , without a State or borders .
He is making himself plain . Why do we not believe the things that Mr Sharon is saying explicitly ?
Why are occupiers and occupied placed on the same level ?
Like the President-in-Office of the Council , I am appalled and horrified by this situation , but I am also , on occasion , appalled and outraged at the way we describe the facts ; of course , I condemn the throwing of bombs at civilians in Tel Aviv as an appalling , criminal act , but I feel that it must be said that the root of the matter is the need to put an end to the Israeli military occupation .
I have met Mr Arafat several times - the last time together with French and American delegations - and he said to us : " We are not asking for much .
We are asking for international law to be respected .
This is our request and I have accepted everything : the G8 , Sharm-el-Sheik and Mitchell . "
The Mitchell plan was not rejected by Mr Arafat . It was rejected by Mr Sharon because the Mitchell plan stipulated the end of the settlements and new settlements are still being established today .
Behind the fighting and violence , there is , in actual fact , a plan being executed : more destruction of houses and more settlements .
This is a fundamental barrier to the possibility of peace .
Together with Mr Hanan Ashrawi , Mr Yaser Abed Rabbo , Mr Yossi Beilin and Mrs Galia Golan , I signed the document presented at Ramallah : they demand peace , a fair peace .
Just as those courageous Israelis who are defending the rights of all and who , together with me and many others , have been sleeping in the Palestinian houses bombed at Beit Jala demand it .
Without a doubt , Europe must act .
I would like to thank Commissioner Patten for the things he has said and I support Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s proposal to reinforce our political presence in the field .
I consider it absolutely essential for international observers to be sent but , once again , it is Israel who has refused to cooperate .
Why do we not say so openly ?
Why do we not make the situation plain ?
Dialogue is essential for peace but respect for the law and for human rights are just as essential and cannot be treated as separate issues .
Madam President , some decades after the Holocaust and the extermination of the Jews in the Soviet Union , Durban is evidence that anti-Semitism is still alive in the political world of the third millennium .
If Europe does not take a firm stand against the statements made at Durban equating Zionism to racism , it will be dealing another mortal blow to the survival of the West as a culture which embodies the right of nations and peoples and it will fall back into the abyss which engulfed us at the time of the Nazi concentration camps and communist persecutions .
When , after the attack outside the disco in Israel - just hours after Mr Arafat ' s visit to the European Parliament in Brussels - and the attack at the pizzeria , Europe spoke out , there began to be hope that dialogue would be resumed , but Europe has subsided into silence .
Terrorist attacks on civilian targets in Israel have become everyday occurrences , forcing the Israeli army to defend the civilian population .
Moreover , Israeli civilians have also failed to show respect for the human dignity of the Palestinians on a number of occasions and violence has become a symbol of and synonymous with a tragic period of history , one , indeed , in which Europe is incapable of speaking out and , what is more , fails to remember that , in actual fact , the Palestinian leader has never commanded his forces to stop the violence but , on the contrary , has released Hamas and Jihad terrorists from jail .
We must realise that terrorism is becoming an international phenomenon and that greater political commitment is needed to oppose this unwelcome development .
Europe provides a considerable amount of economic aid to the Palestinian Authority : we would like to see proof that the Union ' s funds are being used to help the people to work towards the success of the peace process as well and not to provide weapons for terrorists .
In the light of recent events , we request a detailed report on this point and we call upon Europe to play a useful part and to demand from both Israel and Mr Arafat a genuine peace process , not just the words or terrorist bombs of recent years and months .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard many resolutions formulated in this debate today , but I think the Commissioner ' s contribution has made clear that security can only come about through cooperation , by our getting involved in the structures and forcing the parties involved to work together .
In this situation there is absolutely no point in formulating resolutions .
After all , that was our experience in Europe , too , when in 1950 we united coal and steel to put an end to a thousand years of warfare between the Germans and the French .
In the Middle East today , the equivalent of coal and steel is tourism , water and energy .
We must change our policy here and support cooperative projects .
Since 1993 , we have given massive support - billions of euros - to the Palestinian Authority because we wanted the Oslo peace process to be a success .
But if you talk to the peace movement in Israel today , you find that members of parliament who only a few years ago went to prison because they talked to Mr Arafat are now saying they would not talk to him any more .
He is not stopping the violence , he is behind all this violence that we again witnessed last night .
Such a situation inevitably brought Mr Sharon to power .
That is why we need a new starting point for cooperation .
For that reason , Commissioner , I would like to disagree slightly with your conclusion that these allocations of EUR 10 million to the Palestinian budget between now and November are a good thing .
Lump sum payments of that kind can be made to stabilise a budget , but now we need funds with strings attached , not lump sum payments on such a scale .
Secondly , we must not continue to make unconditional payments to multilateral bodies like the United Nations Refugee Relief Agency , UNWRA .
I would like to read to you something from a schoolbook used by the UNWRA in Palestinian refugee camps .
It says : " The extermination of the Jews was a just and unavoidable evil . "
The book praises Adolf Hitler and describes the corrosive power of the Jews in the 1930s .
If that kind of thing is being taught to eight and nine year old children , if suicide attacks are praised , if martyrdom is glorified , then the European Union with the values it stands for must say : we will not pay for that under any circumstances .
I would therefore ask you to look very carefully at what is being taught in Palestinian schools and in the refugee camps through the UNWRA .
Our money should not be used to promote such anti-Semitism and statements of that kind .
Madam President , this has been a distressing summer in the Middle East and I am extremely sorry to say that the European Union is partly responsible .
On several occasions , suicide bombers , armed by Hamas and encouraged by the Palestinian Authority , caused bloodshed in the heart of Israel , and each time , the European Union did nothing more than issue verbal condemnations , whilst all the time continuing to give generous funding to the Palestinian Authority , which has recently freed the most dangerous terrorists .
Can we hope to fulfil a credible role when we continue to provide considerable sums of money , unmonitored , to an authority which is an authority in name only , and which remains one of the world ' s most corrupt political entities ?
A recent report by the Court of Auditors revealed that there has been serious mismanagement and many cases of misappropriation under Yasser Arafat .
Were sanctions imposed ?
Did you demand transparency , Commissioner ?
On the contrary , the complacent attitude and leniency shown by the Commission could only be taken as incentives to continue along this disastrous route .
As you know , peace was a possibility at Camp David , peace was within reach .
What did Mr Arafat do ?
Once again , he lacked the bravery of President Anwar al-Sadat and dashed all our hopes .
He said no to peace at Camp David .
One month later , the Intifada was resumed .
This time , however , there were elements of a genuine anti-Semitic crusade and the most dangerous terrorists were at large .
Did the Commission and the Council take specific action in response to a further breach of the Oslo accords ?
Did they even subject their funding to any conditions ?
The answer again is no , and I confirm that generations of young Palestinians continue to receive education instilling martyrdom and hatred , which is funded by the European Commission .
How can we fail to see that the Intifada is revealing its true nature , which is fanatical , mystical and insane and which completely rejects the existence of Israel .
We can , of course , criticise Israel but how can we fail to see that the rejection of Israel , when systematic , unbalanced and unjust or even when it involves sending away both parties without favouring either , may serve to disguise the anti-Semitism which still exists ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the historian Léon Poliakov quite rightly said that anti-Semitism is to refuse a human being the right to exist because he is Jewish and anti-Zionism is to refuse a State the right to exist because it is Jewish .
Madam President , in July with my colleagues Mr Galeote , Mr Laschet and Mr Morillon I had the opportunity to visit the Middle East .

We had conversations with Foreign Minister Peres and Chairman Arafat and other very senior people there .
It was made clear to us that the Mitchell proposals are still accepted by both sides .
The problem is how to put them into effect .
This cannot begin until there is a cessation of terrorism and only yesterday there was another suicide bomb attack in Jerusalem .
The Europeans should cease worrying about having a role .
They have one .
The question is whether they will exercise it in a balanced and useful way .
The United States and the Europeans must work in harmony and not allow themselves to be played off one against the other .
In the past the European Union has been seen merely as a supporter of the Palestinians .
It was an institution looking for a role .
Now Mr Solana is winning the confidence of the Israelis as well by a more balanced and realistic approach without being too prescriptive .
I am reassured by the Presidency remarks this morning on the need for equi-distance .
On the Palestinian side , the danger is that intransigence will be fuelled by events such as the UN racism conference in South Africa , through the influence of radical Arab forces in the region and by the breakdown of liaison between Israeli and Palestinian security agencies .
Instead of suppressing Hamas , Islamic Jihad and other extremist elements , the Palestinian agencies are now too often in bed with the extremists .
I fully accept Mr Patten 's analysis that further impoverishment of the Palestinians will not discourage extremism but I have no doubt that the European Union should use its financial leverage with the Palestinians to greater political effect .
We must make it clear that continued funding requires the Palestinians to bear down with greater effect and greater consistency on the extremists .
We need to take care also over this question of international monitors .
The precedents are not good .
The most likely form of increased international presence on the ground is a resuscitation of the liaison between the Israeli and Palestinian security services reinforced by American and European elements .
This might not catch the headlines but through removal of misunderstanding and more effective action against extremists , it may actually help create some of the conditions for peace .
Madam President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , thank you very much for your remarks here today , especially for the clear language which you , Madam President-in-Office , used and which is not always found in the Council ' s statements .
You actually described what the Israeli government is doing , namely murdering its opponents , whom it accuses of being terrorists , as murder .
In the light of this fact I find it embarrassing and sometimes in poor taste to make reference to schoolbooks when we see that Orient House is occupied , Palestinian territory is invaded and occupied and Palestinian police stations are systematically destroyed regardless of the human casualties .
Anyone who says Mr Arafat is responsible for what is going on there cannot be very well informed about politics .
Everything we have tried and proposed in the past has failed , sending observers - I am glad Mr Van Orden also advocates that - all that has failed because of the Israeli government ' s refusal to accept it .
Even the Mitchell report , which we all support as a common point of reference , cannot be implemented because the Israeli government under Mr Sharon - who is wanted by the police in your country , Madam President-in-Office , which is why he cannot be invited to Brussels - wants to interpret the Mitchell report and determine when it will be applied .
In view of this situation , I am no longer calling for greater involvement in the process .
We want to be involved , but we are not accepted .
What else can we do ?
We have a treaty with Israel and we ought to give some thought - you have also mentioned this in the past , Commissioner , where treaties have been broken - to whether we can maintain that treaty in force or whether we ought to suspend it .
Madam President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , the spiralling level of violence in the Middle East blinds us to the fact that it was not so very long ago that , instead of the current feelings of despair , there was optimism and hope that a permanent peace could be achieved .
Unfortunately these hopes were to be cruelly shattered and it is hard to forget that the present Intifada arose directly from the unnecessary and provocative visit by Mr Sharon to the Temple Mount in Jerusalem .
However , nothing justified the subsequent acts of terrorism by either side , and in the current highly charged emotional situation , with the areas of conflict so widespread , it is very difficult to see a cease-fire emerging .
It is clear that the only way of breaking the current deadlock is through the intervention of a third party .
The only feasible third party would be a team of international observers .
We know this is acceptable to the United Nations and the Palestinians , but regrettably it has been rejected by the Israelis .
The United States has endorsed the Israeli position .
Regrettably its blind allegiance is paradoxically damaging to Israel 's cause .
Instead of being a puppet of the Israelis , the US should be independent and use its influence to pressurise them to end their violence , just as we , in the EU , must use our influence with the Palestinians to do likewise .
If both we and the US work together in common cause , there is just a possibility that we could halt the continuing slide into regional conflict and restore peace negotiations once again on the basis of the Mitchell recommendations .
That should continue to be our primary objective .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank all the speakers who have taken part in this debate , not only to explain and clarify their positions , but also to express their feelings and emotion regarding the tragic situation in the Middle East , and , of course , the appalling events of yesterday .
Ladies and gentlemen , I understand only too well how tempting it is , when faced with the seemingly endless cycle of acts of violence and violent retaliation , to give in firstly to our emotions , whether positive or negative .
This is a very human response and if we did not react in such a way , we might wonder , in fact , whether we are human .
I believe , however , that if we want to help find a solution , we must control these emotions and overcome them .
We must also be able to control our frustration - and God only knows how frustrated we are by this process , where we take one step forward and two steps back , and sometimes even two steps forward and three steps back . We must always begin again , pick up the pieces , maintain contact with both parties and use the carrot and stick approach - if you will forgive me using such a crude expression - as circumstances require .
This is a process to which , I believe , all the bodies of the European Union , including the Presidency , of course , are devoted , in the full knowledge that by continuously working hard to try to safeguard opportunities for a solution , there is a great danger that neither side will be satisfied .
I would like to endorse the comments of those Members who have reiterated that the European Union ' s role in a region of the world so close to our own is today much more important than it was several years ago .
However , very many of you have also said that a solution cannot be found without much more active and dynamic support than is currently being given by the US administration and other bodies or other governments .
Lastly , and to sum up , Madam President , I would nevertheless like to say to those who have criticised the concept of impartiality , as they may rightfully do so , of course , that by maintaining a position of equal distance between both parties does not mean we believe that their circumstances are identical .
To use the English expression , and these will be my closing words , ' equidistance is not equalising the parties involved . '
Madam President , I have a question for the President-in-Office .
There are reports in the press today that the Prime Minister of Israel did not receive the European Union ' s High Representative .
So Mr Sharon has not seen Mr Solana .
Can the Council give us more information ?
Was it because there was no time , because Prime Minister Sharon has gone to Moscow , or was there a political intention not to receive the High Representative ?
Has the Council been informed of this ?
I should like to know .
Madam President , I cannot provide an accurate answer to this question at the moment .
However , I am , of course , more than willing to find out all the necessary information so that I can give you the answer later .
Thank you , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck .
I shall now give the floor to Commissioner Patten .
Madam President , if I may offer one brief reflection on that last question , I cannot believe that anybody would seriously refuse to see my friend and colleague , Dr Solana .
Nobody has done more than Dr Solana to try to move forward the peace process in the Middle East and today and on other occasions Parliament has paid proper tribute to the role that he has played in the Middle East as the representative of the European Union .
It has been an interesting debate , focusing on some familiar and central themes .
There have been some disagreements , but by and large it is fair to say that most Members take the same view of the situation and there has been perhaps a shared sense of frustration about how we can best contribute to resolving this appalling and deteriorating situation .
Obviously we are going to come back to the subject again and again in the coming weeks and we will be able to respond to some of the very positive suggestions made in this debate .
For example the suggestion made by Mr Galeote about the resources available to Ambassador Moratinos , who has been doing such an outstanding job .

I should like to comment on the speeches made Mr Zimeray and Mr Laschet and I will do so with all the diplomatic restraint for which I am famed , not least in Asia .
Over the last two years I have had the great pleasure and privilege of listening to hundreds of speeches in this Chamber , probably more than any other Commissioner .
I am bound to say that I have not heard many speeches less well informed than Mr Zimeray 's .
I would wish that Mr Laschet 's speech had been a little better informed as well .
I know of no serious commentator on the Middle East who argues that we would all be better served if the Palestinian authority was brought to its knees .
Most Members of this Parliament are aware of the Commission 's efforts to make sure that the European support for the Palestinian authority is money that is properly spent , well spent and spent in ways that help to promote pluralism , the rule of law and clean government in the Palestinian territories .
I am surprised that the honourable gentleman did not know that , before we make each month 's payment , we have to have the seal of approval of the International Monetary Fund to ensure that the money voted by this Parliament is being spent in a sensible way .
These are all issues we have discussed at great length with Parliament , which has been rightly concerned to ensure that European taxpayers ' money is spent properly , transparently and to good purpose .
I would be delighted to come back to this subject again in the future , but I want to underline that point today because I do not think it is helpful when Members of this House give the impression we are not spending European taxpayers ' money sensibly .
I also want to deal with a subject which I have dealt with again and again .
Perhaps if I talk about it once more today , I will be able to save one or two honourable Members who have not yet got the point from raising it in correspondence and in speeches in Parliament in the future .
It is repeatedly suggested , not least in some sections of the Israeli press , that the European Union has been implicated in funding Palestinian schoolbooks which contain anti-Semitic passages .
I want to be very clear on this .
None of the projects in support of the Palestinian authority , none of the projects in support of UNRWA financed by the European Commission , include the production or distribution of school textbooks .
It is true that this year , for example , we have contributed EUR 35 million to the UNRWA 's EUR 170 million education budget .
I would just like to point out that we are not the largest contributor to that budget .
The largest contributor is the United States and I do not think anybody is suggesting that by contributing to the education budget of UNRWA the United States is guilty of the things with which we are charged in the Commission .
Assistance to the educational system is focused on infrastructure , equipment and direct assistance for current school expenses , such as salaries for teachers .
It would hardly help to contribute to security in the Palestinian territories if teachers were being laid off in large numbers because nobody could afford to pay them .
Furthermore , no request has ever been made to us by the Palestinian authority to finance curricula or textbooks .
We reject any attempt to use the educational system as a vehicle to promote intolerance and to hinder the efforts by the parties still committed to peace in the Middle East .
It is particularly regrettable in this context that school children may be exposed to intolerance by the parties involved in the conflict .
The Commission has always and will always continue to focus its assistance on promoting a culture of peace , tolerance and human rights in the Middle East .
Recent studies of Palestinian books have shown that anti-Semitic language contained in old Egyptian and Jordanian textbooks used by the Palestine authority and UNWRA , particularly before 1994 and 1995 , is being removed .
These new books , rightly or wrongly , have been criticised for not conveying a clear message of peace and friendship with the Israeli people .
I wish they did convey such a message .
However , textbooks are not going to change the tragic reality of daily life in the Palestinian territories or in the Palestinian camps .
It is important that UNWRA is running a substantial tolerance and awareness programme in its schools to counteract any negative influence on the pupils , but it cannot be very easy for a teacher in the camps to be teaching children about tolerance and awareness when they go out of the camp in the evening and see tanks and guns and stone throwing .
Teaching a tolerance and awareness programme in those camps must be one of the most difficult jobs in the world .
I beg honourable Members who take up rather partisan positions on these matters to think of those who are working day after day in the camps and elsewhere in the Middle East to promote decency , to promote the sort of values which we share in this chamber .
I do not think that rather cheap attacks on what is being done by UNWRA and by others are the sort of thing that one should hear in this Parliament .
Finally , I would like to say something about Mr Lagendijk 's speech , because I normally agree with the honourable gentleman .
He makes some of the most thoughtful and interesting and well-informed contributions to our debates .
Of course , we all have the ambition to take steps on behalf of the European Union that would make a bad situation in the Middle East better .
It is , of course , possible for us to contemplate or take steps that would make a bad situation worse .
The honourable Member talks about economic measures .
It is true that we have a very important economic relationship with both Israel and with the Palestinian Authority and with the other states in the region .
I am not unaware of the consequences of that relationship in political terms .
We are trying to ensure , as I have said before , that the assistance that we provide for the Palestinian Authority promotes pluralism , promotes clean government , promotes an independent judiciary , promotes the rule of law and promotes democracy .
That is what we should be doing .
We are also insisting with the Israeli authorities that our agreements with them are honoured to the letter as well as to the spirit - that is what we said to them during our discussions at the customs cooperation meeting in July .
But I have the gravest doubts about going beyond that .
The record of economic sanctions in international affairs is not - alas - a very happy one .
I have great respect for the honourable Member 's views and I am sure that we can exchange further thoughts about this issue , but I would need a great deal of persuasion that we should start talking the language of sanctions in trying to frame a more effective policy for the European Union in the Middle East .
It is easier , of course , to see how our relationship with the parties might consolidate peace in the longer term than to see how the economic relationship could advance peace in the shorter term .
I understand the frustration , but nevertheless I remain doubtful about the ability to use economic sanctions .
( Applause )
Thank you , Commissioner , for giving such clear answers .
Madam President , before we bring this debate to a close , I have received some information which will allow me to answer Mr Poettering ' s question .
Since it is an important question and the lack of a response could give rise to misunderstandings , I shall pass on to the House the details that the Council secretariat has just given me .
The High Representative , Javier Solana , will remain in Jerusalem to await Mr Sharon ' s return from Moscow .
Mr Sharon has suggested to Mr Solana that they meet tomorrow .
The meeting will , therefore , take place tomorrow .
Madam President , I have personally been taken to task by Commissioner Patten , as have several Members , which is why I think we at least have the right to respond .
It is unusual for the Commission to have the last word , having taken Members to task and especially having pointed out that it is not up to a Member to check up on funding granted by the Commission , particularly to the Palestinian Authority .
I maintain all that I said about education in Palestine .
Even if the European Union does not pay for these books directly , it certainly pays for the teaching .
What Chris Patten has just told us is a justification for teaching that instils hatred and martyrdom .
The debate is closed .
Progress of the 12 candidate countries in 2000
The next item is the joint debate on :
the oral question ( B5-0331 / 01 ) by Mr Brok to the Council , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the statement by the Council on the Enlargement process ;
the report ( A5-0251 / 2001 ) by Mrs Carlsson , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Estonia 's application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 704 - C5 ­ 0604 / 2000 - 1997 / 2177 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0252 / 2001 ) by Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Latvia 's application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 706 - C5 ­ 0606 / 2000 - 1997 / 2176 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0253 / 2001 ) by Mr Souladakis , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Lithuania 's application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 707 - C5 ­ 0607 / 2000 - 1997 / 2178 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0254 / 2001 ) by Mr Gawronski , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Poland ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 709 - C5-0609 / 2000 - 1997 / 2174 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0255 / 2001 ) by Mr Jürgen Schröder , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Czech Republic 's application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 703 - C5 ­ 0603 / 2000 - 1997 / 2180 ( COS ) ]
the report ( A5-0256 / 2001 ) by Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Slovakia 's application for membership to the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 711 - C5 ­ 0611 / 2000 - 1997 / 2173 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0257 / 2001 ) by Mr Queiró , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Hungary 's application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 705 - C5-0605 / 2000 - 1997 / 2175 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0258 / 2001 ) by Mr Van Orden , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the 2000 Regular Report by the Commission on Bulgaria 's progress towards accession [ COM ( 2000 ) 701 - 1997 / 2179 ( COS ) ]
the report ( A5-0259 / 2001 ) by Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Romania ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 710 - C5-0610 / 2000 - 1997 / 2172 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0260 / 2001 ) by Mr Volcic , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Slovenia ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 712 - C5-0612 / 2000 - 1997 / 2181 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0261 / 2000 ) by Mr Poos , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Cyprus ' s membership application to the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 702 - C5-0602 / 2000 - 1997 / 2171 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0262 / 2001 ) by Mrs Stenzel , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Malta ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 708 - C5-0608 / 2000 - 1999 / 2029 ( COS ) ] .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we hold this annual debate in order to assist the candidate countries , the Commission and the Council in completing their negotiations for enlargement as quickly as possible and also to admonish one or other of them because in many areas we have not seen the progress we want .
We should like to point out that is it we who have to ratify at the end of the day .
In our opinion , there should be no further delay to the enlargement process .
We should all create our internal prerequisites , institutional and otherwise , so that the candidate countries do not become hostages to our own reform process .
We should make clear that all candidate countries are treated as equals and that countries like Hungary and the Czech Republic will therefore get the number of mandates in the European Parliament to which they are entitled .
We should also make clear that no one outside the candidate countries and the European Union has any influence over European Union enlargement .
It is a matter for the European Union and the candidate countries alone .
In saying this , we should also like once again to make clear that in view of what we said last year , namely that the first candidate countries can take part in the 2004 European elections , the accession treaties with those countries that are ready must be concluded by the end of 2002 given that the ratification process will then still have to be completed .
In this connection , the individual country reports also need to make clear where the individual countries ' strengths and weaknesses lie .
I should particularly like to thank the rapporteurs of the various country reports for the commitment they have shown to their respective countries .
These countries must not only make the acquis communautaire part of their own legislation , but in the coming year they must also demonstrate that they are capable of implementing it administratively so that they are really ready for membership .
Of course , we understand that in some cases there will have to be transitional arrangements , both in the interests of the Union in individual cases and also in the interests of particular candidate countries .
But we should like to make clear that transitional arrangements should be kept to a minimum and be for as short a period as possible so that we arrive much more quickly at a coherent union with fewer distortions of competition .
It seems important in this connection that economic development , too , cannot yet be regarded as certain in all countries and that this market readiness , this ability to become part of the European internal market , as the Commission made very clear for the various countries last year , is , at the end of the day , another important point that needs to be examined .
From our point of view , we are deliberately not mentioning any favourites for accession to the European Union , because we know from experience that wrong decisions and mistakes in domestic policy next year may mean that a country that is perhaps fairly well ahead today is not actually ready when the time comes .
For that reason , it is a genuine race where everyone has the same opportunities and at the end of the day we measure who is ready for accession at any particular time .
At the same time , we should also be saying among ourselves that under the present financial arrangements we have assumed that the financial questions of enlargement have been settled for the period up to 2006 .
I mean that with phasing in and phasing out periods we shall be able to cope with it .
From our citizens ' point of view , internal security is an important issue surrounding enlargement .
We can therefore only urge the Commission to negotiate particularly clearly and seriously in these areas , just as we take the view that questions of external security are very important .
In my opinion , as many EU States as possible should also belong to NATO , but it is up to each individual country to make its own decision in the matter .
If as many as possible do belong , we will also have a better chance of developing a single European security and defence policy .
We should not demand more from the candidate countries than the Member States of the European Union themselves are already doing today and we should not seek to cram into the negotiating package everything we might wish for .
We must not require of them more than we ask of ourselves .
We must not erect further new barriers .
Commissioner , when the euro is introduced next year , more money will be available and we ought then to conduct a major campaign to make clear that the economic and political advantages of enlargement extend far beyond the debate about costs .
If we can expand the area of security and economic prosperity in Europe , that will be the greatest political achievement of the decade , guaranteeing security and peace on our continent .
We ought to strengthen this stability accordingly .
The countries that cannot , should not or do not want to be members of the European Union at present , over and above the twelve with which we are currently negotiating , should also be offered another option than full membership so that we can bind them to the European Union .
Countries like Ukraine and others cannot be overlooked in this process if we want long-term stability on this continent .
( Applause )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , European integration has undeniably made great progress over the last 50 years .
The European project is highly attractive and has contributed to peace , stability , democracy and prosperity .
The appeal is so great that the European Union is currently preparing to double its number of members .
The current enlargement process is in itself nothing new for the Union . However , it is unparalleled in its magnitude , the variety of candidate countries and its political and historical dimension .
In today ' s debate , I should like to discuss three questions with you .
Firstly , why enlarge , even if I believe that the answer is evident to this House ; secondly , and this might be of more interest to you , what is the exact stage we have reached in the negotiations ; and thirdly , how should we prepare for the future ?
Why enlargement ?
You , Madam President and honourable Members , may know the answer to that question , but maybe some of what I am about to say will seep through the walls of this Hemisphere and enter the sphere of public opinion , which is still regularly exercised by this issue as , of course , it is fully entitled to be .
From now on , the future of Europe and enlargement of the Union are inextricably linked .
Enlargement is the future of Europe .
Pursuant to the objectives set out in Helsinki , the European Council of Nice took all the necessary steps to ensure that the Union will be in a position to welcome the new Member States .
We could have easily rejected the compromise reached in Nice , but we opted not to do that so as not to send out the wrong message , namely that of an indecisive and reticent Europe , at the wrong time , that is to say on the eve of the reunification of Europe .
Enlargement specifically embodies the magnanimous and open vision of the original European project .
The decision in favour of enlargement , rightly deemed irrevocable at the European Council in Gothenburg , reflects the importance which the founders of Europe attached to international solidarity . Today ' s Member States remain just as committed to this aim .
Enlarging the Union is an historical duty .
Our peoples , who have been separated by history for far too long , must have a chance to be reunited .
In addition to the genuine historical challenge , enlargement is also a political project .
This project brings us , European leaders and elected Members , face to face with our responsibilities .
We must henceforth make every effort to ensure a stable , secure and prosperous future for our fellow citizens in an enlarged Europe .
Enlargement was , and still is , imperative in order to prevent destabilisation in the candidate countries , as well as the expressions of such destabilisation .
The growing influx of refugees , the rise in crime , etc. spring to mind .
The unfortunate events in the Balkans in the last ten years have shown that a region cannot be stabilised without introducing and consolidating the enlargement or association process .
In some of the countries of the former Yugoslavia , destabilisation has led to a deterioration in the rule of law and to the emergence of new hotbeds of international crime .
The Union will have to strive hard to combat transnational criminal networks .
In its efforts to stabilise the region , the Union introduced an association and stability process at the Zagreb Conference , which will naturally result in a European perspective .
Moreover , the positive results of future enlargement are already tangible .
In Central and Eastern Europe , stable governments have been established which have adopted the common values , or the values which they have in common with us , such as democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and the protection of minorities .
The remarkable improvement in the security of Europe and new prospects for economic development are the direct result of this .
Enlargement , even if it is still to be translated into reality , is already making Europe more prosperous and enhancing its influence .
In addition , we are also noticing - to put it in blunt , materialistic terms - that the amount of foreign direct investment - and I mean that in the candidate countries - is constantly increasing .
The Union has become the largest trading partner of the thirteen candidate countries .
The Member States therefore reap many benefits .
The enlarged Europe will consist of 500 million citizens and , in economic terms , these are 500 million consumers .
That is sufficient to allow the Union , also in economic terms , to better assert and defend its specific character in a world which is increasingly turning into a ' village ' , to borrow a term from a Canadian sociologist .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the candidate countries , enlargement has become a strong incentive to take the measures needed to make the transition to a market economy .
The implementation of these measures is still painful and has sometimes even been extremely painful .
In several candidate countries , however , these changes have already led to rapid , balanced growth , making it possible to improve people ' s standard of living .
So , what stage have the negotiations reached ?
Since July , the Belgian Presidency has , as it pledged it would , been continuing the work begun by the Swedish Presidency , on the basis of the principles set out in Nice and according to the timetable agreed at the Gothenburg Summit .
The Presidency is taking great pains to keep within the confines of its role of facilitator , to avoid taking over from the Commission and to allow the Commission and relevant Commissioners to conduct the negotiations .
The Member States ' governments warmly welcomed the presentation of our work programme on enlargement at the General Affairs Council meeting in July . They all stressed the importance of carefully monitoring the implementation of the commitments made by the candidate countries , as did Mr Brok , when he expanded on the question that he submitted .
We would like to open up all the negotiating chapters .
Malta still lacks the chapter on agriculture and Bulgaria still has eight chapters that must be examined .
Furthermore , in accordance with the Gothenburg conclusions , the Belgian Presidency will support the efforts made and to be made by Romania , which still has 14 negotiating chapters to be opened .
In the case of several candidate countries , we will soon have completed the critical mass of the chapter that is provisionally concluded .
By this , I mean that the number of chapters which have already been negotiated , and for which provisional agreements have been reached , is such that the question now becoming increasingly specific and , therefore , increasingly urgent concerns the differentiation in treatment of candidate countries , each according to its merits , as well as the question of knowing how the negotiations will end .
This time could , in fact , come sooner than we were expecting .
The Belgian Presidency is striving to maintain the intensive pace of negotiations .
At the first meeting of substitute members on 27 July 2001 , seven chapters were examined , five of which were concluded .
Seven have now been able to be concluded with all the candidate countries .
These were the chapters on statistics , small and medium-sized enterprises , research , education , health and consumers , as well as foreign relations .
Those chapters that are still to be negotiated - and this will come as no surprise - are some of the most difficult .
In addition to chapters on the free movement of workers and the environment , we tackled issues involving justice and home affairs , competition , transport , energy , fisheries , agriculture and taxation .
In some of these areas , considerable progress was made .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the enlargement process cannot , however , be reduced simply to the conclusion of negotiating points .
Every country must comply with and continue to comply with the economic and political criteria of Copenhagen and must implement these effectively .
This applies in particular to a country with which we have not yet begun negotiations .
I am , of course , referring to Turkey .
During a visit by the Belgian Foreign Affairs Minister , Louis Michel , to Ankara in July , he reminded the Turkish authorities that they have every interest in focusing on implementing the accession partnership . This will enable Turkey to comply with the political criteria set out at Copenhagen .
As for Cyprus , we are pleased with the progress that has been made in the accession negotiations .
However , the pace of negotiations does not depend on the efforts of the Commission , the Council or the Presidency alone .
External events can sometimes influence them , or disrupt them .
I am thinking , for example , of the beginning of the election campaign in Poland , or of the new Bulgarian government that has come into power .
I am nonetheless counting on a positive outcome in both cases . Indeed , I believe that these changes will not slow down the pace of negotiations , which so far has been swift for both countries .
Another important event will take place in November , when the Commission publishes in-depth reports on the preparation of candidate countries .
The information contained in these reports will allow the Presidency , at the Laeken European Council , to provide the following presidencies with clear indications as to what needs to be done .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , how then do we manage the future ?
The conclusions of the European Councils in Nice and Gothenburg gave a boost to the enlargement process .
The quality of this process is now just as important as the number of chapters being negotiated .
On this point , I would like to say to Mr Brok that he is of course right , at least in my personal opinion , to urge us not to ask more of the candidate countries than we ask of ourselves .
That is very true , but even so , the candidate countries have every interest in ensuring that the acquis communautaire is implemented in the optimal fashion , because otherwise there is a risk that the initial stage of their membership of the European Union will be very difficult and very painful . I believe that we must help them to avoid this sort of situation .
Achieving the aims that we identified at Nice and Gothenburg will depend on two very important factors .
First of all , the determination of EU Member States - of all of us , in other words - to translate the commitments that we have taken into action .
Member States will have to adopt common positions within the deadlines specified in the road map , and will have to determine transitional periods if necessary , even if this may , and will , give rise to difficulties .
The second factor is , as I pointed out , whether the candidate countries can provide , within a reasonable time , sufficient and substantial information on their ability to comply with the required criteria , and also on their ability to prove that this process has been set in motion .
( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will wind up my speech but , before I do , I should like to say something about the outcome of the Irish referendum , especially in connection with enlargement .
The outcome of the referendum has led to all manner of speculation on the feasibility of enlargement .
Although enlargement on a purely legal plane is feasible without ratification of the Treaty by all the Member States , it must nevertheless be underlined that non-ratification of the Treaty would send an entirely wrong political signal to the candidate countries at a time when a segment of public opinion in those countries is starting to question the merits of this process , which is perceived as a restriction on their newly regained sovereignty .
I am always reminded of that prime minister of a candidate country who stated in Brussels recently : ' We have been told for ten years that we will be joining in ten years ' time .
Well , if that situation lasts too long , nations and governments will begin to lose their patience . '
In view of the magnitude and institutional repercussions of enlargement , I advocate the Union adopting a realistic , responsible and ambitious stance .
The enlargement of the Union must indeed be responsible ; this means that the vital functions of the Union must be safeguarded .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , let it be clear that enlargement will put pressure on key components of the common or Community policy - the common agricultural policy and the structural funds policy spring to mind .
To combat this will require courage and determination from the Member States and therefore from all of us .
Enlargement also requires that we adopt an ambitious attitude in terms of devising new common policies .
The introduction of a genuine common policy on fighting crime and harmonising asylum and immigration policy is needed now more than ever .
In addition , the Union must also step up its efforts in the field of the common foreign and security policy .
The Union must acquire the resources in order to deal with a destabilising crisis on the borders of an enlarged Europe - the Europe of tomorrow , in other words .
It is crucially important that the Union have the necessary tools to manage unstable areas .
As the initial accession stage approaches , the Union must enhance its dialogue with the neighbouring countries of an enlarged Europe .
What will be important , and is already important , is to reassure these countries about the impact of enlargement in terms of partnership and association agreements . Our very fruitful and extensive dialogue with Russia , but not only with Russia , is a concrete example of this .
By way of conclusion , I should like to say that enlargement remains a political project .
Whether this project is managed well or badly will determine whether Europe ' s unity will be strengthened or weakened .
In our society , a broadly-based debate must be held in order to clearly set out the risks and benefits of the project .
Misunderstandings must be cleared up .
The concerns of the citizens of the Member States , but also of the citizens of the candidate countries , must be taken seriously and must be responded to appropriately .
As the initial accessions draw closer , more and clearer information must be provided than has been the case to date .
Enlargement offers enormous scope . However , it also imposes conditions and restrictions on both parties .
The credibility of accession requires efforts on all sides .
The Belgian Presidency has pledged to maintain the intensive pace of negotiations .
It will ensure that the conditions for accession are met .
The candidate countries will still need to make great efforts in order to implement the acquis communautaire .
We have a very long way to go , but we can see the light at the end of the tunnel .
We can now start counting the months , rather than the years .
We can now also start telling all the candidate countries with which we have begun negotiations that they are future Member States .
Finally , there is no doubt that the accession of , certainly , twelve countries in the short term and that of thirteen countries in the somewhat longer term will turn our Union into something other than what we have known so far .
That has been the case with each new accession .
Each new acceding state , each new acceding nation has added something extra .
I will not enter into any detail , for that could lead to bad feeling and that is not my intention .
It is evident that this will also happen when new Member States join .
The adventure which we started around ten years ago - at least the concept of it - is thus reaching successful completion , but that success will only be achieved if we all make the efforts needed .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your extremely detailed speech and I shall now give the floor to Commissioner Verheugen . I would point out that , in principle , our guest speakers have limited speaking time , but we can , of course , be flexible where necessary .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , it is almost a year since the European Parliament ' s last major debate on enlargement .
I therefore welcome the opportunity to take stock of the year and describe the tasks that still lie ahead of us .
I should like to begin by sincerely thanking the European Parliament and all its groups and committees for their great commitment to the process of EU enlargement .
You have all done a great deal to give this historic project political credibility and to give democratic legitimacy to the enlargement process .
In the decisive closing stage of negotiations the Commission continues to rely on Parliament ' s support , and I am pleased to be able to say , on the basis of the contribution from Mr Brok , the rapporteur , and the presentation from the President-in-Office , that there continues to be a high level of broad solid agreement between the three institutions , Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
After the Councils of Nice and Göteborg it is clear that enlargement will come , and come soon .
The point of no return is definitely behind us .
The project is now irreversible .
I do not want to reawaken the controversy surrounding the Treaty of Nice , but I would like to point out that this Treaty contains essential political conditions for the conclusion of the accession treaties .
I , too , have my doubts as to whether the treaty is the best possible solution both to the question of institutional adjustments and to that of the combination of deepening and enlargement that many , myself included , believe necessary .
But I fear there will always be differences of opinion over the best possible solution to this problem .
But living in Europe means living with compromises .
The Commission is therefore pressing for ratification of the Treaty of Nice here in the European Parliament and in the parliaments of the Member States .
As we all know , the treaty fell at the first hurdle , the referendum in Ireland .
The answer to such a referendum cannot be a simple " as you were " .
If we simply close our eyes and continue , we shall be shipwrecked and miss out on a great historic opportunity .
Enlargement must not be sacrificed to growing alienation between Europe ' s citizens and the European institutions and decision-making processes .
The answer to the warning signal from Ireland is also , but not only , a question of proper communication .
Perhaps Europe ' s citizens are looking for a more fundamental and more complex answer .
As I see it , there is an intrinsic link between the debate about Europe ' s future and the debate about our future borders .
We need to make that link .
Nice has paved the way for negotiations to be steered towards the really substantive questions , as the candidates urgently require .
The ' road map ' presented by the Commission and approved by the Heads of State and Government is more than a timetable for negotiations .
At heart it is a commitment by the 15 Member States to find common positions by particular deadlines , even in areas where interests are widely divergent .
At the same time , this tells the candidates that their efforts are worthwhile and that nothing is being put off .
After almost a year , we can say that the Nice strategy has motivated the candidate countries enormously and that the transposition of Community law is running more quickly and more smoothly .
At the same time , the candidate countries are showing greater flexibility in adjusting their positions and there have been genuine breakthroughs in negotiations as a result .
The treatment of the free movement of workers issue is an instructive example of this .
The desired time frame for the first accessions was then clearly defined in Göteborg .
That came at the right moment .
On the one hand , the progress in negotiations made it possible to define the finishing line for those applicant countries that are adequately prepared ; on the other hand , the Göteborg decision gives the parliaments and governments of the candidate countries the necessary political tailwind to mobilise all their forces and respond to the doubters that most certainly exist .
Making the 2004 European elections the point of reference for the accessions is an idea that originated here in the European Parliament a year ago .
We reached agreement on it in our debate last year .
I am very pleased that we actually managed to follow the way pointed by the European Parliament at the Councils in Nice and Göteborg .
I believe it was a wise decision not to set any specific accession dates for individual countries at Göteborg or to define groups for accession .
The basic principles of the process - namely individual merits , differentiation and the chance to catch up - are working .
If we stick to these principles , we shall arrive at a natural and real accession scenario that is justified by the results of negotiations alone .
The Commission will be sticking to this line resolutely .
I am also saying this to counter the view that in the end the decisions taken will be purely political , political here in the bad sense of the word .
The Commission will not propose the conclusion of an accession treaty for each individual applicant until it is convinced that the applicant is well enough prepared and satisfies all the conditions .
I am not therefore going to speculate today about how many , and which , new members will already be represented in the next European Parliament .
All I can say today is that 10 of the 12 countries we are negotiating with have decided that they want to use the Göteborg time frame .
It would be a serious breach of trust if we were now to say to individual candidates : " You are in , in any event " or " Whatever happens , you are going to have to wait a little longer " .
We shall therefore have to prepare ourselves for the possibility that we might have to accept an initial accession group of as many as 10 applicants .
That sounds more drastic that it actually is , because those 10 together represent around 75 million citizens , while all 13 candidate countries together make up a population of 185 million .
The President-in-Office has already indicated how much progress we have made in the negotiations .
I can , in fact , confirm that the question of the substance of the individual chapters is more important than the mere compilation of figures .
It is quite possible that countries which have concluded fewer chapters than others are nevertheless further on in their preparations .
The example of the free movement of workers has shown the difficulty of the issues we now have to deal with .
The compromise based on the Commission proposal will bring the most liberal and most flexible solution to the problem yet seen .
We shall need as much freedom of movement as possible , and for a number of years also as much security as possible .
I would also like to use this example to point once again to the Commission ' s understanding of its own role in enlargement .
The Commission has to look to the interests of the Union as a whole .
It is in the interests of the Union as a whole that enlargement should not demand more of any Member State than it is actually able to give .
In making its proposals , the Commission also has to take into account what the applicant countries and future members are able to bear and what they are not .
Unless we are able to compromise , we shall not make the necessary progress , especially since we are now faced with highly controversial issues such as justice and home affairs , competition , taxation , transport , the budget , regional policy and agriculture .
When it comes to negotiating the chapter on justice and home affairs , the protection of the future external borders is a central issue .
We are faced here with a classic conflict of aims .
On the one hand , enlargement must not lead to a new division of Europe .
There must be no new dividing lines created .
Traditional cross-border contacts that often go back hundreds of years must not be made impossible or intolerably difficult , especially in places where the same language is spoken on both sides of the borders and there are close cultural ties .
On the other hand , at the end of this round of enlargement we will have an eastern border extending almost from the North Cape almost to the Bosporus .
That border will have to meet the security needs of today ' s EU citizens .
A secure frontier is one of the essential prerequisites .
New members will not be able to be fully integrated into the Schengen system until the border system fully meets Schengen standards .
The other topics , such as taxation and competition , and to a large extent also agriculture , raise enormous social questions .
On the one hand , this concerns the functioning of the internal market , but on the other also the matter of social cohesion in the countries undergoing transformation .
We shall have to decide how much flexibility the Union is able to show so that enlargement is not experienced as a social shock in the future new Member States the day after accession .
When it comes to agriculture , we are dealing with an acquis that may change radically in the next few years .
Many observers believe it would be better to go for agricultural reform first and then talk to the candidate countries about agriculture .
If we were to do that , we would be setting a new condition .
There would not be an enlargement timetable that was anything like reliable .
The end of the project would be put off indefinitely .
As regards the financing of enlargement , the Commission will ensure that the budgetary effects of its proposals for negotiating positions are fully in line with the expenditure ceilings agreed in Berlin for the period up until 2006 .
Account must , of course , be taken of the necessary adjustments for the number of new Member States provided for in Agenda 2000 .
But even with those adjustments , we shall not exceed the ceiling decided in Berlin in 1999 .
I want to turn now to the situation in the candidate countries themselves .
The transposition of Community law is now proceeding apace everywhere .
Most countries have taken highly effective organisational measures to deal with the massive amount of legislation in time .
The instruments deployed , in particular twinning and interparliamentary cooperation , have also proved their worth .
The Commission will be describing the progress made in meeting the Copenhagen criteria in the progress reports for the year 2001 .
These reports will be discussed by the Commission and adopted in early November .
What we can say today is this : the trend of the last few years is continuing .
All the applicant countries with whom we have been negotiating continue to satisfy the political criteria .
It is clear that the prospect of membership has made a decisive contribution to stability in the young democracies of Central and Eastern Europe .
The value of the system ' s stability for Europe as a whole can be seen everywhere where there are no concrete prospects for accession .
We see increasingly that a definite expectation of accession is the strongest and most effective motor for necessary reforms .
I should like to leave you in no doubt that in the negotiations the Commission is continuing to press for human rights and the rights of minorities to be fully respected .
That includes banning all discrimination on grounds of age , gender , sexual orientation or religious conviction .
We are continuing to observe carefully the position of minorities and the development of the rule of law .
It is symptomatic that national minorities in the applicant states are particularly keen on rapid accession because they see membership of the European Union as their most effective form of protection .
While the situation of the Russian minorities in the Baltic countries continues to improve , the integration of the Roma remains a thorny and substantial issue .
It would be pure illusion to think that social and cultural discrimination against the Roma could be abolished before accession .
That will take decades to achieve .
But we are asking all applicant states to develop credible strategies to improve the integration of the Roma and to put them into practice before accession .
I can also at last see light at the end of the tunnel as regards the condition of orphanage children and the adoption trade in Romania .
I want to be cautious because we have already experienced many disappointments , and in the past many fine words have not been matched by deeds .
But with the present government that is starting to change .
Its readiness to enforce a moratorium on international adoptions was an important sign .
There are such overwhelming indications that the existing system has knowingly and deliberately encouraged the abuse of children that the entire system will have to be radically reformed before international adoptions can be allowed again .
I am convinced that parents who really want children and reputable non-governmental organisations that help them to satisfy that desire will be the first to understand that protecting children against possible abuse must be the top priority .
At this point I should like to mention that the European Parliament ' s rapporteur for Romania , Baroness Nicholson , has personally done the greatest service in uncovering an incredibly corrupt system and that the progress we can now see would not have come about without her persistence .
( Applause )
So far as the economic criteria are concerned , even when we apply the necessarily strict yardsticks we can see that here , too , the positive trend is continuing .
Free-market reforms have not yet been completed everywhere , but the market economy has been established everywhere .
In most cases , the applicant countries are already competitive on the internal market because the exchange of goods and services between them and the EU has to a large extent already been liberalised .
The overall economic situation is another matter .
We need to be very , very realistic here .
It is true that the candidate countries are achieving higher growth rates than the EU-15 average , but economically they are still a very long way behind .
It will be a very long time before we can speak of a real approximation .
Here , too , we should be speaking in terms of a period of a whole generation .
This means that , even after the accessions , enlargement will not have a drastic economic effect on the present Member States .
Most of the positive economic effects are already with us .
They will continue to grow .
But enlargement will not at first bring large annual boosts to growth for the EU 15 , although , of course , border regions and the future Member States ' neighbours in general will experience stronger positive effects .
All the same , the economic effect must not be underestimated .
There will be a sustained improvement in EU growth in the long term .
The European Union ' s roll in international competition will be strengthened .
The economics and finance ministers and the Commission are watching the macroeconomic direction taken by the future new members closely .
In some of them , inflation rates and budget deficits are too high .
The balance of payments in some candidate countries has structural weaknesses .
There is intensive dialogue with the candidate countries about macroeconomic stability and there is no dispute about the objective .
In the light of the impending introduction of the euro I want to point out once again that the new members will not automatically belong to the euro zone .
That requires special preparation and a separate decision .
The Maastricht criteria will have to be satisfied in full .
But there will be no opting out of monetary union either .
At present , there are clear priorities : first the Copenhagen criteria for accession , then the Maastricht criteria for the euro .
I can already say that the Commission ' s next strategy paper will focus on the assessment of the third Copenhagen criterion , namely the complete application of EU law .
That is a perfectly logical sequence .
Up until now , the main thing was the transposition of the acquis itself .
Now we are looking primarily at the ability to enforce and apply it in full .
As you know , there were still major deficits in this area last year .
We have strongly urged the applicant countries to remove those deficits .
I must repeat here what I said on an earlier occasion : severe deficits remaining in the areas of administrative capacities and the legal system may become serious obstacles to accession .
Before concluding , I want to say a brief word about two regional problems , Cyprus and Kaliningrad .
Our strategic objective is still to receive a united Cyprus as a new member .
We are therefore continuing to give our strong support to the UN Secretary-General ' s efforts to find a solution to the Cyprus conflict .
I am very pleased to be able to say that we are working closely and confidently with the United Nations in this question .
It was no accident that the UN Secretary-General ' s meeting with the Turkish Cypriot leader , Mr Denktash in Salzburg last Tuesday was preceded by a meeting between Mr Denktash and myself the day before .
I must thank the foreign ministers of Greece , Turkey and Cyprus , the presidency and the special representatives of the United Nations , the United Kingdom and the USA for their close cooperation and constructive dialogue in this matter .
I very much hope that things will now get moving again on the Cyprus issue and that talks on substantive issues will soon begin .
We should now concentrate all our efforts on resolving the conflict and refrain from speculating about what we might do if we fail .
The Helsinki resolutions apply and give us all the room for manoeuvre we need .
Kaliningrad is an entirely different matter .
It concerns the effects of enlargement on our neighbours , in this case Russia .
While fully recognising Russian sovereignty over the Kaliningrad territory , we have made proposals to Russia about how Kaliningrad can benefit from its position as a kind of island within the EU in future .
Dialogue in the matter has started , albeit rather sluggishly .
We would like to see a faster tempo here .
The immediate neighbours in the region , Poland and Lithuania , share our point of view .
It is a general principle that enlargement should not harm third countries .
In Russia ' s case in particular I am absolutely convinced that Russia will benefit once the political and economic dynamics of the enlarged Union on Russia ' s borders show their full effects .
Now one question remains . How can we ensure that people in the European Union and in the candidate countries will agree to the objective of enlargement ?
We need to make greater efforts here .
I agree with what Mr Brok said about it .
I have a proper degree of scepticism about opinion polls .
But we cannot ignore the Eurobarometer findings and the trends in opinion in the candidate countries .
However , we must not see the question of acceptance as purely a problem of communication .
If we have problems of communication in politics , in my experience the problem lies with the policy .
Many people are frightened by enlargement .
If those fears are based on fact , we can deal with them by information and participation .
But if the fears are unspecific or part of a very general unease about the way European things are going , then we need more than a communication strategy .
Then , the key issue is : What does Europe still mean to the people in the European Union ?
How can we make the idea of European unification as inspiring again as it once was ?
If today ' s European Union does not inspire people , how can we expect the prospects of an even larger EU to give rise to positive expectations ?
The answers to these questions must be found in another debate , but that debate has already begun .
If we can develop clarity of goals and of language , if we can find enough courage and vision , then social acceptance for enlargement will also be forthcoming .
( Applause )
Mr President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first to say a word to the Council .
Please do not take it personally , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , we think highly of you , we are always pleased to see you and you do excellent work .
But there were long drawn out negotiations over the date for this debate so as to enable President-in-Office Louis Michel to be present .
Then we agreed on this Tuesday .
Now he has stayed in Durban , which I do not want to criticise in itself , but I would like to say that the Council must be reformed ,
that foreign ministers are the wrong people , not only because EU policy is not foreign policy , but because foreign ministers do not have the time to perform their duties in the European Union !
We are going to be talking about governance - Commission President Prodi will be saying something about it later - , and the change must begin with the Council , not only as regards transparency , but we also need new structures so that the relevant members of the national governments are also always present here in Parliament .
In other words , to be specific , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , if you had full powers over European policy and were not now dependent on your foreign minister , we would welcome that .
So that is no personal criticism of yourself .
( Applause )
We are very pleased that there is a broad majority across the groups here in Parliament - and with the Commission , too - on the questions of enlargement , and we say emphatically - as Mr Brok has also said - that enlargement is to everyone ' s advantage , and we must say it in our member countries , too .
National politicians , too , must say that enlargement is to the advantage of the present European Union and of the accession countries .
No one would have thought 20 years ago that today we would be talking about the countries of central Europe being able to join our community of values .
That is a tremendous historical development .
And I would also like to say a word of recognition to the accession countries , which have embarked on tremendous reforms after 50 years of communism .
What they are doing is not a simple matter and instead of only ever giving voice , in the countries of the European Union , to certain fears about the dangers we should also say a word of recognition for the people in the accession countries for making this tremendous effort .
( Applause ) The accession countries also have dignity .
I cannot understand why heads of government in the countries of the European Union tell the heads of government in the accession countries : Yes , we must demand a long period for freedom of movement because we have national elections .
The accession countries also have dignity and an internal political situation , and our national heads of government ought to recognise that .
( Applause ) I do not believe there will be a mass migration .
I have the figures for the Federal Republic of Germany : in the last ten years , 900 000 people came to the Federal Republic of Germany from Poland , but 700 000 of them went back again .
Commissioner , you are quite right : If the countries have the prospect of becoming members of the European Union , their citizens will not migrate but will prefer to stay at home .
That is after all quite natural human behaviour , and so we should not demonise this question or abuse it for internal political reasons .
We need a great deal of flexibility for the questions of freedom of movement .
Commissioner , I very much welcome what you said about border controls .
On the one hand , the borders must remain open , the right to asylum must be guaranteed .
People wanting to enter the Union across the external borders must also be treated humanely , and that is why we advocate a European border police .
We should show solidarity , that is the countries with no external borders with the countries that have an external border .
A European multinational border police would be a sensible way of cultivating mutual solidarity here .
We must , of course , also think of the border regions of the present countries of the European Union , which will have problems , and I note from a press release that you are also particularly sympathetic to the problems of these border regions .
We will also increase acceptance in our border regions .
I would like to draw your attention to one very particular problem , Commissioner , namely developments in Romania .
We were very concerned to see that an opposition party that is not represented in parliament but which has a long tradition , the PNTCD , was banned there last week with dubious legal arguments , and I would ask you to look into the matter , because democracy and debate on a democratic basis are a high value and we ought to pay attention to that in those countries .
A final comment , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck : We know that in your case European policy is in good hands .
We are approaching the Laeken summit , and if the decision about the convention , about a conference , is taken there , would you kindly ensure that the accession countries , too , are involved in the process in a sensible manner for the purpose of consultation and information , because we owe it to those countries because we shall have a common future with them in the European Union .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if anyone is looking for a juicy bit of controversy between Parliament and the Commission or Parliament and the Council , or even a juicy bit of controversy between the major parties here , I have to disappoint them .
We all want and continue to want to make enlargement a success and it is not a matter for party political sabre rattling , Mr Poettering .
I therefore have no difficulty in signalling to Mr Brok and everyone else that my group will be voting in favour of the resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , the enlargement reports and in fact all the country reports .
There may be a difference of emphasis here or there , but over all both the resolution of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the country reports satisfy my group ' s principles and criteria for the continuation of the enlargement process .
We also agree with , and support , the Commission ' s strategy as explained by Mr Verheugen today .
We stick firmly to the principle of merit for the conclusion of negotiations with the candidate countries , and we also agree to your plan of saying that by 2004 ten candidate countries may have managed to conclude negotiations according to our criteria .
It need not be 10 , but it may be 10 .
We are prepared for that .
We also agree with attention being shifted in future reports from the transposition of EU law to the application and enforcement of EU law .
That is , in fact , one of the most important points that we must make clear and stick to until the accession treaties are concluded .
But we understand the target date not just as a window of opportunity for the accession countries .
We also see the target date of 2004 as a means of applying pressure on the Member States themselves not only to pay attention to how and to what extent the candidates are solving their problems but also to ensure that the Member States themselves do not create new problems for accession .
And that is the rub if we have set our eyes on the year 2004 as the target date .
Of course - and here I support what Mr Verheugen , Mr Brok and Mr Poettering have said - we shall talk about the risks , the burdens and the deficits of the present enlargement process .
There are many points there .
But if we want to win the people of Europe over to support what we are planning and what we have to do , we must not speak only about burdens and risks .
We must also speak about what all of us in Europe stand to gain from enlargement .
Then let us talk about how reform of the common agricultural policy is naturally about financing and about reform .
That is correct .
But let us also say that it is about strengthening consumer protection in Europe .
Let us say that the security of the Union ' s food supply will be preserved and must be further strengthened after enlargement .
Let us say that enlargement presents no risk to environmental protection , on the contrary that in a few years ' time EU standards will apply in the whole of Europe and not just in the western part .
That is an advantage for us , too , not just for the east Europeans .
Let us make clear to the people in the EU that we can fight international crime and corruption better in the European Union than if the countries of eastern Europe are left outside , if the laws we have created to fight international crime also apply in eastern Europe .
Let us talk about how enlargement will benefit us all because we will carry more political , economic and also ecological weight in the world , in a world that is becoming increasingly globalised .
That in Europe together we will have more chance of meeting the challenges of globalisation than if we in Europe diverge into east and west or north and south .
And economic and social cohesion , social solidarity in Europe will extend to Europe as a whole , and that is an advantage not only for the east , it is an advantage for us as well .
Funding up until 2006 is secured .
But that does not mean that enlargement will come at no cost .
Most surely not .
It has its price .
But non-enlargement is expensive , too .
It costs much more than enlargement .
Its price is economic , social , ecological and political stability in Europe , above all else its price is trust .
Failure to enlarge will deprive Europe of its future .
Basically , we are on the point of taking a step comparable to the situation in 1989 / 1990 for the whole of Europe .
What is at stake is not merely one or other transitional period , not that this or that project or programme or fund will work better or worse .
Neither is it only about this or that advantage for one country or another .
It is about something very simple : It is about the future of all Europeans .
And there we are only at the start of the debate .
After the failure of Nice we are also setting great hopes on the Belgian Presidency .
This debate about the future of Europe must not be conducted only in the Member States , it must also be conducted in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and in Cyprus and Malta .
Mr President , since our debate last year on enlargement , there has been very considerable and commendable progress .
During this past year , several of the states in the Helsinki group have already in effect caught up with those in the earlier Luxembourg group .
It is a year where the emphasis and the élan which was brought to this task by the Swedish Presidency has borne fruit .
This is a process that I am sure will be continued and deepened by our friends in the Belgian Presidency .
I welcome the fact that the European Council , with the encouragement of the European Commission , adopted the date of the next European election as a target timetable , all the while emphasising and respecting the fact that we should continue with a case by case analysis based on differentiation .
It may well indeed be possible that ten states could be ready by that time and if that is the case , that would be very welcome .
But we should not impose on those who are ready by that time the burden and failures of those who may not be and therefore we must still cleave to this notion of differentiation as the leitmotif through which we should analyse the outcomes .
There is a very disquieting level of public support indicated by opinion polls .
The Commissioner is right in that we should not get carried away excessively by following every poll but when they are so consistent , underneath it there is a message .
And again I would congratulate the Commission in the past 12 months on the deepening and extension of the information and communications policy .
But it is very clear that that alone will not be enough .
We need political leadership and political vision .
We need the big picture to be put in place to convince people what the nature of this historic project is of .
In that regard there is the question of the free movement of labour .
I am bound to say on behalf of my own group that the Liberal Democrats here in this House are unhappy at the pace with which the thought of having a systematic ban on the free movement of labour became the politique acquise .
We think that indeed there may be a burden but more empiricism and more reflection may have helped .
At the end of the day whether it is realpolitik or empiricism that brings us to this conclusion , my group would appeal that each Member State would reflect on its own position and where possible would opt out from this particular policy .
Already I understand four states , Ireland , Denmark , Sweden and Netherlands have given such an indication .
I would appeal to other states to do so .
But inside this there is another real issue .
The frontline border regions are the regions of our European integration process .
We here in this House must express our concern for an enhancement of regional policy focus in those places because these regions will carry the most immediate consequence of enlargement .
This solidarity is something we must inject into this debate , as Europeans , with greater vigour and not simply leave it to local or national interests to make the case .
On the question of the current state of the enlargement debate , I meet many friends in the candidate states in politics and diplomacy who worry about various tensions that have emerged .
My own sense is to say to them they should take reassurance from this .
We are now getting real .
The shadow boxing has finished and these tensions reflect the reality that we are now in a vigorous process .
Finally three very quick points which I do not have the time to develop .
I should like to be reassured by the Commission that the failure to establish paying agencies for Sapard in so many states for reasons which I understand will not mitigate against the carryover of funding that we have dedicated for structural agricultural reform .
Secondly , I welcome what the Commissioner had to say on Cyprus and Kaliningrad .
I salute what he says about the optimum desires for Cyprus and I hope the UN process will take off with his and others ' encouragement but we must remember never to make the best the enemy of the good .
Finally , on the question of the Irish referendum , the message given both by the Council and the Commission today is an important one .
Yes there may be legal means to get us over the legal niceties but there is within this a political signal and message and the signal must be , that however we may criticise the Nice Treaty , and we all do , we must get over that hurdle as a precondition politically not to do with enlargement but to do it ourselves .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council and Commissioner , first of all I would like to say on behalf of my group that we are extremely pleased that during the year now ended negotiations have truly made rapid progress and it has been possible to close one chapter after another .
My group truly regards 2004 as a target timetable by which it is possible - not certain , but possible - that as many as ten new countries may join the European Union .
Simultaneous accession by such a large group would , , of course , bring the advantage that we would avoid new division lines between the applicant countries , and in my opinion this is something which we must earnestly strive towards .
Mr Hänsch did a fine job of explaining how the enlargement process is one in which both the current and the future Member States of the European Union will benefit : everyone can benefit from this .
I wish however to stress that this means that we must truly be able to create an economic and social dynamic so that these benefits will be realised even in the pre-accession period .
Here I wish to stress the emphasis which my group places on this point : sustainable development must be sustainable not only economically , but also ecologically and socially .
We need to emphasise that the applicant countries must take very seriously any Community legislation which aims to strengthen these sustainable characteristics .
It goes without saying that children 's rights and the principle of non-discrimination are the sort of principles to which we , as Europeans , must hold fast .
Mr. President , our group hopes that it would be possible to deploy additional resources in order to expedite this dynamic .
Here we refer to the fact that the Community 's funding framework for the years 2000-2006 contains some resources which could possibly be freed , since quite obviously no new Member States will be joining in 2002 .
Those resources which are freed on account of this fact could be deployed , even in the pre-accession period , as tools of agricultural and structural policy in order to strengthen this positive dynamic .
We would like to see the common agricultural policy strongly reformed in such a direction that , instead of making direct aid payments to large farmers in the European Union or in the applicant countries , these resources would be firmly shifted to rural development and quality-oriented food production .
Finally , Mr President , one very important shortcoming in this process is that the involvement of citizens has , up to now , been particularly poor .
We would like to take part in serious consideration of how we could increase the participation of ordinary citizens in the enlargement process also in the applicant countries , since at the moment what is happening is that it is only the narrow élites of society who find enlargement to their advantage , and it is these people who are pushing enlargement .
A great many people , however , are perplexed , and fear that enlargement will be to their detriment .
The position of women and the fight against poverty must be taken into account , and our group would like to emphasise these matters .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , on behalf of my group I should like to say that we - at least the vast majority - consider the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to the European Union to be of strategic importance and we strongly support this accession process .
Madam President-in-Office , if you have compared this accession process with others , I think it must be made even clearer that this accession process is qualitatively quite different , not only because of the number of countries , the languages , the territory , the population , but also historically , because it is a far-reaching cultural opening towards Central and Eastern Europe such as has hardly been discussed before , because it is an economic and social challenge on an entirely new scale , and , of course , also because of the far-reaching foreign and security policy implications .
In the light of that , my agreement to what many of the previous speakers have said must be qualified .
I think the policies pursued by the governments and also by the Commission are seriously flawed , even though I do recognise the commitment you have shown , Commissioner Verheugen , the progress made in negotiations and the great support given by the EU to the accession process .
I would like to highlight five questions :
Firstly , in my opinion the involvement of the citizens has been minimal .
Secondly , hardly any attempt is being made to use the opportunity presented by eastward enlargement to overcome the Nice crisis and for the democratic and social shaping of European integration .
Thirdly , equality for the accession countries has not in my opinion been adequately achieved .
That applies to the question , which has already been raised , of the excessively long transitional periods for the free movement of workers just as much as to the lack of clarity that is now emerging over transfers to agriculture .
Fourthly , I have to say clearly that the Commission ' s recent decision on funding for border regions is irresponsible .
A year ago , Mr Verheugen , you made quite different promises in the regions concerned .
You are being measured against them there and I am measuring you against them .
As you well know and others here have already mentioned , these are the very regions , above all others , where expansion will be experienced directly .
Whosoever wants it to be an economic , social and political success and not a breeding ground for nationalist sentiment must change this position .
Fifthly , I find it totally unsatisfactory that the number of Czech and Hungarian members of this Parliament was decided undemocratically in Nice and that that has still not been changed .
Mr Hänsch , I was also surprised that the amendment I tabled in the matter to the report on the Czech Republic was supported by the European People ' s Party and others in the Committee on Foreign Affairs but was not supported by the majority of the Social Democrats .
Whether that was out of deference to the national governments that decided it , I do not know .
At any rate we should agree that Parliament will in this matter be calling uncompromisingly for a change .
I would like to thank everyone , including Mr Brok , for their reports .
I believe that here , too , a critical , thoughtful attitude was formulated towards many aspects of the eastward enlargement strategy .
But I would also like to draw attention to two differences , which in part also affect other reports .
The first is the stereotypical concentration on economic and social deregulation and privatisation at the expense of social division and destruction which , given the scale of it , are unacceptable .
The second difference concerns Mr Brok ' s report .
When it says that the expansion of the EU and NATO are sensible complements to each other , I would think that eastern enlargement of the EU also offers prospects for a productive and cooperative shaping of the relationship between Europe and Russia .
But NATO expansion , especially under the conditions of current US and NATO policy , is in my view fraught with serious and in part incalculable risks .
Finally , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office , it remains my great wish that the citizens might be able to experience EU enlargement as something that concerns them not primarily through glossy brochures , but that they might help to shape it as a democratic , social and ecological reality .
Mr President , the enlargement of the European Union is an irreversible process .
We must be quite clear about this .
The conclusions of the Göteborg Summit of EU leaders with regard to the enlargement negotiations and the accession process stated that the road map should make it possible for those countries that are ready to complete negotiations by the end of 2002 .
I am confident that , under the Belgian Presidency of the European Union , extensive progress will be made with regard to the enlargement negotiations .
Key chapters of discussions which it was said will be opened during the Belgian presidency include competition policy , transport , energy , taxation , customs union , veterinary and hygiene aspects of agriculture , fisheries , justice and home affairs , and financial control .
The aim of concluding the enlargement negotiations with the more advanced countries by the end of 2002 is an achievable objective .
The leading candidates are provisionally closing chapters at an impressive rate and the leading candidate country , Cyprus , now has 23 chapters concluded .
But it is equally important that the European Union and the applicant countries get down to negotiating the more difficult chapters of talks , which to date have remained closed .
It is in the interests of all contracting parties that the bottom line issues that remain outstanding are debated , resolved and finalised .
We must all continue to play an active and constructive role in the enlargement process .
The enlargement of the Union is an economic and political opportunity for Europe .
The expansion of the single market should be of real and tangible interest to European exporters and to indigenous European companies seeking investment abroad .
On a continental level , the enlargement of the European Union will contribute to further stability .
An enlarged Union will be able to play a more positive and influential role internationally , both politically and economically .
It will help to consolidate democratic and civil structures in eastern and central Europe .
It will contribute to the development of greater free market economies .
Our input into organisations such as the World Trade Organisation would be very much strengthened by the enlargement of the European Union .
As an Irish Member of the European Parliament , I would like to take this opportunity of restating that the result of the Nice Treaty referendum in Ireland should not be interpreted or construed as a vote against the enlargement of the European Union .
Irish public opinion is strongly in favour of the enlargement process , as indicated by a recent Eurobarometer poll which found that 59 % of the Irish people were in favour of the enlargement of the Union .
This figure is the second highest amongst the 15 Member States of the European Union .
Hopefully this Eurobarometer poll will be reflected when the Irish electorate next have an opportunity of making a decision on the issue .
Welcome
We are joined in the public gallery by many friends , politicians and diplomats from the applicant countries .
You are most welcome to the House .
I hope you are enjoying the debate and finding it constructive .
Progress of the 12 candidate countries in 2000 ( continuation )
Mr President , Commissioner , this morning ' s debate on enlargement has revealed considerable convergence of approaches and methods as well .
Moreover , it was observed on several occasions that enlargement is not just a matter of extending the Union geographically , economically and politically , of integrating 10 , 12 or maybe 13 countries , mainly in Central and Eastern Europe , which have survived the tragic experience of 50 years of communism , but that , in enlargement , the Union itself is at stake .
It was President Prodi , in what is probably his best speech as President which he delivered at the University of Lublin , who said and I quote , " European integration is dependent on a shared understanding of what policy goals should be pursued in the Union " .
This does not , of course , simply mean that we must monitor carefully the candidate countries ' respect for the three Copenhagen criteria : freedom , democracy and human rights , a competitive market economy able to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union , and gradual incorporation of the Community acquis which , as Commissioner Verheugen pointed out this morning , also requires full incorporation of European law , which has proved to be maybe the most difficult part of the process for the candidate countries .
No , it is indeed a question of discussing , rethinking and reviving a European project all over again .
Neither can we expect immediately , so to speak , an easy outcome of the reforms , which are sometimes just institutional hot air .
As both Commissioner Barnier and Commissioner Lamy rightly observed , we cannot discuss the institutional reforms if we do not first define a political project .
Implementation cannot precede conception or else we will become so used to not saying what Europe does that we will not even know what Europe is .
What , then , is the project on which we should initially focus the debate of Parliament ' s , the only genuinely democratic institution and maybe the only institution which is capable of involving the public as well ?
A Europe which has a federal currency , an intergovernmental defence policy and an open economic market area clearly has considerable potential , but also areas of considerable confusion .
Some are of the opinion that these areas of confusion can be resolved by drawing up another document following on from the Charter of Fundamental Rights , in other words a genuine Constitution ; others wonder whether we really need a European Constitution , a form of constitutional patriotism based on the German model which is supposed to provide patriotism which would not otherwise exist .
For others , at the heart of the project lies enhancing and increasing economic cooperation around the euro , and , more then any other characteristic , this would make Europe ' s relationship with globalisation clear and would indicate our ability to be a genuinely global force , at least at European level .
For still others , the core concern , the crux of the matter is the need for a foreign and security policy which is truly common .
Well then , if I may focus on this point for a moment , the debate which took place just this morning on the Middle East revealed that this is , if not the heart of the project , certainly the centre of our difficulties .
Commissioner Patten rightly said , this morning , that we feel that we have been frustrated in our desire to contribute to the peace process or , to be more accurate , the resumption of negotiations or , more precisely still , cease-fires in Palestine , by the events which have been repeated during the last few hours .
I am , of course , pleased to hear that anti-Semitic school books are not being financed with European funds , but , frankly , I do not think that this should be the focal point of the debate we must initiate within the Union .
What is missing is politics , political decisions , political action such as , for example with regard to the Middle East , the accession of Israel to the European Union as proposed so often by our radical friends and others .
This decision would genuinely change the course of events , providing a new security policy and , at the same time , committing Israel and the entire region to it .
There you are , focusing on these issues - strengthening the euro , adapting the institutions and a genuinely common foreign and security policy - will give the European project what it lacks today and what enlargement requires of us .
Mr President , the June movement is voting in favour of enlargement , but the agreements must also be so good for the candidate countries that their electorates are inspired to vote in favour .
The EU Summit must learn from the referendums in Denmark and Ireland .
Given the way in which the enlargement negotiations are at present going , a majority of people in one or more countries is going to vote against .
Keeping documents and correspondence secret is a sure way of creating mistrust .
People will think that the EU has something to hide when it does not dare to produce documentation .
For a couple of years now , I have been trying to obtain a non-bureaucratic electronic copy of the rules the candidate countries have to accept .
The Commission still refuses to produce such a document .
Why not do voters the service of putting all papers on the Internet so that they can be read in Karup and Prague , Bogense and Budapest ?
I am not demanding that internal negotiating positions or military secrets be made publicly available . However , papers that are to result in laws must be made available now .
We must also discuss whether we are making the correct demands of the candidate countries .
Where and when have our people demonstrated in favour of being able to buy cheap land in the countries of Eastern Europe ?
Might we not offer transitional arrangements concerning agricultural and recreational land until such time as the countries concerned have , for example , 90 % of our income ?
Who in the West has any desire to pay subsidies to people in Eastern Europe whom we are forcing out of their jobs ?
Might we not allow extended transitional arrangements so that they can adapt to competition in the common market but be allowed to protect local markets until such time as they are more competitive ?
Might we not be a little more magnanimous and much more flexible ?
Why not allow the 12 candidate countries to be involved in devising the basis for cooperation in the next treaty ?
Why not disregard the Treaty of Nice and create a treaty which can be adopted in referendums in all the countries - a treaty in favour of an open , slimmer , freer and more democratic Europe ?
The prospect of membership would then create enthusiasm among people and increase the turnouts at elections in such a way as to produce large majorities in favour of enlargement .
People want to be united instead of divided Let that be the challenge .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in its report on the progress of the Czech Republic , the Commission writes , and I quote : " The Czech Republic continues to fulfil the Copenhagen political criteria . "
This is a remarkable statement .
The Commission 's report does not contain a single word about the Benes Decrees .
The Commission overlooks the fact that upholding the Benes Decrees , which justify the expulsion and murder of many thousands of people after the Second World War , is clearly contrary to the accession criteria established by the Community .
The Czech Republic 's stance , that it does not wish to repeal them , amounts to a disregard for fundamental basic values and human rights which the EU expressly upholds .
This means that Europe is sending out a signal which does lasting damage to the EU 's credibility on matters of fundamental and human rights .
As a representative of Austria I should also like to say a word on Temelin .
Temelin has significant safety defects .
The Commission 's report on the safety of Temelin also confirms that Austria 's misgivings about the reactor are justified .
Notwithstanding this , the Czech Republic is trying , by activating the reactor , to present us with a fait accompli .
This is not the kind of behaviour that we expect when working in a partnership .
The place to resolve this problem is Brussels .
I await a European initiative to close it down .
Commissioner Verheugen , you described Temelin as the safest nuclear power station in Europe .
This is not only not very helpful , it is also counterproductive if we are to identify a strategy for abandoning the site which is acceptable to everyone .
We will resume this debate at 3 o 'clock .
Mr President , I have taken the floor to inform the Members that , last night , responding during a debate on the oral questions tabled by Mr Harbour and Mrs Guy-Quint , Mr Kinnock said and confirmed that all the Members of Parliament would receive the Commission ' s written answers last night , and the Vice-President of the Commission invoked this information in support of his answers to the Members present last night who did not know anything about this .

When I checked , I found that these documents did not arrive either yesterday or this morning , and it is not known when they will arrive .
I have mentioned this because - in view of the tone of yesterday ' s debate - if the members of the Commission could manage to give the Members of Parliament correct information and not say one thing and do another , I feel that this would be an absolutely essential achievement .
We will take that up with the Commission services and see if we can get it to you as quickly as possible .
I am sure that if there was a commitment , it will be met .
Mr President , in relation to what Mr Dell 'Alba has said I simply wanted to report , without wishing to defend the Commission , that I also spoke to the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Kinnock , today and apparently the reports are already on their way .
There has been a technical problem , so no one was being devious ; there was just a technical hitch .
Mr President , as the joint initiator and author of this question , perhaps I might be allowed to say a brief word .
I also met Mr Kinnock this morning to discuss yesterday 's responses .
His services told me that the report had actually been sent to Parliament yesterday for distribution to Members .
So that is something that should be looked at , because Mr Kinnock made it clear yesterday that the Commission was keen to give Members a response straight away to the detail of my question .
We ought to investigate this .
If the Commission sent the report to Parliament , it is our responsibility that it has not been circulated .
If the delay was on the part of the Commission , we should ask why there was a delay .
We will have a look at that and try to discover what has gone wrong .
VOTE
According to my text , it is quite clear .
It says : " ... and the strengthening of European citizenship " .
That is the text that we are voting on .
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) President .
That concludes the vote .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Hans-Peter Mayer report ( A5-0243 / 2001 )
Mr President , Mr Mayer ' s document is the first stage in the adoption of the directives on the European company , the European limited-liability company .
Only yesterday , when I spoke during the debate , I said that the European company is a good thing , so good that I could see myself celebrating the success of the European limited-liability company by swimming in a bath tub full of euros .
I would like to continue yesterday ' s discourse by saying that many pensioners came in to see me and asked : " Seeing as you are swimming in gold , why do you not create a European pension as well , so that we pensioners can all become rich as well like the European limited-liability companies ? "
I hope that there will soon be a European pension .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that at long last we have resolved this issue of the European Company Statute .
It is logical that if we have a single market there should be a single system of company registration , which ought to make registration simpler and reduce red tape .
In the defence industries in the last few years we have had considerable cross-border cooperation and consolidation but we have not helped those companies because we have not provided them with a single company structure .
Hopefully this will now do that .
We also have to bear in mind that there are other issues that have to be addressed , such as the manner in which companies are taxed and the way that is approached .
And if we are really to encourage transnational consolidation , we have to look at the question of how pension funds are dealt with so that people are able to take their pensions with them when working within a single company structure .
. Madame President , I , like many of my colleagues , was very happy to see that after 30 years of negotiations and many false starts , we eventually had a compromise text on a European Company Statute .
I fully supported the text as adopted by the Council .
However , I was and I am totally opposed to the amendments which have been adopted and which support the harmonisation of taxes .
We all wish to see the ability for companies to operate on an EU basis under one common regulatory system .
This can potentially lead to employment and assist economic growth throughout the Union .
Over the past decade , Ireland has been progressively reducing its taxation which has been led to an increase in employment , an increase in budget surplus and continued sustainable growth .
I am opposed to the standardisation or harmonisation of taxes and these issues can be and must be dealt with by means of co-ordinated measures .
. ( PT ) As we all know , this proposal for a directive has been under discussion since 1970 and , despite the very basic agreement concluded at the Nice European Council , with the creation of a regulation on the statute and a proposal on the involvement of workers , the first step was nevertheless taken to make the European Company a legal entity .
The fundamental aim of the European Company is to eliminate any obstacles to the mobility and functioning of companies that operate on a European scale , enabling them to merge and allowing multinational companies to extend their business activities to other countries in the European Union , thereby increasing the benefits of the Euro and the internal market .
Furthermore , the European Company is seeking to create a statute for a supranational society , giving an identity and a face to European capital .
The current regulation , therefore , broaches mainly constitutional issues , and calls for Community and national law to fill existing loopholes in legislation .
It is not by chance that the rapporteur mainly focuses on the issues of harmonising tax provisions and creating a uniform framework in other areas , such as competition , worker participation and insolvency .
The rapporteur is also seeking to use this regulation to establish a connection with the Directive on the involvement of employees and expresses concern at the situation of SMEs . Nonetheless , the aim of the regulation is to serve the huge multinationals and the interests of UNICE [ Union of Industrial and Employers ' Confederations of Europe ] .
Consequently , the proposal on the participation of workers itself is inadequate . The amendments tabled by the ELDR Group are even more unacceptable and we have , therefore , voted against them .
A Statute for a European Company has been a subject of discussion in the EU since the Seventies .
Together with the Directive on employee participation , the European Company Statute known as Société Européenne ( SE ) , upon which the Nice Summit agreed , appears to be as far as it is possible to go , given the different legislation of the 15 Member States .
We support the Council ' s proposal and reject the amendments demanding uniform EU rules on taxation .
Mr President , I do not wish to make an explanation of vote .
I am simply here to listen to colleagues ' explanations of vote , in particular Mr Fatuzzo 's , and I would earnestly request that you do something about the level of noise here .
This shows an unacceptable lack of respect for those who are making explanations of vote .
I know the problem .
We can all sympathise with you , but it is very difficult to get colleagues to leave the Chamber quietly .
They always have something else to do .
However , we will make that point as often as we can .
Menrad report ( A5-0231 / 2001 )
Mr President , Mr Posselt , not only is there a great deal of noise while I am delivering explanations of vote , but I discovered this morning that an amendment to the Rules of Procedure has been tabled by Mrs Bastos , a Portuguese lady , proposing to reduce the number of explanations of vote and to force Mr Fatuzzo to shut up .

I support this initiative , although it will still have to be voted upon in the House , when I will learn to what extent Mr Fatuzzo ' s explanations of vote are appreciated .
With regard to Mr Menrad ' s report , Mr Fatuzzo voted for the motion for he considers that it is right for workers to be informed about what will happen to them when their company closes .
I call for not just the workers but the ex-workers , the pensioners of such companies to be consulted as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the positive outcomes of the Treaty of Nice is the European Company and we are now debating this in the context of Mr Menrad 's report on the involvement of employees , which I welcome .
My concern is simply that if we constantly extend workers ' rights and in particular if we lower thresholds , as is the case in this report - from 1000 employees to 500 for the rules on worker participation to be applied - we will place too great a burden on this European Company .
The European Company is supposed to attract companies to Europe .
This new company model is intended to open up Europe as a business location and make it more attractive .
That is why it is also necessary , in particular where worker participation is concerned , for us to keep a sense of proportion and not to burden the companies adopting this model with these new rights in such a way that it is simply no longer of interest to those who wish either to enter Europe or to use the European Company to be more mobile within the European single market .
In my view sufficient account has not been taken of this and that is why I have voted against .
The European Council directive claims to grant additional rights to the workers of European companies .
These so-called rights are simply the participation of workers ' representatives in ' the SE ' s administrative or supervisory body ' .
Even by taking Parliament ' s amendments into account , these minority representatives will not be able to influence any decisions .
Furthermore , the legislator wants to ban them and even their freedom of expression with fellow workers by imposing a confidentiality clause on them .
As a result , these representatives are only summoned when required to approve their employers ' policy or to be silenced .
We refuse to approve this farce .
That is why we abstained from voting on this text .
I believe that it is important to mention the background to this proposal for a directive , which seeks to supplement the regulation on the European Company with regard to the involvement of workers .
The first proposal for a European Commission regulation dates back to 1970 and was presented to the European Parliament at the end of the 1980s .
Some of the core elements of this directive are the binding provisions concerning the participation of employees ' representatives , the information and consultation requirements within the administrative or supervisory bodies and the obligation to obtain authorisation before implementing decisions such as shutting down or relocating establishments , cutting back or expanding establishments , changing establishments , the establishment of subsidiaries or holding companies . Election procedures and the working methods of employees ' representatives should follow normal practice in the Member State concerned .
These proposals have failed on the issue of participation .
A great deal more negotiating was needed before the Nice European Council reached agreement on 20 December 2000 .
The proposal for a directive governing information and consultation of workers specifies that the scale of participation will be decided through free negotiations between the companies concerned and the workers represented by a special negotiating body .
Should the result of the negotiations lead to a reduction of participation rights , the majority required for a decision to approve such an agreement shall be the votes of two thirds of the members of the special negotiating body representing at least two thirds of the employees .
In the event of a breakdown of negotiations , a safety clause is provided to protect participation rights .
The purpose of the amendments made by the European Parliament is to establish minimum requirements for information , participation and consultation of employees ; to harmonise the national implementing provisions of the Member States , since acquired rights are not called into question ; to ensure that even in the case of substantial structural changes after an SE has been created , negotiations on employee participation are planned to take place at a later date ; to lay down clear rules on management ' s obligation to provide information , specifying areas to which this obligation applies ; to ensure that the election or appointment of workers ' representatives to the SE ' s administrative or surveillance body shall take place according to the legal provisions of the Member States .
I must conclude by saying that I voted in favour of the amendment to change the legal basis of this proposal .
In my view , the European Parliament must use the co-decision procedure for a piece of legislation that concerns 75 % of European workers .
Thirty years of difficult negotiations , exemptions and exceptions , a legal basis that only serves to give illegitimate powers to the Commission in Brussels , an attempt to transform a directive into a regulation using an implementation group .
Undeniably , the Statute for a European Company is a real labyrinth and economic and political actors are hardly enthusiastic about it , to put it mildly .
In truth , the only benefit of the European Company is that it is being imposed as if it were a true component of supranational law - it certainly is similar to the single currency , being an ideological construction that seeks to forcibly replace national structures and impose an uncontrollable level of Community decision-making .
Some claim to be concerned about workers ' rights .
The Directive , however , clearly bypasses these rights in favour of the unquestionable right of the management board to create a European Company .
The Directive even allows a reduction in the right of workers to participation .
So this is simply another stage in the unrelenting globalisation process , which begins with everything at European-level being made uniform .
In this scenario , it would be an obvious advantage for all the ultra-liberals to have a workforce , which is also globalised and has the least amount of rights possible .
This is bordering on a perverse interpretation of global worker unification , as the so-called anti-globalisation left-wing extremists are now calling for , with the help of many slogans .
The greatest perversion of all undeniably resides in the objective alliance between capitalist internationalism and subversive or Marxist internationalism , which aims to impose levels of decision-making which override nations , their democratically appointed governments and their democratically elected parliaments .
And yet the nation is the only level at which social and political legislation for workers , freedoms and prosperity for all exists and can be defended best .
- ( NL ) Society cannot survive without businesses which produce goods and provide services .
However , that should not lead us to overlook the fact that businesses can also form a threat to society .
They want as low taxes as possible , as little worker participation as possible and as few rules as possible to protect against environmental pollution and animal torture .
Large businesses , in particular , are out to make the highest possible profits for the owners and also often to secure the highest possible share options for management .
In many cases , the pursuit of profits clashes with the pursuit of the healthiest possible living environment , the prevention of work-related illnesses , a safe working environment , democratic decision-making and the desirability of sufficient financial means to pay for public services .
That is why it is necessary to arrange for as much openness as possible , so that society as a whole can co-determine the actions of businesses .
Moreover , businesses which infringe rules should not under any circumstance receive contributions from European funds .
Menrad report ( A5-0282 / 2001 )
Mr President , a few days ago , I was on Lake Como , admiring the beauty of this wonderful Italian lake from a boat .
While I was in the boat , I met a worker , who said to me : " I am very pleased that you are going to adopt the Menrad report , which will mean that I , a worker , will be informed of the day when I will be made redundant .
I will know it a long time in advance , so this is certainly good news !
But why is it that workers are not informed not just of when they will be made redundant but also of when they will receive a pension , how large that pension will be and , in short , of everything it is important for workers to know about their pensions ?
As things stand , they receive no information at all . "
- ( DA ) We have voted in favour of Amendment No 4 , not because we are opposed to appropriate sanctions in the event of employers ' or employee representatives ' not complying with the directive but because we are opposed to paragraph 2 of Article 2 , no. xiii ) which may create difficulties for national agreement-based systems which at present operate very well .
We did not want a negative vote to prevent the progress of this report , thus taking into account the desire of many of the trade unions .
By abstaining however , we are showing our rejection of the proposals , which , on the pretext of increasing the rights of workers , have obviously been written with employers ' interests in mind .
The report talks of ' competitive needs ' but disregards the need to provide workers with the right to live and earn a wage .
The author of the report perceives helping employers as a need .
Yet , when it comes to workers ' rights , these are immediately restricted to the right to be informed about the redundancies that are to be made - preventing them is out of the question .
Workers ' councils are being refused the simple right of veto , even though , faced with an increase in collective redundancies , often in large companies which have been making huge profits for many years , a simple ban on redundancies would be enough to protect workers .
So , what exactly is this ' partnership between employers and workers ' advocated by the report , where one of the partners has the right to take decisions which ruin the life of so many workers , even an entire region , and where the other partner has no rights , not even the right to safeguard his job ?
. UK Conservatives believe in the principle of works councils .
But we also consider that it is for companies and their employees to decide what best works for them rather than for the EU to set out one-size-fits-all legislation .
Works councils should provide a bridge between employers and employees .
Over-prescriptive legislation can turn them into a barrier .
Flexibility , not rigidity , is required .
The one area where there is a need for greater legal certainty is the issue of confidentiality at a time of mergers and take-overs .
We are no further forward on this .
. ( FR ) Firstly , I would like to remind you that the main objective of Directive 94 / 45 / EC is to eliminate any obstacles to informing , consulting and communicating with employees in Community-scale companies .
It is true that this directive has been transposed within the allotted time frame .
It is also true that its application has led to the creation of numerous European works councils .
Approximately 650 works councils have thus been set up in companies that employ at least 1000 people , with at least 150 of these in two Member States .
However , there are still 1 800 companies in the EU that meet the conditions , especially in relation to thresholds over which , according to the Directive ' s provisions , a European Works Council should be set up .
Furthermore , the recent large-scale restructuring operations and redundancies that have highlighted the gaps in European legislation are still fresh in everyone ' s minds .
It is unacceptable for employees to find out about decisions affecting their company through the media .
We are accountable to European citizens , who are ever more doubtful of the existence of a European social model .
This period of industrial change should prompt us to think carefully about how we can improve existing arrangements .
It is exactly this that the report from the Parliamentary Committee on Employment and Social Affairs sets out to do , for , on the occasion of this application report , it outlines the direction to be taken by the European Commission when it drafts a proposal for an amendment to the European Works Council Directive ( scheduled for 2002 ) .
This will be a matter of implementing the following improvements : precise definition of the concepts of information and consultation of workers ; a general obligation to call extraordinary meetings of the European Works Council , as quickly as is possible and at an opportune time ; the implementation of a consolidated consultation procedure on particular questions , specifically involving workers ; the lowering of the threshold relating to the number of employees in companies affected by the directive from 1000 to 500 employees for a whole company and from 150 to 100 per establishment in at least two Member States ; the establishment of penalties , at national and European level , to be applied in cases where the Directive is not respected .
I would therefore also ask the European Commission to incorporate these suggestions into its proposal for an amendment to the European Works Council Directive .
.
( FR ) Less than 5 % of the companies affected by the 1994 Works Councils Directive have meetings for employee representatives more than twice a year ; 60 % have not even set up works councils and , in the rare cases where they have been set up , it has been to the detriment of the representation of workers in national companies particularly in terms of time set aside for consultation and training .
This is a good illustration of the refusal of employers to inform and consult workers ' representatives and their intention to decide alone on the fate of millions of employees .
The latest redundancy programmes drawn up by the management at AOM , Marks & Spencer , Lu-Danone and even Moulinex have , once again , shown that the interests of managers and small investors are completely opposed to those of employees and the needs of the population .
Today , the most important thing for employees faced with looming unemployment is the chance to block these redundancies , not just to have been told about them beforehand and by different means .
The resolution ' s proposals relating to redundancies are merely symbolic and have no meaning for the thousands of employees that have already lost their jobs .
We support all the provisions that facilitate better information and more rights for employee representatives and all the measures which provide more resources to bring about the mobilisation necessary to thwart managers ' plans .
- ( NL ) No business can operate without the people who do the work .
The shop floor has great insight into what goes wrong and how things can be improved .
That insight is often ignored ; after all , these workers are not hired to pass judgement .
According to traditional power relations , only ownership and management count .
Workers seem nothing but a necessary evil who are completely irrelevant to the business and who are only hired temporarily from the outside world .
In the case of reorganisations , it is the shareholders and managers who make the decisions ; the workers feature at the bottom of the list .
Thousands of people are asked to leave because another product requiring other skills is deemed more profitable , because production is shifted to a country where wages are lower or even because the business wants to penalise the workers for wanting better working conditions .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur is not suggesting that workers should be given the right to free access to information and to suspensive veto .
If suspensive veto were to be applied during restructuring , alternatives could first be considered and developed in full public view and with the use of all the expertise available , and the monopoly of management and owners of the businesses would subsequently be broken .
Blokland report ( A5-0267 / 2001 )
. ( FR ) The fact that , after eight years of negotiations , the European authorities cannot even obtain reliable information on the production of waste , particularly industrial waste , and its treatment , is indicative of their powerlessness .
This is one way in which they have shown their incapacity to follow a policy in this field that is capable of limiting environmental pollution and preventing environmental disasters now or in the future .
The explanatory statement clearly records that " no agreement was reached " between Member States , that there was " considerable opposition in the Council " and that there was rejection by " business " .
The treatment of certain types of waste , particularly from the nuclear , chemical and petroleum industries , requires cooperation on an international level , yet the powerlessness of the European authorities mirrors the intentional powerlessness of Member States .
Neither wants to clash with the private interests of large industrial groups or to impose upon them draconian measures that could reduce their profits , in order to preserve society ' s environmental interests .
We have abstained because the proposals in this report are too vague .
Koukiadis report ( A5-0250 / 2001 )
. ( FR ) We have voted resolutely against the Koukiadis report because , with a frighteningly clear conscience , it proposes to increase control measures to better apply Community Law , without first ascertaining whether the rapid rise in cases of poorly executed application could be indicative of the widening of the gap between Europe and its citizens .
Nowhere does the report ponder the thought that poor application may be the result of a kind of defensive reaction from nations or individuals against legislation that they feel is alien to them , too finicky , or adopted according to anti-democratic processes .
The solutions put forward intermittently in the European Parliament ' s or Commission ' s reports consist of increasing supranationality , increasing penalties and facilitating a swifter and more direct application of Community Law by increasingly bypassing national Parliaments .
In the recent Commission White Paper on European governance , there is even the astounding theory that European Law is too meticulous because the Council and Parliament are greatly increasing the amount of detail , because they do not have enough confidence in the Commission .
It would therefore , I suppose , be a better idea to give this institution a freer hand in order to improve the quality of Community Law .
Specifically , there are currently the stirrings of a movement aiming to speed up the transposal of directives into national legislation , employing rapid methods such as orders , as used recently by the French government .
These methods , which dispense with the fundamental role of national Parliaments , can only aggravate this gap between Community Law and the situations of Member States .
On the other hand , the only solution is to restore the role of nations and national Parliaments in the European decision-making process .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 13.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , I am interested in knowing what has become of the Commission - the Commissioner is there , we did not see you just now - and whether the Council is also going to take part in this important debate on the individual countries , which does actually constitute the substantive debate on enlargement .
I am very disappointed that this does not seem to be the case .
Perhaps you could note this in a suitable letter .
I believe that it shows a lack of respect for this Parliament if this important debate on the individual countries , which really is a central component of the enlargement process , is not followed by the Council .
Progress of the 12 candidate countries in 2000 ( continuation )
Mrs Schroedter , you have been a little too hasty in your remarks .
I was still reading the reason why we are here , continuing the debate , after which I was going to tell the House why Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck has not yet arrived .
She is engaged here , in Parliament , in a meeting of committee chairmen who have requested her presence .
As soon as the meeting finishes she will join us .
Commissioner Verheugen , on the other hand , arrived punctually , in the middle of your speech .
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the progress of the 12 candidate countries in 2000 .
In addition , I have received a motion for resolution in accordance with Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , it is now ten years since Estonia won back its independence .
After the fall of the Berlin Wall , the world has become more secure , and our European home is now more dynamic and inspires more hope .
The conditions for European cooperation changed radically when the Wall came down , and the EU has so far been able to live up to these .
The presence of a successful Western Europe and of political visionaries such as Kohl , Reagan , Thatcher and , for that matter , Gorbachev , is partly responsible for this success , but it was , above all , individual people ' s longing for freedom which made possible this revolutionary change to the age in which we live .
It was courageous men and women , both young and old , who feared reprisals but who loved freedom more .
It is a fantastic inheritance to have experienced this dividend of freedom and liberation .
Let us remind people of the way in which democracy triumphed over dictatorship and oppression was exchanged for freedom .
The enlargement process must be seen in this perspective .
Just as the Coal and Steel Union succeeded in its task of securing peace in the participating countries of Europe , we must now make sure that the European Union increases freedom and the opportunity for more people to participate in freedom of movement and that it increases prosperity , promotes diversity and contributes to solving our common problems involving crime and the environment .
This is probably not as dramatic a task as was once the task of reconciling historic enemies , but I think that it is at least as large a task , involving just as many benefits but being perhaps more difficult to carry out .
That is precisely why it is my political group ' s most important task of all to continue to fight for freedom and now to enable our fellow human beings in Eastern and Central Europe to participate on the same conditions as ourselves .
In this way , we should also be showing , especially to today ' s young people , that we believe in an EU that is able to change in order to live up to its own ideals .
This must not be some wait-and-see project .
The EU ' s commitment will be commensurate with the active work done by the candidate countries .
I want to praise the Commission ' s work on this aspect but still put a question mark over the Council ' s ambition and ability .
Allow me to say a few words about Estonia , that fascinating little country on the Baltic .
Through singleness of purpose , sound political leadership and cooperation , Estonia has come a long way in its preparations for EU membership .
In my report , I tried to make it clear that , in many areas , the EU has a lot to learn from the Estonians , for example in the area of trade and within what we call the new economy .
In many respects , developments in Estonia constitute a success story in which an incredible amount has happened during the last ten years .
I addressed the subject of security policy in my report .
We cannot view enlargement of the EU in isolation or fondly imagine that the EU has powers it at present completely lacks .
The Estonians , who also want to see themselves participating in NATO soon , are aware of this .
The Estonians , who were oppressed , expelled from their homes and driven to despair under the Soviet Union ' s Communist dictatorship , know that the only important thing is to defend freedom .
Those of us in the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats share their analysis and support them in this .
The Group of the Greens here in Parliament are anxious about poverty in a country that has experienced a remarkably greater degree of prosperity since the liberation .
I view the Greens ' amendment as an attempt to defend existing structures and a social model that have entrenched unemployment in the EU .
I believe , for my part , that the economy of the EU needs more dynamism and less hegemony , and I do not therefore wish to support that amendment .
Finally , a few words about minorities , mainly a large proportion of Russian speakers in the case of Estonia .
It is not a straightforward issue .
We are concerned here with power , prejudices and ancient wrongs .
The precondition for integration and a successful sense of community is the successful rule of law , together with institutions and laws that are non-discriminatory . However , that is not enough .
When it comes to practical work too , political leaders must take these issues seriously .
That applies just as much in our own countries .
Overcoming differences requires tolerance and mutual respect and takes time .
In this respect too , Estonia is on the right road .
I want to thank those of my fellow MEPs who have been involved with this topic , and I also wish to extend my thanks to the Committee Secretariat .
Mr President - unfortunately I cannot greet the Council yet , although I have a number of things to say with it in mind - Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , amidst the squabbling over direct aid in agriculture or the future allocation of the Structural Funds , we sometimes lose sight of the fact that the project to heal our divided Europe is of historical importance and that its significance is such that it also determines Europe 's standing in the world .
More fainthearted talk of delay not only harms the project but also Europe as a whole .
That is why I would call on the Council , together with Parliament and the Commission , to do all it can to ensure that the first new members are able to take part in the European elections in 2004 .
Given the current state of play in the negotiations , we are realistically talking about 10 countries .
This also means that not just one Baltic country but all three will be involved .
Should enlargement be delayed further then there is also the danger that the negative implications of this for the people in our own countries will cause problems .
Even now the fact that increasing numbers of firms are relocating to neighbouring countries in the East because of environmental and social dumping is intolerable .
The EU 's environmental and social standards can only be upheld , however , if there is actual membership .
I will give just one example from Latvia : I think it is incredible that EU companies can permit themselves to boycott the social dialogue while the Commission simply stands by and watches .
In any case , it is a characteristic of the enlargement process that the people 's existing rights of participation play no part in it .
Why are we surprised at the diminishing interest of the people in the accession countries if enlargement is practically solely a project of the political elite ?
Mr Verheugen , you mentioned the positive attitude of the national minorities towards enlargement .
I cannot say the same for the Russian minority in Latvia .
No debate of any kind is taking place in society about the successes achieved and problems experienced either in the accession process or with enlargement ; neither is it a joint process .
The communication strategy is to have separate projects for East and West and as such is ill-conceived even in terms of structure .
It prevents people from getting to know each other .
How many people in the West are aware of the European treasures in the Baltic cultures ; how many know anything about what is of significance there ?
In our countries it goes without saying that projects in rural and urban areas are developed by the stakeholders .
In the accession countries it is a Commission-led top-down process .
Why do they not attach any importance to having the same quality of participation as is demanded here by the Member States ?
In Latvia too the administration is the weakest point and of course an administration is only strong if it offers a service facility to all of its citizens , regardless of their social standing and language .
It needs to be able to organise and implement procedures to allow them to participate .
As a predominantly rural country , Latvia is particularly affected by the foolhardy project to export the EU 's unsuccessful agricultural policy to the accession countries .
Surely we all need to work together to convert direct aid into ecologically and socially sustainable structural development .
It would be beneficial not only to Latvia but also to consumer protection and thus to the entire population of the EU and the accession countries .
I should like to stress once more that in this whole process the social dimension is being wholly neglected .
It is illusory to believe that processes of transformation in society can be managed by free market forces alone .
We cannot ignore the alarming gulf between rich and poor .
But we could reduce it if the idea of Europe were understood as a common political task for the people of Europe regardless of their region and social position .
Mr President , in debating the twelve reports on the twelve candidate countries today , we are making a positive contribution to a development without , as yet , any understanding of what the results of that development will be .
I hope and pray that Parliament and the Commission , the term of office of which expires at the start of 2005 , will have the joy and honour of making these twelve countries members of the European Union in a new European configuration , the aim of which is obviously not to create new borders , but to create a community of states and nations working towards common objectives of peace , social prosperity and global collaboration .
I think that , as a political objective , this is the major objective for all of us and we must all serve it faithfully .
I am the third rapporteur for the Baltic states .
All three states have more or less the same problems , as do most of the candidate countries , given that they all have a history of the same socio-economic and political system and are now in a process of reform .
What is special about these countries is that , until recently , the enlargement of the European Union only involved countries with similar social and economic systems .
Now we are moving towards countries moving from centralised economies and state control to market economies and democratic procedures .
In this sense , this move , which unites Europe ideologically and politically without forming borders which divide something between us which we should not divide , is most positive .
Lithuania , on which I am reporting , has the same general problems and two specific problems .
One specific problem is the Ignalina nuclear power station and the second is Kaliningrad .
I believe that every effort will be made at Ignalina to secure Lithuania 's energy supply and deal with the secondary and primary repercussions on both society and the economy and I trust that things will go smoothly .
As far as Kaliningrad is concerned , it is indeed here in this Russian enclave that the policies which give us the opportunity to create a new Europe will be judged and , even if it is not integrated into the same economic and political system , it will work with us , exist alongside us and share a common future with us rather than clashing with us .
In this sense , I believe that Commissioner Verheugen , who has demonstrated sophisticated political skills , will help move things along here .
He has proven as much in other difficult cases because - let us not deceive ourselves - the real political problems will be numerous .
I should like to refer to Cyprus , given that it has already been mentioned and even though it is not the subject of my report , merely to say that it is because of Commissioner Verheugen 's correct political handling of the case that he says , yes , there is the issue of Turkey 's occupation of northern Cyprus ; however , at the same time , he says that Helsinki expects the accession of Cyprus to proceed irrespective of whether or not the question of northern Cyprus is resolved .
Put simply , this is a message to all quarters that it is political Europe 's intention to proceed on the basis of its own principles and perceptions and without allowing anyone to dictate how issues relating to human rights , democracy , international standing and international law are to be handled .
From this point of view , I hope and trust that Commissioner Verheugen will do his very best .
As far as tomorrow is concerned , the crucial question is : what do we as Europeans hope for ? A united Europe which integrates as it goes along or a microcosm of economic transience and short-termism ?
If Europe and its people truly want to achieve some sort of ideal , some sort of vision - and I believe that they do - then it must be a social and political vision , not a small-term or short-term economic vision .
In this sense , I think that we should move towards this vision of an integrated Europe of peace , collaboration , cohesion and development and impart visions of this sort of Europe to our people , leaving aside petty confrontations on transient issues which have no future .
Mr President , this is certainly not an easy time for the majority of the countries who are preparing to enter the European Union , especially Poland .
Precisely now , at the most decisive moment when they should be making the final spurt towards the finishing line , when there is most need of enthusiasm and single-mindedness , the Poles , like many others , are starting to have second thoughts and to wonder whether the sacrifices required of them , the supposed costs of accession , will not outweigh the advantages , the potential and future gains .
A certain alarming scepticism is becoming rife which is in danger of threatening consensus on accession to the Union .
Commissioner Verheugen mentioned this phenomenon this morning , and this is why we have tabled an amendment which I hope will be adopted tomorrow , calling upon the Commission to increase its commitment to European Union information and promotion campaigns in order to convince the Poles that their presence in Europe is essential for both us and them .
Factors which are certainly contributing to the scepticism of the Poles are a centre-right government which is about to come to the end of its term amongst difficulties and instability after a long period of clear , decisive action , and an economy which was the envy of the postcommunist world with consistently high growth rates of around 7 % per annum and which now , after the great dynamic progress of recent years , has started to show signs of slowing down .
To these must be added the natural disasters which struck Poland this summer , floods and tornadoes which caused severe damage both in material terms and in terms of loss of human life .
The left , the postcommunists , the current opposition - which will have the majority at the elections on 23 September , that is in a few days - are certainly not helping to calm things down and are tending to throw oil on the fire and present a picture of Poland which is not particularly reassuring so that they can then set themselves up as the saviours of the homeland .
Of course , when this same left comes to power , it will not do anything at all to change the resolute , competent action taken by the Polish government to make every endeavour to enter Europe as soon as possible .
There is no doubt that the left is committed to taking this path because all the Polish parties - both right and left - signed an explicit agreement a few days ago committing themselves to working together to this end .
We must not ignore the fact that there are still issues which need resolving , and we have listed them in our resolution ; to cite some examples : environmental protection , which was totally disregarded and abandoned during the long period of communist dictatorship with the result that the environment is now in a pitiful state ; improving air and water quality to European Union standards requires huge effort and investment which would be impossible without external aid or those transition periods to which Mr Brok referred this morning .
With regard to the environment , I would like to say to some of the Members , who are rightly sensitive to the argument and who have tabled amendments , that I support the amendments for the most part but that I have not accepted them because they are too specific and go into too much detail .
Another well-known problem is agriculture , which is suffering the consequences of the Polish farmers ' heroic resistance to collectivisation under Soviet rule and is now extremely fragmented .
For Poland , 26 % of whose population lives in country areas , the restructuring of agriculture affects and involves many other sectors , starting with the need to create new jobs .
A further issue is that of the borders to the east , which will become the Union ' s borders with Ukraine and Belarus .
These borders will have to be open , on the one hand , but also totally crime- and mafia-proof .
Commissioner Verheugen talked about that as well this morning .
To sum up , we are sure that Poland will enter Europe as soon as possible , in 2004 , and we are pleased to note that the Belgian Presidency - as we heard this morning - wants to give fresh impetus and new dynamism to the negotiations .
Poland - the President-in-Office said - will enter , although it is more appropriate to say ' will return to ' Europe , for it has occupied its rightful place in Europe for centuries and only a perverse dictatorship was able to deny it its true place in history and geography for many decades .
Mr President , I do not wish to say anything about the content of my report on the Czech Republic .
Anyone who has read it will also realise that the criticism that came from the Right at the end of this morning 's debate was unjustified .
It does , in fact , contain a number of observations on these points .
Allow me to comment on the latest developments .
In the past week it has emerged from the Czech Republic that the government has a very ambitious programme , namely that by June 2002 it wants to have met the accession criteria and therefore to regard the accession negotiations as closed .
So far , 19 out of 31 chapters have been closed and by the end of the year a further six key chapters should be completed .
Commissioner Verheugen rightly said that completing chapters is not the only thing that counts and that neither is it an indicator of how far a country is .
Nevertheless , the Czech Republic is well on the way and we should not believe those who are confusing the people in the country .
Only last week a leading Czech politician asserted that the European Union was a rigid , unwieldy and costly concern .
With your permission , Mr President , I should like to analyse these three erroneously employed concepts .
The European Union is not rigid .
If there is one constant in the European Community - which today is the European Union - then it is the desire for change and the possibility of achieving it .
Since the Fifties , the European Community has been constantly changing and today we are even facing the possibility and necessity of enlarging this Union once more .
Anyone , therefore , who says that this organisation is rigid does not know what they are talking about .
Secondly , I turn to the charge that it is unwieldy .
We should not confuse two different things here .
Of course the European Union is a large entity , but it is , nevertheless , manoeuvrable .
It can be compared to a great ship sailing across a wide ocean .
It can be manoeuvred and yet it is large , like the European Union .
The decision-making process is certainly lengthy in the European Union and it is sometimes tedious as well , but what do you actually expect in a Community of 15 sovereign states , where each state - and , incidentally , not least the small ones - is asked what its position is ?
Everyone has a say , and this is something which those circles in the Czech Republic should bear in mind .
So the Union is not unwieldy and it is not rigid either .
The third argument , that it is costly , is actually the least accurate because the countries which freed themselves from communism would have had to undergo reform and a process of transformation anyway , regardless of accession to the European Union .
There is a further point : there are two possibilities in the European Union , either you receive money or you contribute money .
Those who receive money - and the Czech Republic is already one of them - actually ought not to complain at all .
Those who contribute money have also shown over the last few decades that they fare very well when they pay money into the European Community or Union because somehow they always get it back again .
These three arguments are therefore purely and simply populist , to put it mildly .
My final comment on this is that where cost is concerned there are also things which should not be measured or explained in terms of marks and pfennigs or euros .
These people in the Czech Republic who are blackening the name of the EU have forgotten one thing , namely our founding fathers ' prime concern : peace in freedom .
This is something which up until now has prevented wars and , by the way , expulsion .
Despite a number of points which are explained in my report , for example in relation to Temelin , the Czech Republic is making good progress .
No one should take fright ; Temelin is not an obstacle to joining the European Union .
Finally , allow me to make one further comment which I already made last year in my report .
I am from Saxony , which borders the Czech Republic ; in the past in socialist times I was in the same boat as the Czechs and I should also like to be in the future , but in a different boat , a boat which the Czechs can help to steer .
Admittedly , no one in the Czech Republic should think that the Czechs will be the only ones deciding where the boat goes because it is not the European Union which wishes to join the Czech Republic but the Czechs who wish to join the EU .
Nevertheless , the Czechs are guaranteed to be one of those helping to steer the course of the European Union in the future .
Mr President , the current Slovakian Government has , since 1998 , made considerable inroads into the accession process .
If Brussels was very sceptical at that time , the country is now joining the ranks of candidate countries that are first in line to join the EU .
It is no longer playing second fiddle to the members of the so-called Luxembourg Club if one considers the number of concluded negotiation chapters .
Credit where credit is due . To the Slovakian Government , but also to the population which has managed to sit and wait for far-reaching reforms , which also have their drawbacks , of course .
Take the unacceptably high level of unemployment .
The high speed with which the negotiations have taken place is not merely a reflection of an energetic government . Slovakia is one of the smaller candidate countries and can therefore afford a higher degree of flexibility .
The country is taking advantage of this . The support for EU Membership remains as high as ever , and it is fair to say that there is political consensus surrounding this issue in Slovakia .
However , one can question whether a government of a different make-up would have managed to make the same progress .
Nevertheless , there are points of criticism .
In the light of the Council ' s and Commission ' s strategy to conclude a number of negotiations next year , these points of criticism deserve extra attention .
If Slovakia is to keep up with the frontrunners , an extra effort will need to be made in this connection .
That is why , with all due respect , it is not so much the role of the European Parliament to be kind , but rather to give the right incentives .
I have therefore adopted in my report many of the critical observations which my fellow MEPs have made in the various committees .
These observations will hopefully speak for themselves as it is impossible to list them all here .
Slovakia is transposing EU legislation at a rate of knots , which , in fact , as in other candidate countries , begs the question of whether all these new laws can actually be implemented and whether sufficient , qualified staff are available for this task .
This is all the more pressing in the sphere of financial control for which , admittedly , draft legislation has now been submitted in Slovakia , but in respect of which it is fair to continue to question the country ' s aptitude to process EU subsidies in an adequate manner once it is an EU Member State .
Fortunately , the Slovakian Government is in the process of recruiting additional officials , which , in itself , is a considerable step forward .
Commissioner Verheugen was right this morning to declare this topic a priority , and I should like to give him my unqualified support in this .
I should also like to provide him with the word ' transparency ' as a key concept in this connection .
In the spring , we were startled by the news of irregularities committed by a high official responsible for the distribution of EU monies .
Needless to say , the Government took action , which is praiseworthy in itself .
However , the inquiry is still under way .
The matter should , in our opinion , be subject to a thorough investigation , particularly to establish whether this was simply one incident or whether this was a symptom of a more systematic phenomenon .
We would , in this framework , also like to receive the initial assessment of the anti-corruption programme which the Slovakian Government adopted a while ago .
I have , in the past , regularly expressed my concern regarding the large discrepancies in income between the different regions in Slovakia .
The country is not unique in this either , and it will soon have fresh opportunities to do something about it thanks to EU membership .
Nevertheless , I cannot shake off the feeling that many plans take a long time to come to fruition .
That is unfortunate because what matters is relations between rich and poor in Slovakia .
A worrying trend is that concerning the deployment of elected regional councils .
This decentralisation is important from an EU point of view , because the country ' s administration will become more efficient and democratic control will improve as a result .
Parliament recently took a few decisions , but the Slovakian Government partners do not consider these to be satisfactory .
That is why the coalition has come under pressure .
A year before the possible conclusion of the negotiations , there is now the threat of a Government crisis , the implications of which are not entirely clear .
We do not decide on the regional re-division of Slovakia . We can , however , ask that every effort be made to stave off a crisis .
The present coalition has a job to finish , and the involvement of the Hungarian minority remains every bit as important in this connection .
In fact , they themselves subscribe to this wish .
Surely during further discussions on this topic , it should be possible to reach a final compromise which is acceptable to everyone .
That means that everyone must be accommodating , for everyone is responsible for the cohesion within the Government .
A free vote in Parliament is not always the best solution in this connection .
We continue to receive complaints about the treatment of minorities , and not only from Budapest .
Progress has been made with regard to the Roma people .
Nevertheless , we can continue to question the speed with which improvements are being made and the willingness of local authorities to commit themselves fully to these .
Unpleasant incidents are still occurring .
I repeat once again that next year , at the - what we hope will be - final assessment , the first genuine and concrete results of the Roma policy will be revealed .
It will be an exciting year for Slovakia , a year of hard toil in order to maintain the momentum of the negotiations , and we hope we will be able to pass a verdict on the end result next year .
Mr President , whereas the debate on enlargement held last year happened to take place on the day commemorating the tenth anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall , today ' s debate , although it does not have the same symbolic importance , is nonetheless taking place in the wake of two very important events .
Firstly , the Nice Summit , at which the European Heads of State and Government undertook to reform the Community institutions so that these could accommodate a Europe enlarged by a further twelve countries .
We all share the conviction that failure in this area would damage the project of enlargement for many years to come .
Secondly , the Göteborg Summit , which brought the Swedish Presidency to a close .
In their conclusions , Europe ' s leaders categorically stated that the process of enlargement was irreversible , having for the first time set a deadline at the end of 2002 for concluding negotiations with applicant countries that are ready , with the stated aim of these countries already being able to participate as Members in the 2004 European Parliamentary elections .
To this political commitment we must add the emphasis placed on the principle of differentiation , according to which the applicant countries will continue to be assessed solely on the basis of their merits .
It is in this context that we should consider the report on Hungary ' s accession to the European Union and developments in its application process over the last year .
Hungary ' s integration into the European Union is a truly national ambition for that country .
Tangible proof of this is the agreement reached by all the political parties represented in the Hungarian Parliament in favour of accession and by the consensus obtained on first holding a referendum on this decisive step for their shared future .
By channelling all of its energies into fulfilling this national objective , Hungary has already been able to conclude negotiations with the Commission on a substantial number of chapters , ( 22 out of a total of 30 ) , which gives us hope that negotiations on welcoming Hungary into the European Union within the 2002 deadline set at Göteborg can be concluded .
This fact , combined with the existence of a ' road map ' of clearly delimited negotiations , is of great political importance , since it has not only enabled Hungary ' s leaders and the Community ' s negotiators to plan and undertake their work in line with the previously established timetable . It has also contributed to preventing a climate of anxiety and disillusionment arising in Hungarian society as a consequence of it being impossible to give commitments on deadlines for concluding negotiations on joining the Union .
Mr President , with regard to developments in Hungary ' s application procedure , the main aspects that I wish to highlight are obviously ongoing , although some new situations can also be mentioned .
As for the former , reference must be made , first of all , to Hungary ' s economic situation , which is continuing to improve , despite signs of the slowdown that are being felt everywhere .
Gross domestic product growth stands at around 6 % and exports continue to perform very well , as does investment in housing .
Consumption , employment and foreign investment have also achieved very healthy figures .
We can conclude that today , Hungary has a solidly developing market economy and if it continues to make progress in the field of structural reforms and in consolidating public auditing , it will be able to withstand the pressure of competition and market forces within the European Union , without having to jump through any hoops .
Nevertheless , inflation remains high , at around 10 % , and the government must keep a close eye on this by implementing the appropriate measures for reducing pressure for price increases .
There is also the situation of the Roma population , which remains difficult in spite of the progress that has been made under the mid-term programme .
This is why we are warning that this programme must be complemented by immediate practical measures for social support in the fields of education , employment , housing and health , amongst others , in conjunction with representatives from that community , which will be jointly monitored with them . Some of these measures are already in place .
Mention must also be made of the need , which has been fully accepted by Hungary ' s political leaders , to step up the fight against corruption . The approval and implementation of a very thorough package of legislation against corruption , to enter into force with immediate effect , should be emphasised .
We are aware of the difficult situation inherited by countries in similar areas and with similar recent histories to that of Hungary , and we know that this battle must be fought throughout the European Union and beyond .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Hungary recently approved a law on protecting Hungarian minorities living in neighbouring countries , which evoked various reactions and controversies , particularly in Romania and Slovakia , where the largest of these minorities live and work .
The Hungarian authorities have insisted that this new law does not have any extraterritorial effect and will not have any consequences that are not in complete harmony with the legal systems in force in the neighbouring countries in which these minorities live .
In this regard , I must once again repeat what is stated in the report , which is that the Commission must provide an assessment of this type of law in terms of its compatibility with the Community acquis . The Commission must also appeal to Hungary ' s spirit of good neighbourliness and cooperation with its neighbours and , in general , with all Member States .
The fact that this law contains a provision - Article 27 - laying down the supremacy of Community legislation over its national laws and the fact that the Hungarian government has demonstrated willingness to hold bilateral discussions with its neighbours on issues of the law ' s interpretation and implementation give me grounds for optimism about the resolution of any potential problems that it may raise .
Mr President , in the short speaking time granted to me as rapporteur , I can only present the main conclusions of this report .
I am nevertheless convinced that my fellow Members will agree with me in my interpretation , analysis , and support for this report .
The European Parliament will therefore continue to make its essential contribution to the process of bringing together the European peoples and nations and of truly raising the awareness of the citizens of the Europe of Fifteen and of the applicant countries to the advantages and also to the obligations inherent in European integration .
Mr President , over the past year we have seen many very encouraging developments in terms of Bulgaria 's progress towards accession .
While there have undoubtedly been many areas of disappointment , three months ago there was a very dramatic political development in Bulgaria .
In the general election on 17 June we saw the governing UDF routed by a new political force , the Simeon II National Movement , led by the former King Simeon who , as Simeon Sakskoburggotski , is now Prime Minister and will be visiting European Union institutions and NATO in Brussels for the first time next week .
In the elections some 60 % of the electorate preferred to vote for parties that were not represented in the previous parliament .
It was a resounding vote of no confidence on the government in office , and a heartfelt demand for real progress , improvement and change : a leap of faith .
The previous UDF administration faced enormous difficulties and I wish to acknowledge its success in many areas .
It was the first of the post-communist governments to see out its full term .
It took forward Bulgaria 's application for European Union membership and put Bulgaria in a position formally to open accession negotiations in February 2000 .
As a result , 11 negotiating chapters have now been successfully closed .
A further 10 have been opened and are under negotiation .
It is expected that five more will be opened this year .
Only four chapters therefore will remain to be opened by the beginning of next year .
On the macroeconomic level there has been excellent growth in GDP .
Bulgaria has been a pillar of regional stability , first through all the international difficulties with the Milosevic regime in neighbouring Yugoslavia , then the Kosovo conflict and most recently with the tensions in neighbouring Macedonia .
Bulgaria has acted throughout in a manner supportive of European Union and NATO policies , but the regional instability has inevitably had an impact on the Bulgarian economy and on investor confidence in the region .
But the formal process of negotiation and the aspiration to take reform forward are clearly not enough .
Certainly the Bulgarian political system has confirmed its democratic stability .
Certainly structures have begun to be put in place to deal with the fundamental problems of weak administrative capacity , of corruption and of excluded minorities .
The fact is that most of the people of Bulgaria , through all these difficulties and upheavals , have seen little improvement in their own lives and standards of living .
My report is in effect a final report on the performance of the last government and an indicator as to the problems that need to be addressed by the new administration .
The challenge for the new government is to maintain its coherence and to translate its aspirations , its ambitious programme , into concrete reality .
I am very encouraged by what I have heard so far .
The new government team , particularly concerning the economy , balances its vitality and enthusiasm with professional competence and a degree of modesty in view of the tasks ahead .
The priorities for the government are continuity and the preparations for European Union and NATO membership , with acceleration of political and economic reform , concentrating on tax reforms to stimulate the economy , squeezing out corruption , reform of the judiciary , modernisation of the customs service and border security , and legal changes to ensure that Bulgaria has a functioning market economy through amendment of banking laws and improvement in the bankruptcy laws .
In many ways the new team offers a breath of fresh air .
It has a clear agenda and is willing to consider novel solutions drawing on sound experience from other countries .
It will be judged by the quality , rather than quantity , of its legislation , by its ability to implement its policies and by its determination to bring about real reform that will benefit the population at large in a tangible manner .
At a time of regional crisis and an international economic downturn , this will not be easy .
It is time to build the widest possible consensus for reform in Bulgaria .
Bulgaria previously set itself the target of concluding negotiations by 2004 with a view to European Union membership by 2007 .
Many regard this as ambitious , but not unrealistic .
I have agreed to remove such references from my resolution for the sake of consistency with the approach adopted in the other enlargement reports .
I do not support amendments which would seek to add further conditionality to Bulgaria 's membership application .
Of course each candidate country should be judged on its own progress towards accession , without any hidden political barriers and without having to follow the course of any other candidate country .
I trust this House will give every encouragement to Bulgaria and its new government on the path to EU and NATO accession and support my resolution .
I feel sure that the new government of Bulgaria will respond positively to the points that I have made .
Mr President , I thank my colleagues in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy for giving me another opportunity to work on Romania 's accession to the European Union of Romania .
At the moment , Romania has a unique opportunity , unequalled in modern times , to make very swift progress .
For the first time in living history , it has a stable government , elected on a democratic mandate .
It has clear political leadership , a greater understanding of the European Union 's Community values and exceptionally good economic signals .
The reform process is under way under the tutelage of the European Commission and with the efforts the Romanian administration has made on the acquis communautaire a larger number of chapters is under negotiation now than had been anticipated .
If Romania continues to move ahead in this way and has the courage to undertake the painful political structural reforms , there is nothing to stop Romania joining the European Union without delay and it is pleasing to know that 79 % of Romanians are enthusiastic about this prospect .
The accession process is continuing .
The number of chapters is increasing and I am pleased to announce that the Commission could receive all the position papers from the Ministry by Christmas , if it is able to do so .
Certainly that is what the European Ministry for Integration in Romania is hoping for .
President Iliescu announced in Gothenburg that he hoped and believed that all chapters could be fulfilled during his period of office .
We in Parliament are dismayed and I am sure others must be too , that the visa restrictions have not yet been lifted .
The Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs are meeting today and I sincerely hope that they will come to the conclusion that visa restrictions are no longer necessary for Romanian citizens .
It is pleasing to note that the German Ambassador to Romania last week opened the new embassy by laying the foundation stone and saying that this embassy will have no visa section .
The Romanian Government has decided to be judged by action and not by words .
It has already done excellent foreign affairs work through Romania 's chairmanship of the OSCE and made excellent progress in its relationships with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund .
It might be dogged by poverty , but good things have happened ; industrial productivity has gone up by 17 % and inflation is coming down little by little .
Romania 's largest investor is still France , but other EU Member States such as Germany , Italy , Greece and the United Kingdom are coming in .
It has at the same time been cementing its relationship with North America and particularly with the USA .
But Romania 's destiny remains in Europe and her future lies with NATO and the European Union .
Perhaps Ceausescu 's bitter legacy , however , was responsible for the fact that the political will for change was slower to emerge in Romania than in some other former Soviet Union candidate countries .
Indeed , the treatment of children in Romania , as the Commissioner mentioned this morning , rapidly became a global media horror story .
Today , however , Romania is in the process of change , helped all the way along the line by the Commission 's faultless work in Brussels and Bucharest and guided by long-term friends here in Parliament right across the political spectrum .
We are working as a team to assist Romania in her progress towards the European Union .
As the Commissioner said on another occasion , the progress of integration is unstoppable .
Romania is an integral part of that process and social change in the last few months has been rapid .
Gay rights are now part of law , an anti-trafficking law has recently been passed and domestic violence law has gone through .
A children 's act , on children 's rights , which will incorporate adoption law , both local and international , is now being prepared .
The high-level group for Romanian children is moving towards registration .
This will incorporate a wise persons ' panel to assess Romania 's capacity to come back into the inter-country adoption world when the time is right .
It is imperative that the children 's act is not hurried .
Local adoptions have doubled in the last few months and 20 000 children are leaving special schools this week and will be going back into normal schools and normal life .
That is tremendous progress .
Here may I pay special tribute to my Spanish colleagues in the European Parliament , who have had many pressures on them from different families in Spain .
I am delighted that the new Romanian Government has nominated very competent officials to review the problems that these Spanish families are facing .
I will keep a very careful eye on this and report back to my Spanish colleagues .
In conclusion , Romania has much to offer the European Union and the world .
Its deep-rooted knowledge of its early European status in the Roman Empire gives it every encouragement to work through these difficult times and in due course become a full Member of the European Union .
Mr President , Slovenia hopes to be among the first of the 12 boats who will enter the European Union in 2004 to cross the finishing line , to use an image often employed by Commissioner Verheugen ; just this morning it was stipulated that there can be no turning back now .
Indeed , Ljubljana hopes to finish incorporating the Community acquis during the Spanish Presidency , within the second half of next year that is , maintaining the steady rhythm demanded by the current Belgian Presidency as well .
The Slovenians have been diligent in closing the chapters of the acquis , and they have succeeded in resolving some very complex issues , a prime example being the environment , for which they received recognition from the European visitors to Ljubljana .
Slovenia surprised the European Union by concluding , before the deadline moreover , the negotiations on the free transfer of capital as early as spring 2001 , despite some problems with opinion makers .
In Ljubljana , the difficulties which would arise for the Slovenian government in terms of public opinion if the dates were to be put back and the Slovenians , who were obviously very pleased to see the conclusions of the Gothenburg and earlier Summits , were not to enter Europe , were explained to the European guests .
As usually happens in the last stage of the entry of a country into Europe , the sceptics come out of the woodwork , but it is often a matter of internal political tactics .
Slovenia is aware that it must settle the issue of the restoration of goods within the time frames specified , even though in some - quite clear-cut - cases , appeals to the courts have slowed the process down .
However , the time limits for the charges have expired in any case , and there are also delays in denationalising foreign capital .
In any case , Slovenia is one of the countries where , despite macro- and microeconomic stability , foreign capital flows are very low and are often just the result of reinvestment from previous years .
Greater transparency - a word used very frequently in this Chamber - was required in order to proceed to privatisation , so that the launching of companies , banks and enterprises on the market does not end up being a purely national affair , with foreign investors being kept at bay .
The privatisation rules have finally been fixed with the large banks as well , in which the State will continue to hold - for a certain period of time at least - a sort of golden share or what is known as the ' veto ' holding .
Foreign interest exists in this sector and negotiations are in progress .
Slovenia is currently working strenuously for stability in the central and southern region , and , following the disappearance of Milosevic , the issue has become a little less dramatic .
There are psychological reserves in this field : " We have not yet set foot in Europe " reflect some observers , " and already international capital is threatening to restrict our sovereignty " .
This is a development which is evident in other small ex-royal socialist countries .
Nevertheless , Slovenia gives the impression of realising that it must complete opening-up of the market within the time frames laid down in the agreement with Europe .
Various measures such as providing backup for the courts which are swamped with work or creating an ad hoc mobile group of judges to support the district courts with the greatest backlog are speeding up the work related to the many outstanding civil actions , most of which concern precisely the issue of the restitution of goods and property .
The Commission ' s report bewails the sluggishness of the administrative system : laws have been adopted in this area too .
Slovenia is prepared to amend its Constitution to bring it into line with the conditions for accession to Europe .
With regard to relations with neighbouring countries , it has , notably , a cultural agreement with Austria in which it acknowledges the existence of a German-speaking community in the country and , not long ago - and this is a very important issue - the sea and land borders with Croatia were defined .
They are currently being ratified by the two parliaments .
These are the major events which have taken place in the area of cross-border cooperation .
The macroeconomic indicators are still positive and inflation and unemployment are below the European average , while the GDP is not far off the European average .
Considering the preparations which have been made or are currently being completed , Slovenia seems well prepared for integration into the European Community .
Mr President , for the second year running , I have the honour of presenting you with the report on Cyprus ' membership application to the European Union .
The motion for a resolution before you was adopted in committee by 55 votes to 2 with 1 abstention .
It proves to be an account with many contrasts .
On the one hand , it underlines Cyprus ' excellent performance in relation to the adoption of the acquis : 23 chapters have already been closed and the remaining chapters do not present insurmountable difficulties .
On the other hand , the motion deplores the continuing division of the island .
The hopes that the international community had placed in proximity talks , held under the aegis of the United Nations , were dashed last November by the unilateral withdrawal of Mr Denktash from the process .
This withdrawal has been supported by Turkey to this day .
Although precious time has been wasted in the process of trying to find a solution to the political problem before accession , I can only recommend that the European Parliament adhere firmly to its previous position founded on International Law and justice .
This position , which is also that of the United Nations , the Council of Europe and all the other European institutions , including the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , was confirmed on 10 May 2001 by the European Court of Human Rights .
The political solution we seek cannot include the persistence of a de facto situation created by force .
It must , on the other hand , turn the page on the past and resolutely face the future .
The Secretary-General of the United Nations made a proposal to both the Greek and the Turkish Cypriots for a federal system based upon a democratic model that would respect the distinct characteristics of each of the parties .
Such models work in many European countries - Germany , Belgium and Switzerland among others - where they have proven both their viability and their vitality .
Solutions to all longstanding issues can be found through the negotiation process , whether these issues be the reciprocal wrongs which have accumulated since 1960 ( the problem of refugees , property , the retreat of troops , for example ) , with the support , as the need arises , of the International Community .
Cyprus ' problems are not irresolvable if the political will is there to give a boost to proceedings now .
The cold war is over .
All the walls in Europe have been knocked down .
The enemies of yesteryear have become our partners .
It would be in the widely acknowledged common interest of all countries in our region , especially Turkey , to resolve this bone of contention .
Both communities on the island - and recent opinion polls are proof of this - want to be part of the European Union .
Those who have chosen stagnation as their only strategy , maybe as a strategy for survival , should respect this will .
By guaranteeing a large majority to the motion for a resolution on Cyprus , the European Parliament will strengthen the negotiating position of Mr Kofi Annan .
In late 2001 and early 2002 , the General Secretary of the United Nations will have a last chance to make a breakthrough in intercommunity negotiations .
If , however , his efforts continue to be sabotaged by one of the parties , history will forever condemn those who are opposed to international order .
Should this happen , the European Union can only honour its engagement made at the highest level at Helsinki in December 1999 , being conscious of the fact that a political settlement does not constitute a prerequisite for the accession of Cyprus to the European Union .
In the meantime , I can only call on the legitimate government of Cyprus to contribute steadfastly to the removal of obstacles to remaining problems so that accession negotiations can be settled before the end of 2002 .
Mr President , this is already the second report on Malta which I have had the honour of tabling .
The European Parliament without doubt views the accession process of Malta , this small Mediterranean island at the interface between the European Union and Africa , positively and is supporting it constructively .
The report is , on the one hand , guided by the Copenhagen criteria , which apply equally to all of the accession countries , and on the other hand , it examines Malta 's special characteristics , which result from its island position and from its economic and social structure .
Malta 's basic political situation is , of course , unchanged .
Malta is continuing to fulfil the Copenhagen political criteria .
Its institutions are democratic and function smoothly .
There are no particular problems as regards human rights .
The overall situation as far as economic , social and cultural rights are concerned is satisfactory .
In terms of the economy , Malta is a functioning market economy and is in a position to withstand competition from the EU in the medium term , provided that it carries out the structural reforms that are still pending .
Malta is doing well in this field , with regard both to phasing out import levies on finished products by 2003 and abolishing the remaining capital controls by the end of 2002 .
The far-reaching privatisation programme which was adopted in 1999 , and which includes plans to privatise major utilities over the next five years , is also heading in the right direction .
The reduction of the budget deficit from 11.8 % of GDP in 1998 to 5 % this year is a positive and significant result , as are the positive developments in the economic data .
Despite oil prices , inflation stood at 2.4 % in November 2000 and , after rising slightly in 1999 , the unemployment rate fell to 5.3 % of those capable of gainful employment .
It should be borne in mind , however , that this positive process needs to be consolidated by a further cut in structural expenditure .
The favourable progress that Malta has made towards joining the EU is also reflected in the stage that it has reached in the accession negotiations .
With 17 chapters , Malta heads the list of those candidates which were able to open negotiations only in 2000 .
This shows that Malta has made up the time lost through the 22-month suspension of negotiations and is therefore well placed to be in the first round of new Member States .
As far as Malta 's general political situation is concerned , namely the different positions of the government on EU accession on the one hand , and the opposition on the other , not only has nothing changed but the views of the government and the Labour opposition have if anything become more polarised .
As rapporteur , I can only note this with regret .
Of course this does not mean that the European Parliament should ignore the position of the Labour Party , which would like Malta to follow in Switzerland 's footsteps .
Nonetheless , we must do all we can to safeguard the continuity of Malta 's accession process and therefore to support a constructive dialogue with all its constitutive entities and at every level of its society .
The matters of particular concern to the European Parliament in relation to Malta 's accession process , of course , include issues related to internal security and maritime safety .
As far as internal security is concerned , Malta has now set out an effective policy to combat corruption and money laundering , which will allow Malta both to accede to the Council of Europe 's Criminal Law Convention on Corruption and to ratify the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions and thus to respond to a short-term priority of the Accession Partnership .
In the environmental field too , we endorse Malta 's efforts to support short-term priorities of the Accession Partnership to maintain clean air and water and to stem rising levels of waste , and are thus sympathetic towards Malta 's policy to ban the use of plastic bottles .
In my capacity as rapporteur I also showed sympathy for Malta 's specific concerns about the free movement of persons and its fears of there being an influx of foreign workers onto its labour market .
The Commission 's concession on the free movement of persons takes account of this rather psychologically conditioned fear .
Malta is not a country in transition .
It has repeatedly referred to the fact that it should like to be treated on the same footing as the other accession countries .
The Commission 's efforts to make sources of funding available here so as to make up for this shortcoming are to be welcomed .
On the other hand , the Maltese authorities need to make the necessary preparations to enable structural and regional aid to be administered on a decentralised basis .
I should just like to turn briefly to the Council .
Malta 's position on the agricultural chapter should , I hope , also soon be on the table .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , during the Copenhagen Summit , it was rightly stated that the political criteria are central to the assessment of whether a candidate country can be admitted to the Union .
After all , the European Union is primarily an alliance of constitutional states .
That is why we are devoting a great deal of attention to the establishment of democratic institutions in the candidate countries , something in which the Council of Europe too , with its own expertise , is involved in an extremely constructive manner .
We appreciate the difficulties involved in heightening democratic awareness in countries which have for many decades suffered under totalitarian regimes which brought them to political , social and economic ruin .
Fortunately , a great deal of progress is generally to be observed in this field .
All the more painful were the recent reports that the present Romanian Government is trying to ban an opposition party by means of judicial tricks .
We have had similar experiences in Slovakia under Mr Meciar , which led us to suspend the accession process with that country .
The question I should like to ask the Commissioner is the following : is it not time we also indicated to the Romanian Government that this type of suspension will ensue if it continues to take measures which contravene the rule of law ?
This illustrates that independent jurisdiction is particularly beneficial , as is the extent to which the police enforces the rule of law .
The fight against corruption is being tackled bravely in many countries , and I should like to quote Bulgaria in this connection .
Indeed , strengthening society ' s legal infrastructure is extremely beneficial .
However , the concern for the integrity of civil servants , judges , police and administrators is often in stark contrast to the paltry salaries they receive , and I believe that this too should remain an area of attention during the accession process .
European integration is multifaceted and embraces all levels of society .
That is why the exchange programmes and town twinning associations have a practical value , as well as the use of specialist EU institutions , such as the European Drugs Monitoring Centre and the European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia in Vienna .
A concept which , by the way , since Durban , has had all kinds of unpleasant connotations .
That Centre too could play a role in integration and in solving problems in the candidate countries .
My question to the Commissioner is : are these specialist centres involved in the integration of the candidate countries and do they have sufficient capacity ?
Moreover , I share the Commissioner ' s view that , where minorities and non-discrimination are concerned , the social integration of the Roma population - not just in Slovakia or Romania , but in Europe as a whole - is a very difficult task which requires an explicitly European approach .
Mr Wiersma made his views known on this subject earlier .
I share the Commissioner ' s hope that the division in Cyprus will be resolved soon .
If the Cypriot Government continues to do what it can in order to restore unity , the division will not be so much of an obstacle to the Government as it will be in the negotiations with Turkey . And I hope that Turkey takes proper note of this .
Like all the rapporteurs who have already spoken , I am delighted to see that negotiations are advancing and advancing well for all the candidate countries .
Despite the difficulties , the work that has been carried out is considerable .
It must be said that , on a technical level , the negotiators must be congratulated on the great efforts they are making and we also congratulate you , Commissioner .
However , I would like to insist on two points that have not been forgotten but which , in our opinion , should be emphasised .
In the first instance , I am thinking of the social repercussions of enlargement .
It seems that the Commission , the Council and the rest of us should take greater steps to face up to the disorganisation of society that will inevitably result and is already resulting from economic reforms forcibly imposed in the candidate countries .
Restructuring of companies , privatisation , modernisation of working methods , which seem necessary to us , create unemployment , disrupt social protection systems and have disastrous consequences for families and individuals .
Let us all make a greater effort to limit these social problems that could , if we are not careful , become serious political problems .
The second point I want to stress concerns contact with public opinion , both in candidate countries and Member States .
Negotiation should be left to the specialists .
I would once more congratulate them on their responsible approach .
However , the accession of a country to the European Union affects its whole population .
Opinion polls show this .
As the deadline approaches the amount of opposition increases , but so does the number of those who are concerned and anxious .
We need to provide more information and explanations , making things seem as undaunting as possible .
This is a huge exercise in public relations to which the Commission - and we ourselves as well , of course - should devote more effort .
Mr President , it is great to hear the Commission , the Council and Parliament commit themselves so strongly to enlargement , as has happened here today .
Beneath the happy surface , however , there are of course anxieties , also on the part of the people in the candidate countries , and we must listen to these .
As the Commissioner also said , these anxieties cannot be conjured away .
We must not in any way postpone enlargement , but we must listen to countries ' requests for transitional arrangements , whether on the subjects of land purchase or the environment .
An agreement is only sound if both parties are satisfied .
We must not make demands of others that we do not make of ourselves .
I am thinking in this context , for example , of the environmental demands for waste water treatment with which Brussels does not yet , of course , comply .
We must therefore be willing to listen to those countries which wish us to be flexible .
Enlargement is not merely a gift to them on our part . It is also a gift from them to ourselves .
We want them to accede to the EU with their values and their knowledge of what it means not to have freedom and democracy , for that is the most important thing of all .
It is perhaps they who know most of all about this , for it is they who have experienced the loss of freedom and democracy .
Mr President , although I should like to congratulate all the rapporteurs , the two minutes I have prevent me from doing so .
I should like to emphasise two aspects : the treatment of cultural minorities , and information and communication in respect of the population .
The European Union should be more than a market .
It is also a community of citizens and , in addition , a collection of peoples and of smaller and larger cultural communities .
The way in which human rights and the rights of minorities are guaranteed still leads to problems in some countries .
Everything seems to run more smoothly on paper but , in practice , we see , for example , that , in most countries , the Roma are still really being treated like second-class citizens and that we are still being confronted with third-world situations which are on a par with the worst slums in Africa and in third-world cities .
As for the treatment of other minorities , what is written so neatly on paper and in laws appears , once again , not to bear any resemblance to reality .
I would , for example , like to refer to the treatment of the Hungarian minority both in Slovakia and in Romania .
It is not looking so good in practice as it is on paper .
Communication with the population is a major problem because people have substituted a spontaneous enthusiasm for Europe with a more critical stance .
If no promises are made or promises remain unfulfilled , this critical attitude will naturally increase .
However , I do wonder whether the Commission is pursuing the right policy by not addressing the people in those countries in the language of those people .
Is it safe to leave communication entirely to the governments ?
I have noticed that some governments do not even inform their own MPs , never mind whether the population knows what is being said at the wonderful Infopoint in Warsaw in all Member State languages apart from Polish .
I wonder whether we are communicating or simply hiding ?
Mr President , I was very pleased about the speech given on behalf of the Presidency , and I was particularly glad that importance was attached to how people in the candidate countries experience the situation .
We must not ignore the fact that there are to be referendums in quite a lot of the candidate countries .
I hope that people in the candidate countries read , in particular , that part of Mr Brok ' s report consisting of the statements from the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for these , in my opinion , give due weight to what is really important to the individual citizen .
I hope , however , that they do not read the part concerning the common foreign and security policy and , in particular , NATO membership .
We all know that a common European defence would cost a fair amount of money .
Calculations show that , for our part of Europe , it would mean a 50 % increase in budgets .
I dare not even imagine what it would mean for the candidate countries .
I hope that people read the good part of the reports , and I hope that it is this , and not all the other parts , that will be pivotal to the enlargement process .
Mr President , I should like to thank and congratulate all the rapporteurs .
To pick up on something Mr Haarder has already mentioned , our duty and responsibility is to the countries of eastern Europe , not because of the gift that we give them but because of the new enthusiasm and spirit that they can bring into what is becoming a stagnating European Union .
In particular I want to focus on Hungary .
As one of the leaders and front runners for enlargement , it has proved itself capable of throwing off the yoke of totalitarian communism and building a new market-based economy , creating new opportunities in education , improving its infrastructure and industrial capacity and developing its tourism and agriculture .
It has already completed 22 of its 31 chapters of accession to the European Union .
I welcome the implementation of the SAPARD programme to help further rural development and community development within Hungary .
In particular , I call upon the Commission to help alleviate some of the difficulties the Hungarian negotiators are facing with internal bureaucracies within the Commission and speed up that whole process .
In conclusion , we must open our arms and welcome the rejuvenation that the arrival of the countries from central and eastern Europe will bring about .
Mr President on the basis of the Christian idea of charity , I wholeheartedly support enlargement of the European Union .
Much to my delight , the Communist system collapsed in Central and Eastern Europe in 1989 .
That happiness was generally shared in Western Europe at the time .
It now requires a sequel , namely our aid to the candidate countries , to enable them to join the European Union and , in that way , actually return to Europe .
This line of thinking also shows realism , for the predominantly eastward enlargement of the Union benefits the Member States and candidate countries politically and economically speaking .
Just to give you an example : after 1988 , reciprocal trade experienced turbulent growth .
The resolution following Mr Brok ' s oral question is right , therefore , to underline the shared benefits of the enlargement process .
However , this view of enlargement is definitely not shared by everyone .
This is borne out by recent opinion polls .
These studies show a contrast between general public opinion in the candidate countries and that within the 15 EU Member States .
In the candidate countries , enlargement is widely supported . In the Member States , however , only 43 % of the citizens can muster any real enthusiasm .
In fact , in a number of EU countries , those against outnumber those in favour by quite a margin . As if the burden and insecurities of this major enlargement were to rest on EU shoulders only .
Moreover , Mr Brok ' s motion for a resolution does not take account of this imbalanced public opinion .
It encourages both Member States and candidate countries to provide their populations with more and better information .
I fear that that will not entirely cause the noted lack of European commitment to disappear .
Whatever the case , the incentive in the resolution is mainly aimed at the Member States .
However , those in favour are not alone by any means .
The EU Member States are most definitely populated by scores of people who feel for Central and Eastern Europeans .
The extent of their initiatives , private or church-based , since time immemorial , and often long before the fall of the Berlin Wall , speak for themselves .
Members of the Council and the Commission : make sure you definitely involve these allies in your information campaigns on enlargement .
I would like to turn to another point of the motion for a resolution which caught my attention .
Paragraph 49 states that there is no need for candidate countries to meet stricter conditions than the Member States themselves .
That seems to me to be self-evident . What is more , the European Union has explicitly restricted its admission requirements to compliance with the Copenhagen criteria .
As long as the candidate countries cannot co-determine far-reaching cooperation in various areas of policy - such as the CFSP and the asylum , immigration and monetary policies - the European Union may not impose new criteria in these areas .
Mr President , there is a saying in Dutch which means that the last mile is the longest one .
This will once again be apparent when we complete the accession negotiations with candidate countries which have made most progress .
After all , there are a number of difficult issues left to deal with .
I hope that the European Union will know how to give a tangible sign of its willingness to enlarge .
Moreover , to quote the well-known biblical saying , it is better to give than to receive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following today ' s debate on enlargement , we will have to reach a verdict on an overall motion for a resolution formulated by our fellow member , Mr Brok .
The merit of this text is that it takes the decision of the Irish people to reject the Nice Treaty seriously and does not disguise , and I quote , " the uncertainty " that this brings into " the timetable for enlargement " .
We are therefore very pleased to see Mr Brok himself include , in point 2 of his motion for a resolution , the recommendation made by us the very day after the Irish vote , to include alternative solutions within the framework of the accession treaties .
On the other hand , it is completely unacceptable to exploit the result of the Irish referendum to justify the abandonment of the intergovernmental process .
If current Intergovernmental Conference practice is often opaque and unintelligible , this is not due to the method itself which associates governments that have been democratically elected by their citizens .
It would not be at all difficult to make the intergovernmental process more transparent and comprehensible .
We must take practical steps to achieve this , keeping away from the pursuit of ideologies which , when we do not approve of a decision , lead us to conclude that , in order to prevent such a thing being repeated , the legal framework within which it occurred needs to be abolished by majority vote .
This really would be a case of hallucinatory thinking , or , as our fellow member Mr Berthu stated last night , a regulatory illusion .
The lesson to be learnt from the Irish referendum is certainly not that we must make the process of European integration even more undemocratic .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic and political benefits of enlargement will undoubtedly be far greater than its probable cost to the budget .
I would add that this is already the case today .
Nevertheless , it is our task precisely as one arm of the budgetary authority to discuss and engage in some serious and sober preliminary budgetary planning - at the same time allaying our emotions and fears - and to approach the figures in a rational way .
On the basis of our experience with the pre-accession programme and given the take-up capacities and administrative structures in the new Member States , we can also assume that in respect of both agricultural policy and the Structural Funds integration into the Community programmes will be gradual .
On this basis , even if ten new countries join before 2006 in a big bang , we will be able to meet the financial requirements of enlargement up until then within the financial perspective , as agreed in Agenda 2000 : EUR 7 billion in the final stage for agricultural policy given gradual integration and from EUR 6.1 billion in 2004 to around EUR 10.9 billion for structural policy , and this compared with a current Commission preliminary draft budget of around EUR 100 billion for 2002 to put it in context .

There is no doubt , however , that for the period after 2006 , even taking into account compliance with future world trade obligations , we will very probably have to discuss the issue of revenue and expenditure in the European budget because in the final stages in 2013 these comparative figures could amount to EUR 17 billion and EUR 26 billion respectively .
Let us not confine ourselves to looking at these two areas of budgetary policy .
I have grave concerns about whether the Commission 's reflections on how Europe is to be governed or the practical plans in this House to overcome the languages problem really do take sufficient account of the requirements which will need to be met if we really are to safeguard European national identities and preserve the ability of the European institutions to act in the interests of the citizens of a larger European Union .
A further far more intensive debate needs to be initiated here to ensure that we are capable of acting in the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the development of Estonia and Latvia has been rapid and I congratulate those nations on such an achievement .
Freedom and independence incite nations into action .
This should also be the case with people , and the control of individuals over their own lives needs , of course , to improve .
This is not a project for some élite , and this point must now become clear in these applicant countries .
Europe 's boom phase of economic growth has now ended .
In the opinion of many we are on the way to a downturn , even a recession .
This economic standstill will affect those applicant countries even more than our economies , since the former are considerably more frail .
The popularity of the Union has , however , declined in many applicant countries such as Estonia to less than half of what it was , even before this economic standstill which has now taken place in Europe .
The fact that a severe budgetary discipline has been followed is , in these Member States , seen as one reason for this .
A downturn would reduce further the popularity enjoyed by the Union .
For this reason then I ask , and urge as a priority , that we energetically seize the challenge of narrowing social differences and the social and economic gulf , since this is the base upon which we will be able to get the large majority of people in these countries to support membership .
This also means that unemployment within the Union itself must not grow , otherwise it will erode the very base and the broad support for enlargement which exist here within the Union .
In other words , the worsening economic situation may pose a threat to enlargement within the agreed or envisaged timetable .
Therefore , let us get to grips with social inequality before this entire matter is pushed too far into the future .
Mr President , it is fantastic to live through this exciting period in the history of Europe when we are finally unifying the continent .
I hope that , in just a few years ' time , our new friends and colleagues will be able to sit down here with us in the Chamber instead of just listening from the gallery .
We shall then be able to unite in solving the problems that exist and in creating good conditions of life for the citizens of Europe , and not before time .
It will soon be twelve years since the fall of the Berlin Wall , and many Europeans promised that those countries which had finally thrown off the yoke of communism would quickly be able to obtain membership of the EU .
There is still a great deal to do , and this is also described in the excellent reports we are discussing today .
Great progress is being made , and I am delighted that the Belgian presidency has such lofty ambitions .
It is important that no more demands should be made now .
There is more than a little to do in the EU , as well .
Many of us are disappointed at the poor result from Nice and hope that Laeken will prove to be very ambitious .
Integration is a mutual process that requires efforts on the part both of ourselves and of the future Member States .
However , we together have a huge task in convincing the population in all the countries of the practical benefits of a united Europe .
It is also a question of communicating pride in the Europe we have built so far and the Europe we shall build together .
Mrs President , Commissioner , in the current political situation there is no political alternative to enlargement supported by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , as our group chairman has already stated .
The future of the European Union is not and should not be enlargement , contrary to what the President-in-Office of the Council said in his introductory speech .
The future after 2004 of an enlarged Union is uncharted territory .
The Union could be a consolidated free trade area , or else a supranational Union where objectives of sustainable development and social cohesion are the fundamental objectives of a reformed policy .
If we fight for this second option , then the next Intergovernmental Conference in 2003-2004 will be the last chance for the Fifteen to correct the failures of Nice and assume their responsibilities so that a Union of 27 Member States can be governed democratically and effectively .
The question is not , however , of a purely institutional nature : it is also a budgetary issue .
If a policy of solidarity between the Member States is pursued , this means that , in the future , the Union ' s financial resources will have to be increased for , in economic terms , the integration of the markets of the candidate countries with those of the Union has been taking place for 10 years at the cost of increasing territorial and social inequalities in the candidate countries .
Current European aid is essential and alleviates the cost of the transition , but if we really want to preserve a model of European society based upon solidarity and negotiation between all players in a 27-State European Union , there needs to be a clear commitment from both sides to this objective that exceeds the commitment to incorporating the Community acquis and will oblige each of the 15 current members to provide additional aid .
If we want enlargement to be a success whilst preserving our chances of an interdependent Europe , we must not , as Mr Verheugen rightly said , bury our heads in the sand .
From this point of view , I am very shocked by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy ' s rejection of the majority of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Mr President , I think this is an excellent set of reports and that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has done a good job .
Having said which , I think that no-one can hide their concern about how the enlargement of the European Union is proceeding and about the serious repercussions , especially the social repercussions , in a number of countries moving towards accession .
As president of the EU-Bulgaria Joint Parliamentary Committee , I should like to say that , yes , there has been important intervention on the part of the European Union and issues such as the nuclear sector , restructuring of the agricultural sector and investment programmes in Bulgaria have been given positive momentum ; however , at the same time , I cannot , for example , ignore the recent EUROSTAT report published a week ago , which shows that social rights fought for in Bulgaria are literally being demolished .
I think we need to look into all this .
Mr President , I am pleased to participate in this important debate on the enlargement of the European Union and in particular to acknowledge progress on Malta 's application for membership .
This House was pleased when in September 1998 the government of Malta informed the Presidency of its intention to reactivate Malta 's application and since then , with the structures put in place by the government , Malta has demonstrated its sincerity and determination to become part of an integrated and enlarged Europe .
Coming as I do from a small island state similar to Malta , I can testify to the EU 's commitment to the development of small and underdeveloped peripheral regions .
In my view , despite the many criticisms , the vision of Europe 's founding fathers continues to be realised .
I look forward to the participation of Malta and other applicant countries in the Europe of the new millennium .
It is worth noting that by June 2001 Malta had closed negotiations on over 17 different chapters , including important issues ranging from education and training to telecommunications , fisheries and consumer protection .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make five points from the point of view of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Firstly , where the reunification of Europe is concerned , all of us are aware of its historical dimension and our own political and moral responsibility .
It must succeed and it will succeed because it is right and proper .
Secondly , the economic data show positive developments .
Economic growth in Central and Eastern Europe continues to be above the EU average .
The macroeconomic situation has improved .
EU exports to the accession countries are on the up and the accession countries are already benefiting now from the accession negotiations because under this process they are also being given orientation aid for necessary reforms , which would have had to be implemented anyway after 50 years of Communist dictatorship , even if they did not have the prospect of joining the EU .
Thirdly , and the Commissioner touched on this , economic and monetary union - the euro - will not be achieved immediately upon accession .
It is important that we point out that once the Copenhagen criteria have been fulfilled , the Maastricht criteria will need to be met - without any opting-out clauses and that this will probably require at least another three , four , five or more years .
Fourthly , money and balance sheets are , after all , not the be-all and end-all .
The economic indicators are positive , but they are only a means to an end and not an end in themselves .
We said this today in the debate on the Middle East : a means to an end which is to create peace , provide security , guarantee social stability , build up a democratic polity and safeguard growth and employment .
Fifthly , there is much to be done : to meet the stability criteria , to regulate state aid , to remove regional disparities , to reform pensions , social security and health services , to make rapid progress on privatisation , and to guarantee the independence of the judiciary and the public authorities .
We have reached an important stage .
We look towards the goal with optimism .
Mr President , I wish to join with others in also expressing my delight at the support shown for enlargement today .
It is crucial that the EU send out a signal that we desire enlargement for our own sakes .
It is also important , however , that there should be broad grassroots support for the project among the populations of the candidate countries .
It is , of course , the countries themselves that must hold the debates on membership , but it is also our task to ensure that the conditions are of such a kind that this development is perceived as progress by the populations of the candidate countries too and that they are not given the feeling that it is a case of the strong riding roughshod over the weak .
Enlargement must therefore be based upon mutuality , respect and equality . Above all , we must , for our part , understand that there will naturally be changes to the way in which the EU develops once new countries and people come on board .
Their starting points are not always the same as ours , and it is precisely that fact which can also be a source of enrichment for us .
Mr President , I welcome the debate this afternoon and welcome Mr Verheugen 's comments this morning , which were extremely positive .
I should like to make one crucial point .
The key to the enlarged community has to be the integrity of the single market .
We must ensure that the complete integrity of that single market will emerge at the end of these negotiations .
If it is not the case , then there will be considerable resistance to enlargement from businesses in the Community and from the workers in the Community who feel themselves disadvantaged .
I take one particular example .
Recently in the Czech Republic there was restructuring in the banking sector .
One of the major banks in the Czech Republic - IPB - was forced into administration and this was done to the benefit of another bank - CSOB .
There appears to have been some use of state aids to support the position of the CSOB in order to support the position of a private sector rival to the IPB .
Clearly that whole saga is very unsatisfactory .
It is not transparent and it is not in accordance with the terms of the association agreement .
We must ensure that those sorts of events do not continue to happen .
As chairman of the joint parliamentary committee , I should also like to say a few words in relation to Lithuania .
I welcome Mrs Souladakis ' report .
It is clear that the Lithuanian government has made enormous strides to catch up .
I am very hopeful that they will be alongside the original group within the next 12 months .
But again , they have to ensure implementation of the single market , particularly as regards counterfeiting in the audiovisual sector .
Ladies and gentlemen , it will not come as a surprise to anyone that I , as a member of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , will be broaching the subject of women , for a not inconsiderable majority of the population of the candidate countries consists of women .
Very vulnerable women , at that .
Let us not forget that most accession countries are also countries of origin and transit of trafficking in women .
Let us also , therefore , discuss women for a change , as opposed to farmers , employers , trade unions , and the like .
Let us talk about this large majority whom we wish to make Europe-minded and not frightened of Europe .
If we do not devote any attention to that group , things are bound to go wrong .
We therefore need to set up a proper information campaign by means of which women ' s organisations , but also all individual women in the country or in the cities , can be reached for the purpose of explaining , among other things , the acquis communautaire as it relates to women .
In that way , Europe stands a better chance of being accepted , and the situation for women will improve considerably .
Finally , I should like to point out that , in his speech this morning , Commissioner Verheugen failed altogether to mention the situation of women in the candidate countries , something which I deeply regret .
Mr President , I am positive from Greece 's experience that , contrary to what Mr Brok ' s motion for a resolution maintains , the already frightful situation in the nations preparing for accession to the European Union will deteriorate even further , given that the purpose of accession is to serve big business , not the workers ; workers who , in the run up to accession , are already feeling the pernicious political , social and economic repercussions of privatisation and the surrender of their economies to foreign economic interests .
For reasons of solidarity , therefore , we must vote against the reports .
We do not want to be accomplices .
As far as Cyprus is concerned , we have taken note of the positive points in the Poos report , which is why we shall abstain rather than vote against it .
However , our general political position , as stated above , also applies here .
We also note that the pre-accession procedure , especially post-Helsinki , has not only failed to resolve the Cyprus question , it has encouraged Ankara and its vassal Denktash to take an even more intransigent stance .
We are particularly worried by the fact that accession negotiations are being used to pressurise the Cypriot leadership into accepting a federal solution , i.e. into legally recognising the invasion and occupation of Cypriot territory and totally abandoning the relevant UN resolutions .
I refer you to the statements on the matter made by the president of the European Council , Mr Michel .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in most cases , the alienation between institutions and citizens revolves around people ' s prosperity .
The issues that are around in our countries are a fear of immigrants , anxiety about loss of jobs and concerns surrounding the relocation of businesses .
Those issues are equally present in the candidate countries , where joining the European Union is measured by the acquisition of , and increase in , income and by employment .
If we study the latest employment figures in the Central European countries , we see that employment has fallen everywhere in 1999 and 2000 , except in Hungary , Lithuania and Slovenia .
This is why it is vital that we give our attention to this development .
As far as social policy is concerned , I should like to talk mainly about two points .
I tend to think along the same lines as Mrs Maes .
Paper is accommodating , but one must also learn to read between the lines and look for the hidden meaning .
I should first like to turn my attention to social security .
The great danger is that traditional social security will be dismantled before the new system of social security is operational or is fully operational . As a consequence , a whole generation of people will not be able to benefit from either system .
My experience and the discussions I have had in a number of countries show this to be true .
This is a terrible prospect , since it indicates that a large group of people are becoming poorer .
These people compare the situation with the previous one and feel that they are worse off now than in the past .
That is the first point and I would ask the Commission to focus much more closely on the problem of social security than it has done to date .
Secondly , I should like to mention the organisations which are being set up and developed by the social partners .
Again on the basis of my local contacts , my observation is that here too things are progressing with great difficulty and very slowly .
So , we must once again look beyond the words and face reality .
Let us help them and let us help the social partners to help each other .
. ( NL ) Mr President , to my surprise I have just heard in the English interpretation of proceedings that my name is now Michel .
It is true that I work closely with Minister Michel , but full metamorphosis has not yet taken place .
I should like to begin , ladies and gentlemen , by apologising for the fact that I arrived a little late and was not here promptly at 3 p.m.
That was because I was also taking part on behalf of the presidency in the Conference of Committee Chairmen .
Since I do not have the gift of ubiquity , I could not be here on time , for which I again apologise .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , many of you have referred either during this morning ' s speeches or in the ( incidentally very interesting ) reports that you have introduced - usually with much pleasure and sympathy - to the contacts you have had with people in the candidate countries , the visits you have made , and so on .
The same applies to me .
I have been visiting the capitals of all candidate countries with which we have entered into negotiations at least once and , in certain cases , twice , three times or more .
It is true that that creates a bond and leads to a more than purely theoretical political interest in the countries concerned .
I find it almost touching to see how you , in your progress reports , are concerned almost like godparents with the welfare of the candidate countries on which you have to report .
I should , by the way , like to emphasise that this Parliament , in its successive constituent forms , has been one of the great engines of enlargement .
An engine that has never misfired and never stopped , and I believe that you can wear that badge with pride .
But there is more .
I should like in particular , not only echoing Mrs Lalumière , but also because it reflects my own feelings , to congratulate most sincerely the Commission , Commissioner Verheugen and his department on the gigantic task of negotiation that they are carrying out .
At present , they are conducting over 300 different sets of negotiations .
You have only to multiply the number of headings by the number of Member States .
Of course I know that there are parallels , but two cases are never entirely similar .
Public opinion , which is scarcely aware of this because it is insufficiently informed , therefore thinks that accession is taking so long because we are either having second thoughts or because we have not taken particularly effective decisions .
It has no clear idea of how complex this whole matter is .
That is not the fault of public opinion .
That is the fault of all those , including ourselves , who have not told the public the facts .
Although the work is not yet complete , it has been said that the end is in sight .
As a result , tension is rising , of course , as are the number of sweepstakes on who will be crossing the finishing line first .
I agree entirely with Commissioner Verheugen that it would be wrong of us to speculate at this point on which candidate countries will be in the first wave and which will not .
It is still far too early , but we must all start discussing together how we can effectively translate these accessions into reality .
I would like , if I may , to tell a little anecdote here to highlight just one aspect of all this : when Sweden , Finland and Austria joined - and that was also a chronicle of a much-heralded fact that had long been known about - there were nevertheless insufficient interpreters and translators .
That problem will , of course , become even more complex , but all the institutions will have discuss this too in good time .
I said this morning that enlargement is the future of the Union .
Mr Jonckheer , a compatriot of mine but from a different party , has denied that , saying that the future is uncertain .
I repeat what I said this morning . I must add that I did not say this just for formality ' s sake .
I said it because I am firmly convinced that it is true , although I am just as prepared to say that the future will not be limited to enlargement , but that is the first great challenge that we have to meet in the near future . That is absolutely certain .
My country ' s Prime Minister shares this view , and in fact will undoubtedly be providing , and I say this to you very definitely , a role for candidate countries in his proposals for the preparation for the IGC .
This is in answer to a concern expressed this morning by group chairman , Mr Poettering .
During the so-called " Gymnich meeting " at the end of this week , the candidate countries will be taking part in the discussions on the future of Europe .
During the informal Council of Ghent and , of course , during the European Council of Laeken , enlargement will be discussed at length .
It will be approached in the spirit that Commissioner Verheugen and I myself set out and also in the spirit which you have supported almost without exception in your respective speeches .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , the enlargement of the European Union is certainly the most fascinating and most important project that we are working on .
I fully agree with this .
In this respect I believe that the future is certain , as you said ; the timing may not be quite certain but it will happen and that is good , that is important .
This should not , however , blind us to the fact that there are still a number of problems which need to be resolved in the process or that enlargement in itself will also create problems which we will need to overcome , and which must not be a reason to delay or abandon the process .
One of these problem areas is , without a doubt , the social issue , which has already been mentioned by previous speakers , because the accession of the enlargement candidates will also make the gulf between rich and poor within the European Union wider .
It is not because the rich are now becoming poorer but because these questions are being posed afresh in the Union ; consequently cohesion policy will gain a new and even more important task .
Where rich and poor meet , in particular in the border regions , this will of course also lead to problems because amongst the rich there are also pockets of poorer people and less qualified workers who feel threatened .
Solutions need to be found here .
I am very grateful to the Commission and the Council for identifying a reasonable standard which is to be applied flexibly and for as short a period as possible because the aim is integration .
Integration means living together , not only living alongside each other but living together and growing together .
This is an important task which we need to carry out together step by step .
A second problem which I should like to touch on is the problem of minorities .
Increasingly , of course , we are all living in a continent of minorities .
The protection of minorities is an important task which we have not yet fully achieved in the existing Union either .
Although it is legitimate to protect these minorities , we must , however , also endeavour to prepare the people to live in one united Europe and not create new privileges .
I say this because I have been looking in particular at Hungary and the legislation there may run the risk of creating certain privileges for the Hungarians on the other side of the Hungarian border , that is in the neighbouring countries of Slovakia and Romania .
I believe that we should be cautious here ; protection of and solidarity with the Hungarian minorities yes , but no new discrimination .
While I am on the subject of discrimination - and this is my final point - I should like to add that in quite a number of areas , and this is a major achievement of the work we have done together , discriminatory laws have been abolished and , for example , discrimination on grounds of religion , gender or sexual orientation has already been outlawed , including in Romania .
The fact that this is still in the report means , at least according to my information , that it is already out of date because a law has been passed which abolishes discrimination against homosexuals .
This just goes to show that everything is in flux and that our joint efforts have already improved the situation in Europe , even before enlargement .
Mr President , as Romano Prodi said in this debate last year , in Europe we are all minorities .
Today Commissioner Verheugen said that to live in Europe is to live with compromises .
To my mind these are crucial to European values .
It is for the vast majority to make compromises for the minority .
Therefore I was unhappy when I learnt that the European Parliament rapporteur on Slovakia had accused the Hungarian minority parties of setting ultimatums and using methods that are used only in wartime when they made their future in the government dependent on an administrative reform .
The rapporteur 's remark seems very unfair and does not take note of the different steps in the development of self-government at different levels , nor is it consistent with the views expressed by the Prime Minister of Slovakia .
The Hungarian political representatives have , in spite of the adoption of new administrative borders that were promoted by nationalist and left-wing parties and deprived them of chances of adequate political representation , signalled that they are ready to continue in the government but that their future participation is dependent on giving real content to the administrative laws .
That is what we are asking for in Resolution No 39 .
We should refrain from unfounded accusations .
Mr President , investments in roads , railways and other forms of infrastructure are among the most important that can be made in the countries of the old Central and Eastern Europe .
Anyone who takes a bird ' s eye view of Europe can see very clearly where the old borders between East and West run .
This means that the EU and the EU ' s Member States have a lot to gain from contributing to investment in better road and rail networks in the candidate countries and from ensuring that these are linked together with the networks in the rest of Europe .
For a country such as Poland , which the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has studied from a transport point of view , that is quite obvious .
Poland is far and away the largest of the candidate countries and , in the last ten years , it has invested extensively in improvements in roads and railways .
We often talk in East-West terms within the EU but , where a country such as Poland is concerned , it is probably just as important to see the issues from a north-south perspective .
Poland is now already one of the most important countries in Europe when it comes to transport between North and South in Europe .
Clearly integrating Poland into the EU ' s transport system is the same as broadening the waistline of Europe .
North-South transport would obtain a wider range of possible transit routes .
This would ease the burden on Germany , which is something positive - especially from an environmental point of view - and it would also increase competition , which is good for trade .
On the day when Poland , together with other candidate countries around the Baltic , becomes a member of the EU , we shall also jointly be able to make greater demands in terms both of marine safety and of the management of the sensitive environment in the Baltic .
There is therefore a lot to be gained from Poland ' s becoming a member of the EU once the negotiations have been successfully completed .
Mr President , enlargement is not an end in itself . It is clearly a means ; I would go further , it is a means within a group of means .
For example , the other means are : political deepening , economic and social cohesion and budgetary sufficiency .
The success of enlargement depends on whether these three elements are clearly present .
If it is a means , what is the end ?
That people live better , qualitatively and quantitatively , in the countries of the current Union and in the candidate countries .
This is therefore true in the case of a country such as Bulgaria .
We hope that during the next political stage which that country is going to experience after the latest elections , the Europeanist will and effort shown so far will remain as strong and that , furthermore , essential actions will be strengthened in various fields .
Firstly , in the political field .
We must say clearly to the Bulgarian Government that this Parliament would not even consider voting for an accession agreement while , for example , Article 157 of the Penal Code remains in force , which establishes unacceptable discrimination against homosexual citizens in Bulgaria .
We clearly also have to ask the Bulgarian Government to make progress on the reform of judicial power , on the fight against corruption , on improving the social living conditions of the citizens and , particularly , on the fight against unemployment .
We must also ask for progress on the protection of the environment and , above all , for compliance with the commitments made so far on the closure , within certain time limits , of units 1 to 4 of the Kozloduy nuclear power station .
Finally , we want to say to Bulgaria that it is this Parliament ' s desire that it be well incorporated into the European Union and on time , but , of course within the political , economic and social framework established .
Mr President , if the political problems cannot be resolved at long last , the issue of Cyprus has the potential to derail the entire enlargement process or to leave us in the ridiculous situation where hundreds of thousands of Turkish Cypriots are notionally EU citizens without having being consulted , while at the same time facing EU sanctions of a political and economic nature .
We cannot afford to close our eyes to the reality .
I look forward to Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot politicians sitting alongside us as parliamentarians in this Chamber and to the creation of a bi-zonal federal state .
But in discussing this issue , it is not acceptable simply to say that the problems of Cyprus started with the Turkish invasion in 1974 without mentioning the divisions of the island from 1963 when Greek Cypriots murdered Turkish Cypriots .
If there is to be true reconciliation between these peoples , then complete objectivity is needed and in this report before us that is too sadly lacking .
Mr President , in its opinion on the country reports the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has confined itself to only a few points which are significant for all of the accession countries without exception and which are , as you would expect , included in the introductory report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
Our committee calls for a more developed schema governing the future representation of the candidate countries in the European Parliament than is provided for in the Treaty of Nice .
We call for the discrimination against Hungary and the Czech Republic to be rectified and we think it is necessary for provision also to be made for the period after the 2004 European elections for any candidates acceding then .
Other important concerns of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs relate to the candidate countries ' participating as soon as possible in the so-called post-Nice process .
A constitutional reform in Europe without the participation of the future members is politically indefensible .
Of course the candidates will not be able to have an equal say in the decisions for as long as they are still candidates , but they will be affected and we should therefore also attach importance to their opinions .
Our committee continues to be in favour of actively involving civil society in the Member States and the candidate countries in the process of reforming our future institutions .
A prerequisite for this will be high-quality , comprehensive and above all not only one-sided information .
A further concern has obviously already reached the ears of the Commission .
Commissioner Verheugen already mentioned in this morning 's debate that the application of Community law will be a priority in the ongoing assessment of the candidates ' readiness to join the European Union .
We can only fully agree with him .
I have mixed feelings about another comment which Commissioner Verheugen made this morning .
Commissioner , you said that the border regions would spearhead the EU enlargement process .
In the light of the great restraint being exercised by the Commission where support for border regions is concerned , I fear that some border regions may see themselves as spearheads in a different sense , in the sense that they are being speared .
Perhaps here too it will be possible to find a solution by working together constructively .
Mr President , Malta is one of the twelve candidate countries which meets the general requirements set by the European Union on all counts .
The Stenzel report gives us an excellent description of all these developments and I fully endorse it .
However , there is the problem of why a significant proportion of the Maltese people , all of whom we welcome with open arms , has a number of objections and concerns .
For example , the agricultural population totals 1000 people and agriculture is a problem for Malta and for these 1000 people .
Perhaps they are worried that , because it is so small , a property developer could come and buy up the whole of Malta .
Some other nations are worried about their cultural identity .
The vision of Europe which we impart must be a vision which safeguards all the rights of the nations which accede at a later date , be they cultural , economic or social .
In this sense , because our debates are often highly technocratic and focus solely on indicators , Maastricht , approximations and so on , we should understand that , for these nations , most of whom are experiencing economic problems , the economic factor takes precedence .
If we want to bring these nations - and our own nations - on board , we need to show them a Europe of security , peace , culture and individuality , not just the sexual individuality which is often the subject of debate , but cultural individuality , because people do not just have multiple sexual needs , they also have multiple spiritual and cultural needs and linguistic diversity .
In this sense , I think that Malta , which is Europe in miniature , is a good prospect ; at the same time , however , we should use Malta to look at other aspects of our policies .
Mr President , at this stage of our assessment and appraisal of the pre-accession progress of the candidate countries , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities wants to make it perfectly clear that , as an integral aspect of respect for human rights , adopting the acquis communautaire on equality between men and women is a sine qua non to accession .
In other words , these countries have to harmonise their national legislation with the acquis communautaire in the area of sexual equality , on the one hand , and develop institutions and mechanisms which allow appropriate policies to be applied on the other .
It is clear from the opinions of our committee that women everywhere have difficulty accessing the job market and are under-represented at the centres of power .
They also refer to specific problems such as high unemployment in Lithuania , the Czech Republic and Latvia and violence against and human trafficking of women in places such as Hungary , Bulgaria , Slovakia and Turkey .
At the same time , we have welcomed positive achievements , such as state mechanisms in Lithuania to facilitate suitable policies and the employment rate among women in Cyprus , which is close to the Community average .
Moreover , as the rapporteur Mr Poos mentioned , Cyprus is top of the league of negotiating countries and meets all the economic and political accession criteria .
Consequently , we are entirely justified in believing and hoping that Cyprus will become a full member of the European Union as soon as the pre-accession procedure is completed even if , despite our efforts , no solution can be found to the Cyprus problem in the meantime , due to Turkey 's intransigence .
What our committee is calling for , Commissioner , to come back to women , is for candidate countries to take part in Community programmes which help safeguard women 's rights and for civil society , and especially women 's non-governmental organisations , to be encouraged to take part in these programmes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Europe was founded on the idea of putting an end to war between the various nations in it .
At some point in their history , these nations decided never again to allow themselves to fall into the cesspit of genocide .
At the same time , they abolished the diplomacy of threat and pressure and replaced it with the language of reconciliation , compromise and understanding in good faith .
Primarily , enlarging Europe can only mean one thing : extending the application of these principles .
And nowhere in Europe today is there a more pressing need for the application of these principles to be extended than in Cyprus , whose history of violence , threat , blood-stained borders , military occupation , armed reckonings - all the situations from which Europe has drawn back in horror - is repeating itself for both nations living on the island .
The upshot of this for northern , Turkish-occupied Cyprus has been economic ruin and the abolition of political freedom for its people .
They live under a military regime in the guise of a pseudo-democracy .
In southern Cyprus , which constitutes the internationally recognised Republic of Cyprus , and which functions as a true democracy , even if it is handicapped by the Turkish occupation , the economy is flourishing , prosperity is increasing and all the economic and political criteria set in Copenhagen have been met ; however , the people are deprived of the natural , supremely human right to travel around their country , to return to the houses in which they were born , to their small villages , to travel the length and breadth of the country without coming up against barbed wire , road blocks , divided towns or armed soldiers ready to shoot .
Under these circumstances , the accession of Cyprus into the European Union , which should not be delayed , will also bring new peace to international relations between Greece , Turkey and Cyprus in the eastern Mediterranean in general - the European Union 's blessing on all three countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur on Latvia 's application for membership of the European Union , Mrs Schröder , has made some very important and pertinent observations .
They also seemed to me to be very critical .
That is why , with your permission , I should now like to highlight two positive points which present the overall picture in a perhaps more favourable and also , in my opinion , a more realistic light .
In many reports - and the same is true of the report on Latvia 's application , there is a statement at the beginning which is simple and which is important but which cannot be taken for granted .
Latvia satisfies the political criteria for membership of the European Union .
This simple sentence represents splendid achievements , achievements which deserve respect and recognition .
In the light of the difficult situation which these countries were in at the outset and the complicated basic conditions , satisfying the first Copenhagen criterion is a remarkable result .
This is especially true for the three Baltic states which , compared with all of the other candidates , were forced to a far greater degree into the totalitarian structures of the former Soviet Union .
This applies particularly to Latvia , given the complicated ethnic make-up of its population .
It is precisely against this tragic historical background that the systematic and continuous efforts of its parliament and government to integrate all of the country 's inhabitants into society deserve our respect and support .
Latvia is also an excellent example of how clear political prospects for the future can strengthen and accelerate social and economic development .
On 15 February 2000 the accession negotiations were formally opened .
In the same year , growth of 6.6 % in gross domestic product was achieved and in the first quarter of this year growth even reached 8.2 % .
These are just a few of very many other indicators which point to the opportunities - the opportunities to create political stability and economic dynamism - which enlargement brings .
Mr President , Commissioner . I should like to start by thanking the chairman of our Committee on Foreign Affairs , Elmar Brok , for including important points from the various committee opinions in the joint motion .
As joint draftsman of an opinion on behalf of the Committee on Fundamental Freedoms and an opinion on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , I am one of the few members of the committees required to give an opinion who has been able to take the floor in this debate and I do so in order to voice my criticism of our in-house procedure .
First , the timing of the debate .
I think that it would have been better to wait for the Commission 's next progress reports .
Secondly , it is a great pity that only a few of those reporting on individual countries for the Committee on Foreign Affairs have taken note of the opinions of the other committees and that the draftsmen of these opinions were not automatically allocated speaking time during the debate , as is our custom in the House .
Nonetheless , I am delighted that a number of very important points raised by my committees have been included in the common opinion , including the all-important Article 13 and the acquis developed in the meantime in order to combat discrimination .
I think enlargement negotiations should attach equal importance to this and , for example , internal market legislation .
I also believe that it is important to note that the motion calls , for the first time , for the security of the external borders of the enlarged European Union to be a Community responsibility , rather than the sole responsibility of the country on the border .
Finally , one further request , this time in my capacity as an Austrian member .
I think Mr Schröder has written an excellent report on the Czech Republic and I should like to ask the House to support him on all counts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , enlargement is the greatest challenge that the European political project has ever faced .
It is , however , not an end in itself , but a means towards political , economic , cultural and civilisational ends .
Enlargement must mean more and better Europe and not less Europe , even if it increases in area and territory .
Enlargement must be supported and well received by national public opinion . Public opinion in many countries is favourable towards enlargement for reasons other than simple economic calculations and national self-interest .
These countries hope that enlargement will strengthen Europe and will be fair and , unless this happens , they will feel cheated .
For example , and if we take account of the opinion polls , the Portuguese are clearly more in favour of enlargement than - irony of ironies ! - the Belgians , the French and the Germans .
Why should this be the case ?
It is because the Portuguese have benefited from the support of the European Union at a crucial time in their recent history and feel that other Europeans share this right .
These very Portuguese citizens would not have the same attitude , however , if they were afraid that enlargement might weaken the European project and harm Europe ' s internal cohesion .
I am delighted at the orderly , methodical and smooth course of the negotiations , but the hard core of the trickiest dossiers has still not been broached .
Some Members have recommended today , in this part-session , that the ten applicant countries should join the European Union by 2004 .
I think this is too soon .
We must not delay the process of accession through expedient measures , neither should we rush things .
We must respect the pace of each applicant country .
In the 1930s , the celebrated French writer Paul Valéry , coined the famous phrase , which said , and I quote , that civilisations are now aware of their mortality .
He also pointed out that Europe ' s greatest weakness was its inability to form a political entity with powers that are both solid and legitimate .
This is the problem .
I hope that enlargement contributes to establishing this legitimate and strong entity and not the opposite .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I start by drawing your attention to the fact that the conclusions of the Wiersma report on the possible accession of Slovakia to the European Union have the full backing of the PPE group .
Slovakia is an example of how , with political will , a country initially at a disadvantage , in this case a country which , under the Meciar regime , lost nearly four years compared with everyone else , can catch up with the other countries negotiating for accession and join with them in resolving problems quickly .
What is most impressive is that Slovakia has successfully stabilised its economy over recent years and has started and , in many cases , completed comprehensive structural reforms , including privatising the banks .
However , the European Union also needs Slovakia to accede , lying as it does between Poland , the Czech Republic and Hungary , because it will be easier to guarantee an area of freedom and security in an enlarged European Union along a continuous external border .
However , Slovakia will only be able to accede quickly if it is equally quick in implementing government and administrative reform . This includes making the judiciary independent , introducing effective financial controls and reforming the communes and local authorities , all within the next few weeks .
This will also indirectly guarantee the involvement of national minorities , especially the Hungarians , in over 500 communities .
Slovakia should therefore keep up its resolve to deal with outstanding accession problems in liaison with the Commission and the European Parliament , so as to pave the way for fast accession to the European Union .
Mr President , two topics in one minute .
First topic : there are still major deficiencies in the social sphere , including in the country I myself am monitoring , namely Latvia .
I believe it is important to understand that a modern society is most successful if there is a partnership between politicians and the two sides of the labour market .
That is why we must not forget the social dialogue .
It is not merely the internal market which is important for enlargement .
Second topic : there is a positive spirit at present , and this must continue .
We must not believe that enlargement will be without its problems , and we cannot expect enlargement to be nice and easy .
It will have its shortcomings ; there will be untidiness and incoherence ; there will be lengthy transitional arrangements ; and there will be no thorough agricultural reform and no complete structural reform .
I am not saying that we must accept everything .
I believe , however , that we must contrive to show magnanimity and that we are obliged to accept that enlargement will be messy and untidy .
Naturally , we must comply with the Copenhagen criteria , but we must count on enlargement ' s not being as seamless as we perhaps might have hoped .
I hope that we go for major enlargement , show magnanimity and obtain the ' big bang ' in 2003 .
Mr President , Mr Queiró and Mr Friedrich have given Hungary ten out of ten for accession efforts on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Hungary was the first country to raise the Iron Curtain and to start intensive preparations for full membership .
Today , thank God , fear of enlargement is clearly beginning to recede .
We could see in Burgenland , which borders on Hungary , that the Euro-sceptics did not stand a chance and were losing more and more ground .
The same applies in Austria and Germany with regard to the Czech Republic and Poland , although here the problems are patently worse .
But I think that this is a positive development and that this development is thanks to Hungary 's policy of settling its minority problems , which it has done in an exemplary fashion , and of taking a clearly pro-European stance across the political divide .
I should like , first and foremost , to call on the Czech Republic , for which I also have a soft spot and which I hope , like Hungary , will be one of the first wave of candidate countries , to follow Hungary 's example and resolve its minority problems , discard its historical baggage and , at the same time , find a consensus between the political parties on the question of political integration .
I think this is paramount .
I am positive that the so-called candidate countries - not an expression I particularly like - will not become the ballast of European unification ; it is precisely Hungary , the Czech Republic and others which can become the driving force behind European integration .
The same applies to Slovakia , although it has internal political problems .
But if it resolves them , I think that Slovakia , together with Hungary , the Czech Republic and Poland , will become the countries to drive European integration forward .
We should therefore take a less anxious view of this project , which we should not call enlargement to the east but , to quote Pope John Paul II , the " Europeanisation of Europe " .
Because a European Union without Hungary or the Czech Republic is no European Union !
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mr Brok for preparing this report on enlargement .
The decision to open an enlargement process highlights the great , long-term vision of our predecessors .
However , this great vision and long-term perspective is not being matched by an adequate financial and budgetary initiative .
I feel that Member States ' contributions need to be revised in order to include our new commitments and needs even before 2006 .
Like everything new , enlargement is causing uncertainty among the public .
We must reassure them from the economic as well as political point of view , particularly where the structural and cohesion policies are concerned .
Wealthy Europe must be more generous and the governments must be the vehicles of this generosity .
With regard to Slovenia , I have already had the opportunity to thank Mr Volcic for his valuable contribution and his report .
In my opinion , the accession of the candidate countries will be our first opportunity to tackle the issue of relations with the Balkan countries after the war .
The first , absolute necessity which the European Union must establish and confirm , where it is lacking , is multiculturality based on recognition of and respect for differences , all differences whether physical , intellectual , ethnic , religious , economic or other , to prevent any more ethnic or religious wars .
Europe and the European Union must demand reciprocity from all the countries with which they sustain relations or for which they are finalising solidarity programmes in the area of multiculturality , for this dimension is the basis of all the democratic structures of the States .
I hope that , in the future , Slovenia ' s situation will be mirrored in all the Balkan States and bring peace and prosperity to the war-torn communities .
Lastly , I feel that , for the European Union , the economic element of globalisation is not about maximising profit and its social element is not about standardising societies , but globalisation is about the readiness to harmonise existing differences .
Mr President , the upside of the fact that we are so late debating the old progress reports is that we can inject some up-to-date input just before the new reports are finalised .
I have observed developments in Lithuania with interest , and not only since I became the shadow rapporteur for this country .
It demonstrates the classic problems of a candidate country , problems which apply across the board and do not therefore need to be restated .
One specific aspect , and this also costs the EU a great deal of money , is Lithuanian energy policy .
The sector as a whole has already cost three heads of government their job .
First on the subject of Ignalina , which Mr Souladakis has already addressed .
I think that it is up to us to ensure , when the closure process is implemented , that locals are kept properly informed at all times of what it is actually planned to do and what their prospects are in this relatively isolated area .
My personal impression is that this is not yet the case .
As a result , some Lithuanian politicians , admittedly without portfolio , are irresponsibly raising people 's hopes in order to curry votes .
This triggers anti-European sentiments because the debate is over-simplified .
Privatisation of the oil and gas sectors is also causing a degree of ill feeling among the people because western investors have acted as if this is a banana republic .
Now , no one even bothers to distinguish between EU nationals and Americans .
People have become sceptical of western capital and more receptive to so-called national solutions .
However , allegedly national solutions in Lithuania are in fact generally a front for Russian money .
I just want to make sure that everyone involved both inside and outside Lithuania is aware of this and bears it in mind when making political and economic decisions .
Mr President , with regard to the accession of Cyprus , we should be pleased by the result of the vote in the Committee on Foreign Affairs : 55 in favour and just 2 against .
This demonstrates the excellent work of negotiation and consensus carried out by the rapporteur and the cooperation of the whole committee on this report which was not devoid of difficulties , owing , above all , to the occupation of part of the island by Turkey and the stalemate in the dialogue between the Turkish and Cypriot Governments .
My group has wanted to promote a text which does not hinder or compromise a renewal of the negotiations between both sides , but quite the opposite , one which motivates and speeds up the process of resolving the problem which is undoubtedly seeing a change of attitude from the Turkish Government .
We are in favour of approving the report with the amendments presented by our Group which reflect its concern at the political division of the island , supporting , in this respect , the efforts of the United Nations to reestablish the conversations and urging the conflicting sides to achieve a resolution to the problem as soon as possible , for the good of all the citizens of Cyprus .
Cyprus has now closed 22 chapters in the negotiation and presents itself as a firm candidate for accession .
However , intense work will have to be done on the incorporation of the Community acquis , especially in terms of compliance with environmental legislation , where significant shortcomings in the areas of waste management and water quality and management have been noted .
Cyprus must also make progress on putting a stop to its macroeconomic deterioration , as well as on the control of capital movements .
Nevertheless , we insist that a unified Cyprus would be the best guarantee of peace , security and prosperity for the region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , maybe it is an opportunity as well as an honour to have the last word in such an important debate . I think that this debate has highlighted the potential for the European Parliament , especially when it comes to Romania , on which I should like to say a few words .
As a former national member of parliament , I know that a national member of parliament can do very little .
What Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne has done for Romania , with her report and her hard work , is to get things moving there .
The Commissioner acknowledged as much this morning and I think that we could use this as an example to the numerous groups of visitors who question exactly what we in the European Parliament can do .
To start with , the head of government in Romania reacted as perhaps every head of government in the world would react .
He claimed that Mr Verheugen had said , not to worry , it is only the European Parliament . Talk to the Commission if you want to become a member of the European Union one day .
I am sure that Mr Verheugen said no such thing .
All the Romanian media quoted him , although they then acknowledged that it makes sense to take a closer look at Parliament 's reports and opinions ; we have reached a legal position on the question of orphans and homosexuals in Romania which now has to be implemented , something which was unthinkable a few weeks ago .
I should like , if I may , to comment on a question which divides the House .
The Socialist group and Mr Sakellariou have tabled a proposed amendment asking if the report should mention euro-Atlantic structures , yes or no ?
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy says yes , if Romania wants to join these euro-Atlantic structures , then we want to support this and I think it is important , especially in Romania 's case , that we do .
We know that Romania will not accede in the first round in 2004 and a decision to invite Romania to join the North Atlantic Alliance in 2002 is therefore all the more important .
This would bring stability to the whole of Europe and I therefore call on you to reject this amendment tomorrow and support the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I should like to inform the House that I have received a motion for a resolution from the Committee on Foreign Affairs pursuant to Rule 37 , paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
It gives me great pleasure to hand the chair back to the President .
White paper on the reform of European governance
The next item is the Commission communication on the White paper on the reform of European governance .
I will now give the floor to the President of the Commission , Mr Romano Prodi .
Thank you , Mr Prodi .
Madam President , I would like firstly to congratulate the President , Mr Prodi , both on the White Paper and on his comments here today .
It seems to me that the forty pages of this White Paper are forty dense pages , full of reflection and proposals .
But I also believe that your comments were splendid , succinct , full of ideas and vision , and I would like to congratulate you on behalf of my group .
Furthermore , I believe that your manner of presenting the White Paper has been correct .
You have done so modestly , and that is to your credit .
The White Paper is a departure point .
It is just a text which leads to reflection and now we have to ask our co-citizens to participate in this reflection , to offer ideas and to send projects .
I believe that all of us in this Parliament agree on the analysis of the situation , that we all wonder what is happening to the European Union and why our co-citizens sometimes show a lack of confidence .
I believe that the White Paper explains this well : the benefits of the European Union are general and they often pass unnoticed ; however , the disadvantages are specific .
I remember the effect in my country when lorries of strawberries were overturned by French farmers .
This always happened at the same time of year , one week , and it was just a very isolated incident .
That created enormous anti-European feeling : ' Why does the European Union not worry about us , the European Union does not care for us ' .
That ended as a result of the efforts of the European Commission , amongst others .
Surely the Spanish , or many of them , do not realise that .
I believe that our main problem is that we are European without knowing it and without doubt this White Paper has a good role to play in this pedagogical zeal to explain what Europe is and what the European Union is for .
The second idea that I would like to highlight on behalf of my group is that this White Paper stresses the originality of the system which has operated over the last fifty years .
Furthermore , it supports the continuation of this system which we call the ' Community method ' , yet nobody questions this .
Today I have been very glad to hear President Prodi talk about maintaining the balance between the institutions : this seems to me essential .
The Group of the European People ' s Party , which has always tenaciously supported the European Commission having a monopoly on the exercise of legislative initiative , believes that it is very positive that that legislative initiative , when it comes about , should count on the participation of many more players : of what we call civil society , of local and regional authorities ; above all especially if we do so , as Mr Prodi said , without in any way altering the balance between the institutions or the constitutional status of the Member States .
Of course , this Parliament is also going to cooperate in this task of contributing ideas .
And it is doing so by means of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs whose rapporteur on this issue will be Mrs Kaufmann , and it is also doing so on all those issues which are eventually going to be combined with the reflection of the Commission which President Prodi called the third reflection , which is going to come together in the debate of the IGC 2004 .
This White Paper is very important because we are at a moment of the historic constituent process of the European Union , and that process opened with declaration 23 at Nice .
I am sure that the presence of Commissioner Barnier is in response to this .
Therefore , this will be a further element of this process , which is important , and visionary , and which is necessary when Europe is preparing for the euro , for enlargement and for the debate on what we Europeans want .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen . I can agree on behalf of my group with much of what has been said today , Mr President .
I just wonder why it was not set out this clearly in the White Paper which you submitted , unfortunately at a time at which we were unable to discuss it directly .
A White Paper on European governance really should have been submitted to Parliament first .
You said , Mr President , that Parliament represents the people of the Union .
Correct .
But if you look at the White Paper , this premise is hardly anywhere to be found , at least not in the prominent and leading place in which it belongs .
I do not say this just to blow our own trumpet but because we should not spread the illusion harboured by many a non-governmental organisation that the parliamentary and democratic process could , to a certain extent , be replaced by dialogue with civil society .
It cannot replace it but it can and it must complement it .
That is one important aspect .
That brings me to my second point .
Yes , our group is in favour of strengthening consultation with civil society , whatever your interpretation of that concept may be .
I just wonder , Mr President , if the Commission has the staff it needs in order to do so to the extent claimed here ?
At least , you say nothing about how you intend to bring this off .
Secondly , you barely mention how you intend to liaise with Parliament here .
Yes , you say that Parliament has already started this process . Quite right .
But we need to strengthen it .
We need to approach things jointly , as you said today , because our citizens react to the European Union , rather than to individual institutions .
That is why I call on you to table proposals based on your concept of how a joint , efficient , feasible dialogue can be conducted because what is depicted here will result in a plethora of consultation processes and that contradicts the very principle of efficiency which you stand for .
But we are prepared to discuss this with you .
Thirdly , delegating decisions . You are quite right , Mr President ; a parliament which wants to pass every detailed decision and regulation is a very stupid parliament .
But what is the position on the call back or fall back position which Parliament keeps calling for ?
You say nothing about it in your White Paper .
Are you for or against it ?
You surely do not entertain the notion that Parliament will agree to delegate regulatory powers and jurisdiction without the facility to call them back if things go wrong ?
We have already had our fingers burned once with the Lamfalussy report .
Some Commissioner or other - I do not want to name names - did not approve of this process of cooperation , even in the case of delegation , hence our scepticism and suspicion .
Not because we reject it , but because we still cannot condone the practice of the Commission at this point in time .
Mr President , you refer several times in your White Paper to getting back to basics , on focusing on basics once more .
But you do not define them - basics since when ?
Basics for the Commission and the European Union are not the same today as they were 20 years ago and they will be different in the future .
I do wonder , with many of the Commission ' s proposals , if these really are the basics for the European Union .
In other areas - just think of asylum , immigration and so on , you are faced with new basics .
To think backwards and say , we must get back to yesterday ' s basics is hardly the right policy for the European Union .
But I admit that you are right and I hope that the Commission will define what it sees as basics for the future , for the next ten years because that is an ongoing decision which we want to discuss with the Council and the Commission .
Agenda setting , defining political priorities year on year , is not just the job of the Council and the Commission , it is also the job of the European Parliament .
So much for the critical points and now there is no time left for the other points .
But I think that it is more use to you if we voice our criticism and then offer to hold a dialogue with you over the coming months so that we can bring about a joint result .
( Applause )
Madam President , this White Paper between ourselves is worth more than all the recent grandstanding speeches of national leaders , because it combines clarity of purpose with a substantial degree of self-criticism .
President Prodi has drawn attention to the paradox that people want the Union to be doing more in several fields but they still distrust the system of government .
The Commission is therefore quite right to focus on improving the Commission 's representative capacity , especially at the pre-legislative stage .
I would also want a strong emphasis on improving the post-legislative phase , monitoring far more closely the way European policies are put into effect on the ground .
My group welcomes the Commission 's emphasis on decentralised management and on a reinforced role for the regions .
The European region plays a vital part as the intermediary between the citizen and the supranational authorities .
We also note the kind suggestion that Parliament feeds into the European system the views of its own electors .
What else we are up to , I am not quite sure .
But the place that we intend to do this is in the new convention that we trust will be set up at Laeken , a concept that strangely receives not a single mention throughout the entire White Paper .
Would Mr Prodi agree that the White Paper will be a most sensible contribution to the work of that convention ?
Would he say exactly the way he sees the furtherance of the work on the White Paper fitting in with that of the convention ?
Madam President , President of the Commission , your White Paper has been widely praised , but we were disappointed in it , because it has not proved the important document that we had expected after your promises .
It is difficult to find any specific detail in the current reform of the Commission , in the fundamental declarations in Nice on the future of the Union or in the new IGC .
We are therefore searching for the meaning .
Could it perhaps be the case that differences of opinion in the board of Commissioners and pressure from some Member States have combined to reduce the scope of this White Paper ?
We also support greater involvement of mainstream society .
That is positive .
However , as Democrats , we are concerned about the sections on better policy and better legislation , and on the orientation of policy initiatives and institutions .
We attach special importance to institutional equilibrium .
Other speakers have already made that point , for example as regards the impact on the powers and role of the European Parliament of a greater use of " soft law " instruments .
In addition , we wonder whether the new regulatory bodies we are promised and the proposed external executive bodies can be adequately monitored .
We have not forgotten the whole chapter involving the BTB . Neither have you , I hope .
We are positively disposed towards the proposal that the Council and the European Parliament should play an equal role in supervising the way in which the Commission fulfils its executive task .
But I have other concerns .
As a regionalist , I feel bound to say that the importance of the region has actually declined .
There is virtually no trace here of ' bottom-up governance ' .
We cannot find the ' multi-level governance ' in which all administrative strata are involved - which was also asked for by Mr Duff .
The differences of opinion in the board of Commissioners have obviously actually led to regional involvement on the final decision-making being scrapped .
The Commission limits itself to a more systematic dialogue with European and national associations of regional and local authorities at an early stage in decision-making .
In contrast to the draft White Paper and the report of the Commission ' s preparatory working party 4 C , provision is no longer made for a differentiation in regional involvement depending on the type of Member State : unitary , decentralised , regionalised or federal .
As a result , we are now going backwards compared to the present constitutional powers already enjoyed by some regions in certain Member States , for example Belgium .
You can imagine that this will not excite much enthusiasm in our regions for the governance outlined here .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , it is well over eighteen months , Mr Prodi , since you announced that the reform of European governance was one of the Commission 's four strategic objectives .
It is to your honour that , like earlier Commission presidents , you want to leave your personal mark on the Commission .
Your concern to take measures which will at last close the gap between the Union and its citizens is one which I wholeheartedly support .
As does the overwhelming majority of the House .
We want to do something , at long last , to turn a citizens ' Europe from a slogan into a reality .
With all due respect for your concern , Mr President of the Commission , I must say to you in all honesty that I am disappointed in what now lies before us .
I have handed out this White Paper and asked our citizens what they think of it .
Do you know what the immediate problem was ?
They had no idea what the 40 odd pages were about .
It is all pure Eurospeak , was the reply .
How , I wonder , can we possibly close this gap if the language is incomprehensible to its target audience ?
The White Paper contains positive ideas , such as strengthening the role of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions or stepping up consultation with organisations in civil society , it is true .
Nonetheless , I should like briefly to address a few crucial questions .
The basic political problem of the White Paper is obvious , I think , right from the start .
It says that people think the Union is incapable of acting where action is needed , for example , on unemployment .
This reading of the problem is simply not true .
The citizens do not think the Union is incapable ; on the contrary , their experience on a daily basis is that the Union and its Member States have proven they are incapable .
Mr Prodi , you quite rightly said in your speech that , when we speak of governance , we are really talking about democracy .
You quite rightly addressed the problem of the democratisation of the European Union here today , but why can I only find trace elements of it in the White Paper itself ?
One last word on the question of revising the Treaty .
The White Paper makes provision for a consultation stage up to March 2002 .
The final proposals are then due to be submitted a further six months later .
Surely it is absurd to present proposals geared to the current Treaties in the autumn of this year , when we will already have been working flat out , hopefully in a convention , on revising the Treaties .
Dispensing with amendments to the Treaty , as you have posited , is not , in my view , a viable proposition , quite apart from the fact that you suggest a revision in the White Paper itself .
All in all , Mr President of the Commission , even after what my fellow members have said , I see a need for extensive discussion and I offer you Parliament 's and my personal assistance .
Mr President of the Commission , in our common language , the word " governance " does not exist , and it may well be that it does not exist in other European languages either .
It could be said that it is revealing - and not just because of the linguistic wrangle which took place this summer - that , despite its best efforts at external openness , transparency and accountability towards the public , the Commission chose , right in the middle of the summer , to adopt a document with an untranslatable title .
There were other terms available which would have been translatable and , most importantly , comprehensible , both linguistically and otherwise : the rule of law , the separation of powers , thorough guidelines for Community mechanisms , democratisation of the Treaties , a European Constitution , legal certainty and so on and so forth .
You decided to ignore almost all these pillars of our national States even though , as you know , they are greatly lacking in our European Union system .
I hope that " governance " is not going to become a kind of de facto , free-trade Italian-style Constitution which favours partisan ideals , which , as we are quite aware , is the case with the current Italian Constitution .
Civil society , for example , Mr President , is what exposed Israel at Durban , prompting countries to walk out of that conference . Those countries had a sense of responsibility which I did not see in our Union .
I do not know whether that is the civil society to which you are referring , but I am somewhat fearful because , as Mr Swoboda said , although , today , you have delivered a very pro-Parliament speech , the text itself contains very few references to Parliament .
It is precisely because I want a strong , authoritative Commission that I am saying this .
I do not want it to be reduced to a think tank or , at best , a supervisory body for a couple of industry sectors .
So , Mr President , be bold ! In my opinion , this text does not go far enough .
This operation will not suffice as it stands : if the rule of law and the legal certainties are to make proper headway in this Union , they must be defined now .
Madam President , I too want to thank the Commission for a good analysis in the ' Governance ' paper .
In some places , the report is so critical that I might have written it myself .
What I do not see , however , is an attendant list of practical , precise and binding proposals which would open the legislative process to the people .
In Italy , Mr Prodi has a good proposal about naming those who have been consulted .
We are concerned here with a list , which ought to accompany any bill , of who has been consulted , and all the answers given in consultations should be available on the Internet .
Mr Prodi also has another proposal about preferring regulations to directives .
That runs directly counter to our era ' s demand for decentralisation .
On the contrary , countries require greater freedom in implementing directives . Strawberries need not be of the same size in Italy as in Finland .
The paper talks a lot about more consultation , but it looks as though the aim is to create more support for the Commission ' s ' top-down ' proposal .
What I do not see is a proper concept of democracy that involves starting from the bottom .
Which issues cross borders ?
Which can we not manage for ourselves ?
In which areas do we want the Commission to produce proposals ?
Mr Prodi always has fine things to say about transparency , but he also has a department for refusing the right of access to documents .
Could the Commission not merge that department with the department for fine words about transparency , leaving just the one department ?
For example , I have still not received a complete list of the people consulted in the 1,500 committees and working parties that exist today .
Those who support Mr Prodi are not delivering the goods .
It looks as though he too has been imprisoned in his own fortress .
Might I suggest that Mr Prodi issue his promises about transparency as a regulation , binding his supporters in every respect .
Mr Prodi , the introduction to your White Paper on European governance makes the problem clear . We are losing the citizens ' confidence , as the no vote in the Irish referendum showed .
However your solutions are extremely weak .
Better governance would be more transparency , increased consultation , increased communication , increased participation and a more open method of communication , for example .
To be brief , Mr Prodi , these are the changes that would certainly be desirable for the European institutions to make to the way they work , but they will only have a marginal effect if they are not combined with deep-rooted changes in the balance of institutional powers .
The people think , and we also think , that certain problems would be better resolved by better European cooperation , but , at the same time , they resolutely and constantly attaches most legitimacy to the national framework .
That said , the conclusion is very simple : to strengthen the legitimacy of European cooperation , to make contact once more with the citizens , great influence and a much more visible role need to be given to the nation states within the European decision-making process .
This is the basic condition for a true democracy , a word that is scarcely mentioned , moreover , Mr President , in your White Paper .
All the rest is just idle chit-chat .
For example , how can it be that , in your White Paper , we find developments in the involvement of regional and local structures in European politics , developments in decentralised management , in coregulation with various - non-identified - organisations , and how can it be that there is absolutely no mention of the essential role of national Parliaments in the European decision-making process ?
I imagine , Mr President , that , in your position , you were not able to resolve this issue , but the White Paper could at least have raised it .
The best communication you could hope for is useless if European policies do not revolve around the crucial role of national democracies .
Madam President , I would like to start by thanking all the speakers , for they have made extremely useful contributions to this debate , which will serve as the foundation for more detailed analysis .
I would , however , like to touch on a few basic points , a few of the points underlying this document , so that we will then be able to work together to improve and add to it .
We have indeed set out a road map in this document , but this is the just the initial proposal : debates will continue to be held and it is only during the next stage that the final document will be produced .
I have therefore taken note ( and will continue to do so ) of your comments because this is an initial proposal which needs everyone to contribute to it before the final version can be established .
The second point is the issue of the language and title etc. of the White Paper .
You are indeed right but , in all honesty , I have to say that I have read countless national laws and I have also endeavoured to make a great many .
Mention just one which is written in language that the ordinary citizen can understand .
They are all written in specialised language .
We have done absolutely everything possible to use appropriate language but it is the concepts themselves whose technical nature is ultimately a problem for the ordinary citizen .
Our task is precisely that of explaining , of bridging the gap , but we cannot allow proposals to be less precisely worded .
An example is the discussion on the term " governance " .
I understand perfectly what Mr dell ' Alba is saying , but the problem is that we do not use one single language : we are fortunate and proud to be able to use 11 , and there will soon be 20 .
Therefore , we must endeavour to adapt .
The title we have selected is not a title I like much , precisely because there is never a single term which translates appropriately into all the languages .
We have a duty to understand each other as well as possible , even though we do not always manage to do so with the precision we would like .
Finally , relations with Parliament .
My aim in delivering this speech today was not to please Parliament .
What I have said to you today regarding Parliament ' s role and relations with NGOs and civil society and their different functions are things I often say , things I have repeated a thousand times and things which I have attempted to put into practice transparently during the last 18 months in relations with this House .
The fact that our relations are certainly more effective , more functional , smoother and more open than they were previously is precisely because I consider that the basis of the new Europe must be a fundamental role for Parliament .
Lastly , I have been criticised for many omissions , including the debate on the definition of the role of local authorities .
As I recall , we imposed a limit on ourselves in this White Paper : we will not amend the Treaties .
Therefore , it is not the purpose of the White Paper to change the delegation of powers .
We must make this enormous effort to best adapt our way of working to our tasks but without amending the Treaties .
Then in the second phase , which is separate from the first phase , we will present the proposals for Laeken , and then , in the third phase , we will make an active contribution and we will have to work on the institutional reforms together .
After the Nice decisions had been taken , we had to take note of this and use a methodology which respected the necessary changes .
However , remember that democracy is made of practices as well as rules .
In my opinion , as we have seen from my speech and your debates , it is possible to improve the way we work without amending any legislation .
I therefore believe that we must work together to that end .
A number of specific points emerged in the debate which I feel are particularly important .
The issue of the delegation of powers to the Commission was mentioned .
The Commission , consistently with what I said regarding not modifying legislation , is not asking for more powers but wants to organise its work more transparently and efficiently , getting back to the definitions in the founding Treaties of the Union , which , in laying down the organisation of the institutions , state that the Council and Parliament make decisions , the Commission executes policy ( although not the technical detail ) and Parliament monitors .
When we have finished , the Commission will probably have less to do than it does at present , but the confusing part of the comitology practice , which extends processes and does not make the difference between our and your roles completely clear , will be avoided .
In this case , Parliament and the Commission are equally involved because we are both mixed up in this comitology practice and we are both dissatisfied .
Therefore , let us now say what we tell each other in our private conversations regarding the inadequacy of this process , here in this Chamber , for that way we can do something about it .
An objection was raised regarding the direct responsibility of local authorities in the decision-making process .
We must remember that , although the basis for this is the decentralisation , the subsidiarity debate , the objective is to take into account , in an organised and transparent way , the opinions of the end users and executors of the common policies while respecting the institutional structures of each Member State .
We cannot interfere with the sacrosanct organisation of the Member States .
They define the role of the meetings , they define their institutional system and , if we were to interfere , we would be committing an act of violation and , most importantly , we would be going against the principle of subsidiarity by which we are absolutely and closely bound .
I would just like to focus very briefly on some of Mr Swoboda ' s objections because he has touched on points which must be dealt with .
One of them is a point which might appear banal : consultation , civil society and resources .
I do not think we are talking about huge resources , but it is clearly the European Parliament itself which will have to describe to us in the debate , agree upon and give us the resources we need .
In my opinion , although we have not done any calculations during this phase , the amount will be a modest sum , but this is one of the areas that we must discuss together for Parliament is the budgetary authority .
A further point is the delegation of competences and agencies .
I am talking about the delegation of practical and technical activities , not political delegation , for no delegation is permitted in these areas .
They are subjects which must be dealt with by the institutional authorities .
Lastly , Mr Swoboda raised another , extremely important point : discussing what the Commission ' s core tasks are , namely its political priorities .
I would repeat that the Commission has undertaken - and it is no coincidence that I listed it among the annual commitments - to define its political priorities before Parliament each year .
This is the practice we have presented , we have proposed and we believe we must follow closely so that , each year , as happens in the most democratic and transparent government structures , the political priorities are presented to Parliament and debated in this House .
That is why this White Paper , would appear , on the one hand , to be a genuinely innovative , substantial move towards democracy and transparency ; on the other , some areas of it are still vague but this is because it is a proposal which we could not present as a finished product today : we need to work together to refine and develop it .
It is the framework , an outline , and I would like to thank you for your criticism today which , I am sure , will be a great help to us in our future work .


I would like to end by thanking you and by saying simply that we must view all this precisely in the context of the three stages of the major European reform which we have outlined and which will be implemented over the next three years : firstly , reorganisation of the way we work internally ; secondly , working together to plan how we should organise the major process of reforming the institutions , therefore Laeken ; and thirdly , how to carry out the process of reforming the institutions .
I feel that today ' s debate is good preparation for the other two stages .
I would like to thank you because , in debating this issue today , we have initiated cooperation which will last for almost a year , until we present the final version of this White Paper and it becomes our self-regulation instrument , as Mr dell ' Alba would call it .
That is , it will become the code , the rule which will enable us to work effectively and get back to the true spirit and meaning of the Treaties , to get back to the core working role of each institution .
I would like to thank Mr Prodi , the Members of Parliament who have spoken today and all those who have taken part in this debate .
The debate is closed .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Questions to the Commission ( B5-0332 / 2001 ) .
Part I
Question No 37 by ( H-0602 / 01 ) :
Subject : Managing the huge potential of the waste market With waste generation in the EU amounting to around 1 300 million tonnes a year and total waste generation increasing by around 15 % over the period 1995 to 1998 , managing waste represents a huge market for the Member States without even taking into account the potential of the market following enlargement .
What new initiatives does the Commission intend to bring forward to highlight this market , and how can it demonstrate to Europe 's young people the potential for new employment opportunities in this market ?
Mr President , as Mr Collins so rightly points out , waste management is a huge market .
Indeed , it is the biggest environmental market , accounting each year for around EUR 44 billion and 0.5 to 0.6 % of Community GDP .
Moreover , companies whose primary activity is waste management employ between 200 000 and 400 000 people .
In terms of new initiatives , the Commission is currently in the process of developing several that will highlight the potential of the waste market .
First , the Sixth Environmental Action Programme in the waste field ; this aims to decouple degeneration of waste from economic growth .
It announces that the Commission will come forward with thematic strategies on both the sustainable use of resources and on recycling .
This will take a long-term look at both questions .
One of the aims of the recycling strategy will be identifying policies and instruments to encourage the creation of markets for recycled materials .
Secondly , in addition to the aforementioned thematic strategies , the Commission intends to propose legislative initiatives addressing specific problems such as batteries and packaging waste .
Together with legislation on electronic waste and end-of-life vehicles , these initiatives should further boost the waste management markets .
Thirdly , following the Gothenburg European Council , the Commission is in the process of preparing a report on how environmental technology can promote growth and employment .
This will be presented to next year 's spring European Council .
Finally , the integrated product policy will address issues dealing with design , manufacturing , use and disposal across the whole life cycle of a product and will therefore impact upon waste generation .
It is a challenge to demonstrate to Europe 's young people the potential for new employment opportunities in this market .
Certainly , all stakeholders have , at all levels , a role to play .
The Commission can play its role by keeping waste management issues high on the Community policy agenda and providing high quality information .
However , it is clear that education remains within the competence of the Member States .
I thank the Commissioner for her very comprehensive and most informative reply .
Question No 38 by ( H-0639 / 01 ) :
Subject : Infringement of competition rules in relation to DVD sales The DVD market is characterised by the existence of two different systems in Europe and in the United States and Japan , with the result that European consumers are unable to purchase DVDs from countries belonging to a different zone , where prices appear to be lower and delivery faster .
The justification given by large undertakings is that this is a means of protecting themselves against piracy .
In my view , however , this is a clear violation of free-market competition rules , to the detriment of European consumers , and I have been informed that the Commission is investigating the matter .
Can the Commission outline the results of this investigation , and can it say how it will deal with the infringement of competition rules in the market for DVDs ?
As a direct result of complaints from private citizens , the Commission launched an investigation on DVD pricing and on the DVD regional coding system in June 2001 .
The citizens ' complaints related to the fact that DVD prices were significantly higher in the Community than in the United States and that , because of the DVD regional coding system under which the world is divided into six geographic regions , a DVD obtained from the US could not be played on a DVD player sold in the Community .
The position of the major film production companies is that the basic purpose of such a regional coding system is to allow them to protect their copyrighted intellectual property and the traditional pattern of releasing their films at different times in different parts of the world , as well as to protect against piracy .
The Commission shares the honourable Member 's concerns that the Community 's consumers may suffer as a result of the DVD regional coding system .
It prevents them from benefiting from a broader choice of DVD titles and potentially cheaper prices .
The Commission is therefore investigating whether the DVD regional coding system is compatible with Community competition rules .
In this context all aspects relating to the establishment and the ongoing operation of the system are being examined .
Having sent requests for information to all companies concerned by the system , the Commission is currently reviewing the first batch of material .
Commissioner , I should just like to ask you if the same phenomenon applies to other products , i.e. if there are coding systems for other products , because the culture industry is extremely sensitive , there is huge competition from America , which we are unable to withstand , as we know all too well .
But I know that you are sensitive to the question of competition and I am sure that your investigation will bring in results .
Thank you , Mrs Zorba , for this encouragement .
We do not have information on other products being characterised by this system of regional coding .
At any rate not such typology has been conveyed to us by way of complaints , unlike in the case of DVD , which is the subject on which we are conducting the inquiry and to which your question is addressed .
If we had evidence in other areas we would , as always , try to be effective in implementing the competition rules .
Question No 39 by ( H-0641 / 01 ) :
Subject : Lloyd 's petitions Following the investigations which it has conducted over the past year , is the Commission yet able to say whether Directive 73 / 239 / EEC on non-life insurance undertakings has been properly transposed and implemented by the UK Government ?
As a result of many complaints in conjunction with a number of petitions lodged by EU citizens with the Committee of Petitions of Parliament , the Commission has been examining very carefully whether the requirements of the first non-life insurance directive have been properly transposed and implemented with regard to the association of underwriters know as Lloyd 's .
To date the Commission is unable to confirm that all requirements of the first non-life insurance directive have been fully respected with regard to Lloyd 's .
The situation is extremely complex .
There are a number of specific provisions in the directive concerning Lloyd 's that are clearly reflected in UK national legislation .
The Commission is seeking to complete its inquiries as quickly as possible .
These inquiries are now very close to completion whereupon a decision will be taken , either to close the case or to launch formal infringement proceedings under Article 226 .
The Commission will inform Parliament of its decision as soon as it has been taken .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Bolkestein for his reply .
I recognise that he has reiterated what he said in a very full statement to the Committee on Petitions .
He informed the Petitions Committee back in July that the Commission would be ready at the end of the summer to give its response .
When I look outside the Chamber today , with the pouring rain , I think we are very close to the end of the summer .
I guess I am not going to get any clearer statement other than " as quickly as possible " .
Could I perhaps also ask Mr Bolkestein whether he is aware of the failure of Independent Insurance in the United Kingdom over recent months and the appointment by the British Government of an inquiry into the Equitable Life insurance company ?
Are his services looking at both of those insurance undertakings to satisfy themselves that in those respects the British Government has been properly applying European insurance directives ?
The questions which have been put to me just now are twofold .
The first question is rather of a meteorological nature .
It would be absurd to deny that it is raining outside .
Whether that is tantamount to stating that the summer has ended would perhaps be premature .
I have been reliably informed that summers usually end about 21 September and the Commission is still striving to meet a deadline , although I must admit that the case is of such complexity that it will need a thorough investigation by not only the MARKT directorate-general but also by other parts of the Commission .
It may not be possible to meet that deadline exactly , but the Member who has just spoken can count on my personal endeavour to adhere to it as closely as possible , since the Commission ought to take a decision one way or another as soon as possible .
Concerning the second question that was put to me , the Commission has taken cognisance of the most unfortunate failures of the two insurance undertakings that were mentioned .
The Member will appreciate that Lloyd 's is a unique case .
There is no other organisation in the world like it .
I would therefore hesitate to create the impression that what happened to the insurance undertakings to which reference was made is of any particular relevance to the case of Lloyd 's .
My service is looking at the failures of the other two insurance companies .
Naturally one is interested .
I have tried to follow it in the press although I do not know whether the press reports are exhaustive .
The people who help me in insurance undertakings have also taken a close interest , but may I assure the Member that we are fully stretched in looking at the Lloyd 's case itself .
Thank you very much , Mr Bolkestein .
We shall await the end of the summer , as you have suggested .
Second part Questions to Mr Busquin
Question No 40 by ( H-0606 / 01 ) :
Subject : Exploiting the results of EU-backed research In June , the Commission and the European Investment Bank signed an agreement to strengthen cooperation in order to boost research and technological innovation by offering financial support to researchers .
Given the need to exploit the results of EU-backed research and crucially to ensure downstream development and new job opportunities , can the Commission outline how it intends to raise awareness of and equality of access to these funds in Ireland and the other Member States , and what has been the initial reaction to this joint research and innovation agreement ?
Questions to Commissioner Nielson
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me firstly remind you that following the Lisbon European Council , the Commission and Member States were invited to implement , with the support of the European Investment Bank , measures aimed primarily at strengthening investments in technological research and development .
The joint memorandum establishing a framework for cooperation between the framework programme for Community research and the Innovation 2000 initiative from the European Investment Bank is a response to this request .
This joint memorandum aims to energise European research and innovation by drawing on existing synergies and developing new ones .
It is not , however , an instrument of the framework programme nor one of the Innovation 2000 initiative .
The Commission and the European Investment Bank have separate decision-making processes .
Efforts are being made to stimulate public awareness of this joint initiative . I would like to point out , for example , that it has been mentioned on television , in the daily papers and by six press agencies in the days following the signing of the memorandum .
In addition to this , the Commission and the European Investment Bank websites are linked and offer information on the memorandum .
A didactic guide explaining the sources of finance , whether these are supplementary , sequential or parallel , from the Commission and the European Investment Bank will shortly be available on the Internet .
Presentations and workshops are planned for the launch of the next framework programme .
Finally , the invitations to tender relating to this programme will draw the attention of candidates to this possibility of supplementary financing .
The Commission also believes that equal access to this finance is crucial .
For this reason , assessments will be founded upon a certain number of principles that have been acquired over a long period , to ascertain quality , transparency , equal treatment , impartiality as well as efficiency and speed of implementation .
Subsidy requests from the Commission and loans from the European Investment Bank will follow the procedures currently in force .
On the one hand , experts from the Commission will carry out an evaluation according to the regulations stated in the framework programme , which are specifically based on scientific quality , innovative nature , added Community value and prospects for economic development .
On the other hand , the economists and financial analysts from the European Investment Bank will assess the projects in order to ensure that they fulfil the objectives of the EIB , including those linked to their Community mandate , that they satisfy the criteria of economic and financial viability , especially in terms of the repayment of loans , and finally that they are acceptable in environmental terms .
The signing of the joint memorandum has already received a favourable response from researchers , universities and entrepreneurs , particularly with regard to venture capital .
They recognise the potential of such an agreement and the opportunity it offers in terms of combining Commission financing for integrated projects such as those proposed in the framework programme and loans from the European Investment Bank .
This is therefore a complementarity that we have been eager to implement .
I thank the Commissioner for his response .
However , I was looking for something more specific , if possible , under three headings .
Firstly , what consultation before the money is made available has been organised with research foundations , for instance universities , private research foundations and so on ?
Secondly , will outside technical assistance be used in the operation of the programme ?
If there will be outside technical assistance , who will be operating it ?
Thirdly , on the evaluation by the Commission and the EIB : is the evaluation purely based on economic return from the work or is it to ensure that there is ground- breaking scientific work which may not have an immediate economic return but could potentially in five or ten years time ?
Those three areas are of vital importance to people who are involved in cutting-edge technology that we do not know about today but will be using in ten or fifteen years ' time .
I think that Mr Crowley ' s questions are absolutely pertinent .
That is the reality on the ground .
So , what is happening at the moment ?
We currently have a framework programme for technological research and development that the Commission has been funding since its adoption by Parliament and the Council .
Until now there has been no link between what we do and what the European Investment Bank also does to support loans for innovation and infrastructures .
The objective therefore is to establish a link between the two .
This idea of mutual recognition should obviously not be a mechanism whose sole purpose is to complicate matters .
This is , therefore , why each body upholds its own procedures .
We have our own specific procedures for scientific assessment as well as for the framework programme and the European Investment Bank has its own financial and economic criteria .
It is true that we are currently , with the European Investment Bank , studying solutions that will hopefully be used in the development of new processes that help innovation and new financing procedures , taking account of experience already gained on the one hand by the framework programme for research , and by the European Investment Bank on the other .
This work is in progress .
I cannot foresee what the results will be but I can already tell you that the mechanism has already been implemented at Heidelberg , amongst other places , where a technology transfer centre is to be financed by the European Investment Bank under conditions that are very favourable to this centre , which has chosen to work with the European Investment Bank .
This would not have been possible without the privileged contacts that we had in relation to research programmes .
There are examples , therefore , but a great effort with regard to information and the study of dossiers still needs to be made .
I thank you for your question and I hope that it will contribute to the dissemination of this information .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to thank Mr Busquin for his initiative , because the European Investment Bank has an excellent set of tools for actively supporting research .
My question is , can the European Investment Bank also grant indirect subsidies , e.g. to organisations helping small and medium-sized enterprises , so that the small and medium-sized economy in Europe which , as you know , accounts for 60 % of the gross national product and employs two-thirds of the workforce , can also benefit .
We need indirect arrangements here too .
Yes , that is clear and is precisely the idea of the " Innovation 2000 " initiative that the European Investment Bank put forward at the Lisbon Summit .
This is , therefore , absolutely possible right now ; a sum of EUR 1.5 billion has additionally been set aside by the European Bank within the framework of European Investment Fund .
As there is currently a strong bond between the European Investment Bank and the European Investment Fund , the " Innovation 2000 " project includes EUR 1.5 billion to support technological innovation , especially in small- and medium- sized enterprises .
It is possible that this information is , unfortunately , still relatively unknown and I think that it would be useful for it to be disseminated .
Question No 41 by ( H-0604 / 01 ) :
Subject : Eradicating poverty and the European Community 's development policy In a statement jointly issued by the Council and the Commission on 10 November 2000 , the main objective of Community development policy was confirmed as reducing and , eventually , eradicating poverty .
Despite the extraordinary and unique efforts of the European Union , which provides approximately half of all public aid to developing countries , the fact remains that in sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia , over 40 % of the population are still living below the poverty line , and world-wide , 800 million people , 200 million of them children , are suffering from chronic malnutrition .
Now , almost one year later , what progress would the Commission wish to point to in relation to the worthy objectives set out in the joint statement , and what more does the Commission believe we can do to encourage other countries to follow the EU ' s lead and play their part in reducing and eradicating poverty ?
Mr President , since November 2000 , the Commission has taken a number of important steps towards strengthening poverty reduction in Community development cooperation .
With regard to the EC 's own efforts , progress on implementing the poverty focus has been reported through various Commission papers .
The Commission is midway through the process of preparing poverty-focussed country-strategy papers for the ACP countries which will implement the Cotonou agreement .
Developing countries ' own poverty reduction policies are the foundation for these country-strategy papers .
A working paper of the Commission services has been drafted on measures taken and planned to take forward the poverty focus of the EC 's development policy and poverty awareness training has been offered to the Commission 's development staff .
The communication has been produced showing how the Commission is mainstreaming gender equality in development cooperation .
Gender inequality is a significant determinant of poverty .
Progress has also been made in developing policy coherence for poverty reduction , for example , a communication has been prepared on core labour standards and social development .
With respect to other donors , it should be noted that many EU Member States have already made poverty eradication the main objective of their bilateral development programmes .
The EC is explicitly and financially supporting the poverty reduction strategy papers as the main vehicle for ensuring universal and coordinate donor support for efforts by developing countries to eradicate poverty for their populations .
Regular contact has been established between the Commission , the IMF and the World Bank and with the UN agencies to coordinate our support for the poverty-reduction strategies of developing countries .
We strongly endorse the principle of country ownership of development policies which is intrinsic to this PRSP approach .
Finally , it should be highlighted that the Commission has contributed to work by the Development Assistance Committee , the DAC of the OECD , to develop policy guidelines for Member countries .
All in all this means that we have never been in a situation where the coordination and consensus among the donors has been better .
It is very important that we play our part in this common work .
Furthermore , a consolidated report will appear in the annual report on implementation of external aid from the Commission and that annual report will appear later this autumn .
Mr President , very briefly I want to thank the Commissioner and congratulate him on the progress he is making in the particular area of poverty reduction .
It is a terribly important area but in the new ACP-EU partnership agreement there is a special reference to the tackling of corruption .
In the context of poverty reduction , what progress is the Commission making in tackling corruption ?
One of the things I noticed throughout the ACP-EU partnership debate was the lack of emphasis on education .
The importance of education cannot be underlined enough .
It is extremely important that , in the tackling of poverty reduction , education is given a high priority .
Would the Commissioner agree with this particular statement ?
I shall answer the last part of the question first .
The real dilemma is that everything is lacking and everything is needed .
The response from our partner countries in the ACP group has , to a large extent , been dominated by quite a high priority on infrastructure .
We will continue road building - big roads , small roads - but education and health are the next two items on the list of priorities .
We will be continuing a high-intensity effort on education .
Regarding corruption and the new instrument in the Cotonou Agreement - Article 97 - I can inform Parliament that it will be used .
Within a short time all this will come out in the first case of the new Article 97 being actively used .
This is not to say that we have a powerful and guaranteed effective instrument but it does mean that everything is out in the open and that we are addressing this problem .
It also means that we want to do this by means of a cooperative effort and not just as a sort of punishment .
The lack of capacity to do things right is also part of why things are done wrongly .
A broad-based effort is necessary .
We have to stick with it and we are going to use it .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions No 42 and 43 will be taken together .
Question No 42 by ( H-0613 / 01 ) :
Subject : Child sex tourism The international organisation , ECPAT , works in conjunction with tour operators to combat child sex tourism .
The Commission has hitherto provided a grant covering 60 % of the cost of the project but ECPAT has now been notified that this support from the Enterprise DG will be withdrawn as of next year and the organisation has been recommended to apply for funding from other DGs instead .
The project is the only one of its kind and the Commission 's support is fully in line with the Council 's 1999 decision on efforts to combat child sex tourism .
The Enterprise DG has a responsibility , therefore , to ensure that the ECPAT project continues to receive support from another DG before the support in its present form is withdrawn .
Can the Commission promise that this unique and innovative project will continue to receive support ?
Question No 43 by ( H-0616 / 01 ) :
Subject : Long-term aid to combat child sex tourism ECPAT is an organisation working to combat sexual exploitation of children , particularly in countries where European travel companies operate .
The financial support which ECPAT receives from the Enterprise DG is reportedly to be withdrawn from next year .
During the period that ECPAT has received funding from the Enterprise DG , very important work has been carried out , primarily for the incalculable benefit of an unknown number of children , but also for the travel industry , which has drawn up its own code of conduct .
Does the Commission have any idea how the highly important work done by ECPAT can continue to receive EU funding to ensure that forceful measures to combat child sex tourism can also be taken in the future ?
Can the Commission envisage transferring the project to another DG ?
The European Commission has been co-funding measures against child sex tourism since 1997 . The Commission intends to continue to fund such measures in the coming years .
The transfer of the management of budget line B7-626 - fight against child sex tourism in developing countries - from the Enterprise DG to the European Cooperation Office means that the human rights and democracy unit of EuropAid is now in charge of identifying and co-funding projects dealing with child sex tourism .
Organisations such as ECPAT , which are interested in obtaining co-funding should submit their proposals to this unit , which will continue to implement Commission policy in managing the budget line for the fight against child sex tourism , taking into account the best interests of target groups and best practice in project implementation .
If the proposal is accepted , the EuropAid Cooperation Office is ready to guide ECPAT through the further steps .
We will continue with this .
We believe that the change here will actually improve the efficiency of our activity in this area .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I note with satisfaction that the Commission is going to continue to provide ECPAT with resources .
Let me just say , however , that the child sex trade has not disappeared just because the newspaper headlines have disappeared .
It is therefore incredibly important that the Commission should continue with this work .
I nonetheless have a problem with the proposal put to us by Commissioner Nielsen , to the effect that this must all take place via Euroaid .
If I have been informed correctly , Euroaid requires that the implementing organisation be an NGO in a developing country .
That would rule out ECPAT , which does not carry on its main activities in the developing countries .
Nor has my own country been spared .
We have recently received a report from ECPAT , estimating that approximately 400 children in Sweden aged from 4 months to 17 years have been exploited .
These are frightening revelations , showing that we cannot withdraw support but must continue to give increased support to these organisations .
I therefore take the Commissioner ' s words as a promise that this will happen .
The organisational form is something to which you will have to attend .
I am not sure that we have a problem concerning the fact that this is not an NGO in a developing country .
There is no intention whatsoever of changing the eligibility criteria for judging an organisation .
The principles are totally unchanged .
It is a question of improving handling efficiency .
Doing this in the same office that is handling matters relating to the human rights budget line should increase the intensity and awareness of the staff involved .
I do not think we have a problem .
I want to thank Commissioner Nielson for his positive answer .
In answer to Mrs Theorin ' s justified question , he has produced an important clarification to the effect that this does not mean any change to the criteria for assessing whether an organisation , in this case ECPAT , is or is not eligible for continued EU subsidy .
Allow me to say that your fellow Commissioner , Mr Liikanen , has , in the same way as yourself today , Mr Nielson , given positive answers to questions raised by myself and a number of fellow MEPs here in the European Parliament .
It feels as if there is a genuine commitment to fighting the assault on human dignity constituted by one of our modern age ' s most loathsome forms of the slave trade .
Allow me also to say - and I believe I can also speak here on behalf of Mrs Theorin - that we hope that the time is past when we have to ask questions about long-term financing for ECPAT ' s activities and for the fight against child sex tourism .
Let there be an end to this jumping from one Directorate-General to another .
We definitely agree on the subject .
I just want to add one remark concerning the proportions in terms of money .
The organisation that has been discussed here is the biggest recipient in this field but we are still talking about quite a small amount of money .
Concerning the character of the problem , the visibility and the very official and strong involvement that we show by doing this at Commission level is a very important part of what we doing .
The economic support we are providing here is not a lot of money : about EUR 360 000 .
Concerning the real problem , we should not get the wrong impression about proportions .
It is as important that we do it swiftly and efficiently .
Question No 44 by ( H-0614 / 01 ) :
Subject : Humanitarian aid for children During the seminar of 1 and 2 March in Norrköping , Commissioner Nielson presented shocking figures on armed conflicts and their impact on children .
According to UNICEF estimates , 2 million children were killed over the past decade as a direct or indirect result of armed conflicts , whilst a further 6 million children were left disabled or seriously injured , 1 million were orphaned , 20 million were forced to flee their homes and more than 300 000 were themselves involved in the fighting .
According to the Commissioner , these figures are not totally reliable because there is no effective system for recording such data .

Bearing in mind that the Commission 's Humanitarian Aid Office has spent around EUR 40 million on these children since the start of 2000 , will the Commission act on the wish expressed by the Commissioner responsible and develop a standardised information system which might be used by those responsible on the spot - peace-keeping troops , staff working for humanitarian organisations , etc. to gather and record data , which would help to determine the real scale of the problem and deal with it more systematically ?
Reliable figures on the impact of armed conflict on children are hard to come by .
Although data is available it is often context-specific , anecdotal or piecemeal .
The same consolidated numbers - two million children killed in armed conflict , 300 000 children involved in armed fighting , etc , which were brought to the attention of the international community in the excellent report prepared by Graça Machel back in 1996 are repeatedly invoked without qualification , although they cannot continue to hold true .
I first highlighted the serious lack of reliable data at my meeting with the Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict , Mr Otunnu , in December 2000 .
Inspired by the discussion with him I took the opportunity of the seminar organised by the Swedish presidency in Norrköping in March this year to call for increased efforts to improve the knowledge about children in conflict .
Since that time ECHO has sought to build momentum for the initiation of a large-scale data collection project .
The main purpose of the endeavour is to get an impression of the real scale of the problem because the lack of reliable data is both detrimental to our advocacy efforts and a major obstacle to improving our humanitarian response .
But I do not want to initiate just another project resulting in a report which might never be used .
Numerous studies have already been conducted on children in conflict .
But , as long as there are no common concepts and common definitions , a complex project seeking to establish hard facts has little chance of succeeding .
Therefore , rather than focusing on instant results , we are seeking to build broad international support for a comprehensive initiative on a data collection methodology which will enable comparisons across regions and over time .
Last month , ECHO participated in the seminar in Florence - Filling Knowledge Gaps : a Research Agenda on the Impact of Armed Conflict on Children - organised by the office of Mr Otunnu , Unicef and others .
The workshop succeeded in establishing a network of researchers from both the north and the south , who are ready to undertake research around four themes , one of which will be data on children affected by armed conflict .
In parallel with this initiative , ECHO will continue the cooperation with Unicef .
As the UN agency mandated with protecting and assisting children , Unicef has the potential to play a central role in data collection .
Therefore the Commission is encouraging Unicef to develop a substantial international data collection project on children in conflict , using Mr Otunnu 's research network as a sounding board .
I am ready to make a political as well as a financial commitment to improving the availability of data on children affected by armed conflict as long as any new initiative includes general agreements on definitions , concepts and methodologies for the data collection .
The goal is to create a system that enables people working in the field , from all different kinds of organisations , to feed information into a uniform system .
This will also have a strong effect on the advocacy work in the countries in conflict because they will know that the numbers , the boys and girls we talk about , the real statistics that emerge from this operation , have been produced on their own home ground and are not something which may or may not be true found in a report .
Commissioner , I share your care and concern to improve the system and you have our support .
I have two real - not rhetorical - questions .
You said that often there are no common concepts or common definitions and that often we do not have the support on the ground which we need in order to conduct a proper investigation .
Who is stopping you ?
I think that this is not just a national question .
There are also political aspects which I do not expect you to take completely in hand , but they are there .
I also have a second question , which relates to this and the previous debate .
Wars do not only kill children ; they also leave them orphaned or in poverty , which are traumatic experiences , and there are other aspects and I should like to ask if you are honestly addressing them .
For example , we have seen sexual abuse of children by our soldiers , soldiers of the European Union , in Somalia and elsewhere .
There is a huge campaign in Bosnia and Kosovo to prostitute children , young children , both boys and girls .
Is there anything you can do about this ?
In relation to this question the most important supplementary aspect here is : who is stopping us ?
Obviously we are being stopped in this effort by those who are causing the problems and who are responsible for the conflicts .
The conflicts we are facing today are conflicts where the civil population is not detached from the conflict .
On the contrary , they are more than hostages ; they are victims .
This means that nobody fights an honourable war and the guilt of having abducted children and made them participants in the warfare is psychologically the main reason why it is so difficult to get the truth .
The environment is difficult , politically , and in every other sense of the word .
A free press does not have easy access to the places on the earth where these things happen .
Next week I will be in Afghanistan to show our support for the organisations we are funding there and who have volunteers working there .
The visit will also show the people of Afghanistan and the victims of the conflict that we are taking more than just a political interest .
We are taking a real , tangible , humanitarian interest .
By doing what we are doing we may also be pushing the limit for what is possible .
Question No 45 by ( H-0636 / 01 ) :
Subject : Humanitarian aid in the Caucasus What percentage of the humanitarian aid earmarked in 2001 for Chechnya and for Chechen refugees in neighbouring regions , including the Republic of Georgia , has already been distributed in the crisis region , and what is the schedule for the remainder of 2001 and for 2002 ?
Mr President , since the beginning of the conflict in 1999 , the Commission has granted some EUR 44 million in humanitarian assistance to the victims of the Chechnya conflict .
So far this year , three funding decisions totalling EUR 18.5 million have been adopted .
They cater for the most urgent needs of those affected by the conflict , benefiting IDPs and the most vulnerable population in Chechnya as well as Chechen IDPs in Inguchetia and Dagestan .
This implies that in 2001 , EUR 18.5 million of the EUR 25 million originally provided for have already been committed .
In order to determine further funding needs this year , the European Commission Humanitarian Aid Office will undertake another assessment of the humanitarian situation in September and subsequently submit a funding proposal to the Commission .
The main objective of this forthcoming decision will be preparation for the winter .
The geographic scope of the aid activities will be determined as per the identified priority needs .
The minimum amount required to this end is currently estimated at around EUR 11.5 million .
In 2002 , ECHO intends to continue funding operations in line with its humanitarian mandate .
Obviously , the scope of ECHO 's involvement will depend on the security situation and the humanitarian working conditions .
This notably concerns our operations inside Chechnya where things are still very difficult for us and where we are still engaged in a so far unsatisfactory dialogue with the Russian authorities concerning radio communication , access , and working conditions and security in general for the people working for our money there .
Thank you , Commissioner . I should just like to ask two more questions .
First , what is the situation regarding humanitarian help for Chechen refugees in Georgia ?
Unless I am mistaken , you have not yet said anything about that .
And secondly , are you planning a mission to Chechnya and does the Commission plan to set up a permanent representation there ?
Mr President , on Georgia , I can give the following information : an estimated 7 000 Chechen refugees are believed to be in the Pankisi Valley in Georgia .
Since the outbreak of the conflict in the autumn of 1999 , ECHO has allocated a total of EUR 820 000 in humanitarian aid to this beneficiary group .
The operations funded focused mostly on basic healthcare .
However , given the limited budgetary resources and the increasing humanitarian needs in the northern Caucasus , allocations need to be prioritised .
Therefore , so far this year , no funding has been earmarked for Chechen refugees in Georgia .
An ECHO assessment to be undertaken in September - the one I spoke about - as well as the further evolution of needs on the ground will determine possible further ECHO assistance in favour of Chechen refugees in Georgia .
This is a very cautious evaluation , but so far I am confident that the balance of our actions is correct .
On the Chechnya situation proper , I am not currently planning any mission there .
We are following very closely every activity there .
The setting up of an internal office is not considered to be the most efficient way to proceed at this time .
We go in and out and are monitoring as closely as possible and as closely as we are allowed to .
Question No 46 by ( H-0666 / 01 ) :
Subject : Oil exploration in Sudan Is the Commission aware of the scorched earth policy practised by the government of Sudan to clear the way for oil exploration and exploitation by major European oil companies in the Upper Nile region of Sudan ?
In light of this policy what action is the Commission planning to take to assess the impact of this oil exploration on the human rights situation in the area ?
Would the Commission promote a temporary investment ban on European investment in the Sudanese oil sector and a closure of its borders to Nile Blend crude oil until a lasting peace has been agreed in Sudan ?
Would the Commission ensure the introduction of binding human rights legislation to hold companies accountable for their activities overseas , either directly or through affiliates ?
I will start by quoting the last part of the question - ' would the Commission ensure the introduction of binding human rights legislation to hold companies accountable for their activities overseas either directly or through affiliates ? '
I would react by warning against rushing into the principle of extra-territoriality in our legislation .
I have a clear impression of this House 's strong opinion concerning the Helms-Burton Act with its extra-territoriality and the problems it creates .
It is necessary to approach this with caution .
As regards Sudan , we are following the political situation closely and we are actively participating in the political dialogue between the EU and Sudan that was resumed in November 1999 .
Despite continued concerns about the human rights situation and the lack of progress in the peace process , the political dialogue is considered to be generally positive and it has been agreed to continue it for another year .
The Commission supports initiatives in favour of human rights in Sudan and is planning a study to prepare a more comprehensive strategy in this area .
The Commission is aware that economic issues , like sharing Sudan 's oil wealth , play an ever increasing role in the conflict .
So one could say that the development of this oil sector has raised the stakes for the peace negotiations .
Hopefully it could be turned into an asset for that peace negotiation process .
The Commission is aware of the accusations that many people living near the oil concessions have been forced to leave and that they have been exposed to human rights abuses .
We believe that there is no doubt that militias armed by the government to protect the oil fields and militias supported by the SPLM are involved in human rights violations .
However no accurate independent and objective information is available to confirm a large-scale scorched earth policy organised and implemented by the government .
As regards a possible investment ban , the Commission doubts the utility of unilateral sanctions as a foreign policy tool .
We are convinced that a policy of engagement rather than isolation is the best way to have our concerns heard and expectations met .
As far as legislation is concerned , the Commission already promotes respect of human rights by EU companies wherever they operate , in particular through the OECD guidelines for multinational enterprises .
This instrument , although not legally binding , entails strong recommendations by 33 governments to their multinational enterprises to operate in a socially responsible manner worldwide .
It is clear that this is not the same as what is asked for in the question but having broad international support for these principles is in any case necessary to promote efficiency .
I believe this is the best way of proceeding .
I will be brief .
I do not see the relevance of this idea of ex-territoriality .
We are talking about major European oil companies and they should be held accountable for their activities .
We must not forget that the money and the profits that are being made by these companies are coming back into Europe .
Major European companies have to be accountable in how they operate in other parts of the world .
If there was binding legislation that major European companies had to adhere to , then you would not have the situation we have at present .
This does not just concern major oil companies , it also concerns other European multinationals which ignore their responsibilities for human rights , for the environment and for basic civil liberties .
They are making huge profits and we here are benefiting from those profits .
We have to address that issue .
If I were in a more cynical mood I would say that you are slightly optimistic in saying that we are benefiting from the profits of the oil companies .
What I said about the principle of extra-territoriality is right .
It is a real problem to legislate here for what is going on in another country .
The real problem is that what is legal on paper or in practice in a country like the Sudan can be very different from what we would accept as being legal here .
But that difference is part of the reality of our world .
So I will stick to my warning against this Parliament following what the American Congress has done with the Cuba problem , seen from their point of view and the Helms-Burton Act , by imposing outside their own principles of jurisdiction .
We can agree with them or not , but these principles were only decided on by them .
That is the core of the problem .
Although the ethics of this discussion point in the direction that the honourable Member has expressed , the mechanics and the legislative aspects of evoking this principle are still something I would counsel against .
I had the opportunity to visit the Sudan earlier this year , as did Mr Corrie , though not at the same time , and he led an official delegation .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his balanced response .
It seems to me that what is needed here in Europe is an appreciation of the facts of the situation - what is actually happening .
Many allegations have been made .
The Sudanese Government denies them .
We want to get at the truth .
I would like to hear whether the Commission is going to make any effort , or is making any effort , to try to establish whether or not there is a scorched earth policy .
The Commission representative in Khartoum said to me that our aid to the Sudan is severely limited because of political constraints .
If only we could start to get more aid into that country we might do more to end the civil war there and actually get greater respect for human rights across the whole of that country .
That should be the ambition of us all .
This is one of the very difficult cases where we , on the one hand , are strongly involved in humanitarian support but where the issue of access and of staying clear of the warring parties to deliver to the people in need has been a major problem .
On top of that the whole performance and the political problems in relation to the government and its policies and human rights aspects have created quite a sour situation over some years .
Now the effort to be instrumental in a peace process by engaging in a deliberate dialogue seems to be working .
That is as much as we can say now .
I am perfectly well aware of the views and advice of our head of the delegation in Khartoum and that certainly indicates that the dialogue that we are in the middle of is making some progress .
So we are looking at ways of balancing the stick and the carrot .
I cannot be more precise at the moment .
In both the Swedish and international media , Christian Aid is reported to have demanded that , for example , the Swedish oil company , Lundin Oil , whose board also includes the UN Secretary-General ' s adviser for the Balkans , Carl Bildt , should leave Sudan .
Have Commissioner Nielson and the Commission had any contact at all with Christian Aid and Lundin Oil and , for that matter , also perhaps with UN adviser Carl Bildt on the subject of these allegations of human rights violations in connection with the road building being done so that oil can be extracted in southern Sudan ?
This oil company has , I understand , now been purchased by an American oil company but that does not change the picture .
It neither adds to nor subtracts from the problem .
Nor in my view does the presence of the former Swedish Prime Minister on its board of directors affect the problem .
We have no specific relations with the organisation mentioned or this specific oil company .
The oil activity in the Sudan should be looked upon as a resource for the country to be utilised to the fullest extent possible for the good of the Sudanese people .
We see many cases of a perverse use of oil resources .
If we look at it from a point of view of distribution policy , very few of the developing countries with oil resources are enjoying socially positive effects from that .
One of the elements that we raised in the discussion on priorities in East Timor , at the very launching of our presence there , was to advise them that they should be sure to get first-class consultants to assist in handling the whole issue of the oil resources which are now part of the economic future of that country .
Internal distribution is important and this should be discussed with probably most developing countries .
Thank you , Mr Nielson , for your long and outstanding cooperation .
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , Question 47 , tabled by Mr Howitt , shall be answered in writing .
Questions to Mr Liikanen
Question No 48 by ( H-0600 / 01 ) :
Subject : Prices for unmetered access to the Internet A main instrument in the eEurope process is benchmarking .
The Commission ' s website ( at http : / / europa.eu.int / information _ society / eeurope / benchmarking / index _ en.htm ) provides a list of the benchmarks to be published by the Commission .
In Section 3 of that list is the vitally important matter of unmetered access to the Internet , which has become established in the UK market and hopefully soon across the Union too .
Unfortunately , the Commission has not yet provided the benchmarking data for this key indicator .
Will the Commission now provide this information for the European citizen via its website , giving comparative data on current average retail unmetered prices in the fifteen Member States , as well as the unmetered wholesale products available from incumbent operators ?
Mr President , cost of access is the key determinant of Internet use and policies to reduce the cost by introducing more competition are central to the year of action plan .
In view of this the Internal Market Council in November last year endorsed a set of indicators to benchmark the year of action plan , which included the cost of access .
When defining the access price indicator , the Council specified the source to be OECD , supplemented if necessary by a Commission study .
The advantage of the OECD data was that it enabled comparisons to be made with third countries and especially the United States .
OECD data was used in the Commission 's report to the Stockholm European Council .
The data includes unmetered access , however their methodology considers only prices charged by the dominant telecom operating in each country .
In practice , this meant that there were too few figures available to merit their inclusion in the website .
To overcome this methodology , the Commission called for tender for studies to measure Internet access prices in the EU .
The response was good and price data will be measured on 1 November 2001 and made available to the Commission not later than 15 January 2002 .
It should then be repeated half a year later .
All the research will be published by a benchmarking section of the e-Europe website .
Although OECD analysis is limited , it gives an indication of the impact of unmetered access on the price of the Internet .
The cost in September 2000 of unmetered access in the OECD report was - and here we use dollars because they use dollars , next year we will use euros - USD 25 in the UK , USD 35 in Spain and USD 50 in Germany .
New figures from August 2001 show no notable variation in unmetered access prices .
The USA remains at the lower end with USD 20 .
It is also clear from the benchmarking exercise , that unmetered access is growing rapidly in the EU .
For example , provisional data from the Internet use survey shows that in June the proportion of households with unmetered ADSL access has increased by over 200 % from last October 's survey .
The overall penetration of ADSL remains low , that is a fact , but there have been several spectacular advances in Member States , for example , Belgium went from 1 % to 11 % in the eight months separating the two surveys .
That was such a comprehensive reply that I cannot think of a supplementary question , so I will not ask one .
Thank you for your decision , Mr Newton Dunn .
As the author is not present , Question Nos 49 and 50 lapse .
Question No 51 by ( H-0617 / 01 ) :
Subject : High-speed tyres in Sweden In April this year , when many car owners in Sweden were about to buy new summer tyres , an absurd situation arose .
The tyre industry claimed that an EU directive stipulated that every new car must be equipped with tyres capable of coping with the vehicle 's theoretical top speed .
The fact that the maximum speed limit in Sweden is 110 kph was not relevant and many cars had to be fitted with tyres capable of coping with speeds of 270 kph and in some cases as much as 300 kph .
Despite the risk of fines and the new registration test , it is common for car owners to ignore the high-speed tyre requirement .
Many tyre dealers have pre-printed forms for customers to sign releasing the dealer from liability for fitting tyres which can only withstand speeds up to 190 kph .
Is this interpretation of the directive correct , and does the individual car owner have the right to ask for tyres to be fitted to the vehicle which are not capable of coping with the its theoretical top speed ?
At European level the specifications for tyres to be fitted to passenger cars are dealt with by Directive 92 / 23 / EEC of 31 March 1992 .
European legislation on type approval of motor vehicles stipulates that every new car must be equipped with a certain category of tyres specified by the manufacturer of the vehicle and capable of coping with the vehicle top speed .
However , this directive governs solely the initial entry into service of the car before its registration in the fleet of one Member State .
No indication is given concerning the use of the vehicle , including for the aspects relating to the top speed of replacement tyres .
Another piece of legislation - Directive 1999 / 37 / EEC on the minimum set of information to be put on registration papers for motor vehicles - does not include any specification for this characteristic of replacement tyres .
Therefore the interpretation by the tyre industry and distributors in Sweden of the relevant EC legislation is correct .
However , the fact that at European level no specific prescription is given does not automatically allow car owners to replace the tyres with the model they wish .
At national level and according to the principle of subsidiarity , the police and judicial authorities of the Member States have responsibility for enforcement of the relevant road safety provisions and the imposition of corresponding sanctions when needed .
In principle , fitting a car with tyres not capable of coping with its top speed could invalidate the conformity of the vehicle with the EU type approval .
This potentially dangerous situation could be penalised by the police , if it is in contradiction to national legislation .
Many thanks to the Commissioner for his answer .
In Sweden , the maximum speed is 110 km / h , but now many Swedes have to have tyres that can cope with speeds of up to 250 km / h .
That costs a lot of money , of course , and causes a lot of inconvenience for car owners .
There are really no aspects of road safety necessitating this type of tyre .
I therefore think that it remains very difficult to justify making such demands , entailing large additional costs for car owners .
I understood from the Commissioner ' s answer that an owner changing the tyres on his car for the second time is entitled to have another type of tyre , if permitted by the national authorities .
Is that a correct interpretation of your answer ?
Mr President , I must say that this is a rather complex part of EU legislation .
Before I give a precise reply to the last question I want to consult my experts , but perhaps I can give one reply to the problem under discussion .
Even though in Sweden the speed limit is 110 to 120 , tyres are expected to cope with higher speed limits because , if a Swedish car goes over the bridge to Denmark and from Denmark to Germany where there are no speed limits on motorways , they will be travelling at higher speeds .
The same security should be guaranteed throughout Europe .
I will come back to the honourable Member of Parliament on the first question as soon as possible .
Question No 52 by ( H-0620 / 01 ) :
Subject : Pedestrian-friendly car In many EU countries a debate is going on about improving road safety , and one project put forward in this connection has been that of the " pedestrian-friendly car " .
Is the Commission planning a new directive on this topic , or is progress in this area being made by means of possible voluntary commitments by industry ?
Mr President , the Commission is aware of the matters for concern which have been raised by the honourable Member .
In order to discuss these questions the Commission issued a communication , on 11 July 2001 on the protection of pedestrians .
It is important to remember the significance of this topic .
Each year , 9 000 pedestrians and cyclists are killed , and 200 000 are injured , in accidents involving a motor vehicle .
The European motor industry has now , after discussions held with the Commission , made a commitment to incorporate a raft of safety features from 2002 onwards .
These aim at improving pedestrian safety in accident situations .
As to how regulation is to be implemented , there is a choice between , on the one hand , a voluntary agreement of the industry based on agreed objectives and , on the other hand , the conventional legislative route .
In July , the Commission found that the content of the industry 's commitment matched the objectives set by the Commission .
The final decision on whether the safety standards will be implemented by a commitment - which will be closely monitored - or by legislation , will be made by the end of the year .
According to the agreement , the car manufacturers promise to ensure that all new passenger cars will go through a series of tests with the purpose of ensuring that the cars are designed in such a way that pedestrians and cyclists who are involved in an accident will suffer as little injury as possible .
The discussions which have taken place with the Association of European Car Manufacturers on the commitment of the industry have been based on the following objectives : first of all , attaining the objectives proposed by the EEVC committee which deals with the improvement of European vehicle safety ; secondly , implementing measures to improve the safety of pedestrians in the short and medium term ; thirdly , adopting new and improved technology which will effectively improve the safety of pedestrians ; and fourthly , finding an innovative solution in which passive and active safety features will be combined .
The objective of the commitment is a reduction in the number of fatalities and also a reduction in the number and seriousness of injuries .
It is estimated that the annual number of deaths would be cut by two thousand if all motor vehicles on the roads of the European Union met the requirements of the EEVC tests .
This reduction would represent 20 percent of the present level .
Thanks to new technology , deaths could be reduced even further .
If the Commission decides to propose legislation , this would be based on the content of the commitment .
The industry is making a commitment that as from 1 July 2005 all new types of vehicles will meet requirements which relate to the first series of passive measures recommended by the joint ( that is , the Commission 's joint ) research centre .
The improvements will be added to the existing models in stages , with the result that these will be included in the features of all new vehicles by 2012 .
In the next stage , the manufacturers will commit to installing other safety equipment .
This means that from 2010 onwards the objectives set by EEVC will finally be attained , either in accordance with EEVC 's technical proposals or by other measures which will have an impact on safety at least equal to this .
As one example we can mention that from the beginning of next year all new cars will be fitted with day running lights , and inflexible " bull bars " will be banned .
From 2003 onwards , all new vehicles would be fitted with anti-blocking brakes .
The Japanese car manufacturers , who are represented by the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association JAMA , expressed their official approval of the matter by making an identical commitment in July .
The ASCEA and JAMA commitments cover over 95 percent of the market for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles in the EU .
Negotiations concerning similar commitments are underway with the South Korean car manufacturers , which would lead to almost one hundred percent coverage .
As the honourable Member is aware , the Commission has sent the commitment which was approved in July to the European Parliament and Council for comment .
Mr President , I wish to thank the Commissioner for his thorough response .
I see that the Commission is devoting thought to traffic safety , even though in my opinion a phrase such as " pedestrian-friendly car " is wrong , since there can be no such thing as a one thousand or two thousand kilogram steel object which would be friendly to a person when it hits that person at a speed of several tens or even hundreds of kilometres an hour .
But the question , above all , was whether the Commission will issue a Directive proposal on the matter , or whether it is prepared to make an agreement with the car manufacturers .
Is the reply of the Commissioner to be interpreted as meaning that , at some stage , the idea will come to predominate within the Commission that the quickest results can be obtained by making an agreement with the car manufacturers , in other words that the preferred line of action will be to follow this procedure rather than enacting a Directive on the matter ?
Mr President , the Commission left final decision making until after the opinion of the Council and Parliament had been heard .
Both alternatives have their good points .
It is clear that the agreement route will be quicker , but this also represents a new way of action .
However , a resolution of this type has already been made previously , in connection with the Auto-Oil decision .
The legislative route is more traditional and familiar , but will be more time-consuming ; however the Commission wishes to make this decision now that the reporting round is complete .
Question No 53 by ( H-0629 / 01 ) :
Subject : Origin of information technology as used in SENSUS and AVENTINUS On Wednesday , 13 June , the Commission decided to undertake an inquiry into the Europol scandal .
This inquiry must not be confined to ' the management of SENSUS ' .
OLAF must examine all tendering procedures and all contracts under AVENTINUS and SENSUS .
Such an independent inquiry is the only certain way of obtaining a clear picture of the murky doings of Europol .
One of the most important questions which remains unanswered is the origin of the basic technology used under SENSUS and AVENTINUS and Europol ' s Europolis and Eurint systems .
Will the Commission ask OLAF to examine all tendering procedures and contracts relating to AVENTINUS and SENSUS ?
Can the Commission confirm that the patented Polygon technology belonging to Polygenesys of Munich is being used under SENSUS and AVENTINUS and Europol ' s Europolis and Eurint systems ?
If so , how was this technology and / or the right to use it acquired ?
The honourable Member refers to an inquiry launched by the Commission on 13 June following press articles on Europol .
In order to avoid a possible misunderstanding the Commission will have to point out that it has not launched an inquiry into the Europol-related matter to which the honourable Member refers .
As far as the Commission is aware the matter concerns accusations of fraud unrelated to the Sensus contract .
The Commission understands that internal investigations by Europol have led to the Dutch judicial authorities now investigating the matter .
As far as the action the Commission has undertaken concerning the Sensus project is concerned , the Commission has initiated an internal review of the management of this project as indicated in the Commission 's reply to the oral questions by the honourable Member .
Following this review and also on the basis of ongoing , more general recommendations , both from the Court of Auditors and the external monitoring panel of the Information Society Technologies programme , the Commission is implementing changes in procedures which will ensure significant improvements in project management .
The Commission attends the meetings of the management board of Europol and meetings of the heads of national units in an observer capacity .
It has no mandate to investigate Europol other than in the context of direct contractor relations such as through the Sensus project .
In the context of Sensus and as explained in the replies to written questions , the Commission is not currently planning a financial audit of Europol 's participation in Sensus .
But the need for such an audit will be assessed again when all the cost claims related to Sensus have been submitted by project participants .
That should happen in the next few months .
Sensus and Aventinus were involved in pre-competitive research using many basic technologies for the production of a demonstrator .
The objective was to overcome linguistic barriers between European law enforcement agencies in their fight against organised crime such as drugs smuggling and illegal immigration .
Sensus is an assembly of software models including linguistic content , utilisation and report generation , workflow and database management systems .
There is therefore no specific basic technology .
According to information received by the Commission , although Polygon was originally intended to be used in Sensus , in the autumn of 1999 a different technology was selected instead .
The Commission service has been assured by the contractors that Polygon is not a component of the Sensus demonstrator .
The coordinator of the Aventinus projects has confirmed that Polygon was not used in either Aventinus I or Aventinus II .
As far as technologies used in Europolis and Eurint systems are concerned , the Commission is not in a position to address the question of the honourable Member .
Of course , I thank the Commissioner for his very full answer , from which we can nevertheless extract some new elements in this thriller , if I may call it that .
Still , I am very troubled , Commissioner .
I have the feeling that in the light of what is happening at the moment at Europol , there is insufficient monitoring , and that in some way or other we shall have to design a system at European level for monitoring Europol more effectively .
I know that the present OLAF Regulation is not sufficient for this .
I should therefore like to ask the Commissioner to investigate possible proposals .
A second supplementary question concerns the coordinator of the Sensus programme .
We all know that he is an agent of the German secret service .
The man was sentenced at the end of last year for forging documents .
I should like to know from the Commissioner , since we do not yet know from previous answers , whether or not the man is still co-ordinating the SENSUS programme .
If that is not the case , I should like him to inform us who is coordinating the Sensus programme .
I thank the Commissioner for his answer .
Mr President , as far as Europol is concerned , it is not really with the present legal basis under Commission control in the same manner as the Commission budget normally is .
So the only way for us to audit issues concerning Europol in the context of a particular contract .
If we have a contract for Europol , when a final financial statement has been completed , we can control the issue .
As far as the name of the coordinator and his position , I hope I can provide that detail directly to the honourable Member .
I will check the situation today .
Question No 54 by ( H-0645 / 01 ) :
Subject : Defence industries In response to my oral question H-0447 / 01 , tabled at Question Time on 13 June 2001 , the Commission indicated that it was considering what action to take pursuant to its 1997 Action Plan for implementing the EU strategy on defence-related industries .
It also indicated that it would be able to report on the action it intends to take this autumn .
Can it now outline what proposals it intends to table ?
Despite the difficulties in moving forward on this issue as rapidly as we had hoped , I want to stress that the analysis of the 1997 action plan advocating a need for restructuring the European defence industry and for creating a single market for defence products is still valid .
Indeed I believe it to be even more pertinent for at least two reasons : development of the ESDP - European Security and Defence Policy - and the constitution of transnational defence companies .
Up to now the Council discussions have been characterised by differences of opinion between the Member States , preventing the adoption of a common position on the framing of a European armament policy .
But as the competitiveness of the European defence industry is vital to the credibility of the nascent European Security and Defence Policy , the Commission expects that governments will recognise increasingly the urgency for a change in attitudes in order to end policies and practices that prevent European defence companies from working together more efficiently .
Such a change in the position of Member States will allow the Commission to contribute more effectively to the creation of a European defence equipment market through exercising its competence under Community policies such as the creation of the single market in defence , external trade , etc .
As the commissioner for enterprise I am pursuing the objective of promoting greater competitiveness of Europe 's defence industry in close cooperation with national authorities and industry representatives .
One important initiative in that context is our efforts aimed at promoting awareness of the importance of standardisation issues for the efficiency and competitiveness of the European defence industries and to investigate options and possible start-up actions for defence standards reform .
These issues were fully explored at an important conference last autumn , attended by the principal interested partners .
On that occasion the European Standardisation Organisation , CEN , was identified as the ideal forum to implement this effort in the form of a handbook of defence standards and defence procedures which , when in place , will offer more transparency , improving interoperability , harmonisation of requirements and cost efficiency in procurement .
This process is now well under way .
As regards the industry itself , there has been a huge transformation of the defence industrial landscape , particularly in the Eurospace and electronic sectors .
Good progress has also been made in the land armament and naval sectors .
It is to be expected that once this transformation has been completed and fully implemented the industry will formulate new expectations as regards access to defence markets in Europe and abroad .
To allow the necessary time to formulate these positions it has been agreed that the planned meeting of defence industry COs with commissioners concerned should take place by the end of the year , preferably now in the early autumn .
Would I be correct , Commissioner , in summing up your thorough answer in one word , " no " , i.e. the Commission is not going to do anything ?
When I spoke to you some months ago in this very Chamber you said that by autumn we will have made progress .
But it seems to me that what you are saying is that the Commission is not going to do anything to follow up its communication or its action plan .
What you have said is a summary of what has happened up to now but not an indication that there really is going to be dynamic action in the foreseeable future , as it is autumn now .
I would like to say that the standardisation part , where we are actively now moving , is a very important one .
The fact that we are working now on a normal daily basis is progress .
As far as legislative proposals are concerned , I am not in a position to give a definite answer today .
As the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 55 to 96 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was adjourned at 8.20 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Outcome of the Bonn conference on climate change
The next item is the Commission statement on the outcome of the Bonn conference on climate change .
Thank you for inviting me to report to this House on the climate change conference in July .
The conference was a success , particularly for the European Union .
On 23 July it reached a consensus political agreement on modalities to implement the Kyoto Protocol .
It thereby resolved all the main outstanding political issues which were left open after the first part of the conference in The Hague last November .
This paves the way for the ratification of the protocol .
Allow me to give you a brief assessment of the Bonn Conference before I turn to the main decisions on substance .
The outcome of Bonn represents a major achievement for the European Union .
Following the United States ' withdrawal from the Kyoto Protocol , the European Union has taken the lead in defending the protocol .
This included a declaration by the European Councils in Stockholm and Gothenburg and resolutions from the European Parliament .
High-level missions by the Swedish and Belgian presidencies and the Commission visited the United States , Canada , Russia , Iran , China , Australia and Japan to seek support for our position .
The EU 's commitment to bring the Kyoto Protocol into force before the World Summit on Sustainable Development - Rio + 10 - in September this year was shared by many other parties .
This made the success in Bonn so important .
The agreement struck in Bonn indeed prevented an unravelling of the international efforts to combat climate change following the failure of the conference in the Hague and the announcement by President Bush that the United States will not support the Kyoto Protocol .
What also might have happened was an alternative proposal to the Kyoto Protocol by the United States .
This would have thrown the international efforts to establish an effective international framework for combating climate change into disarray .
The talks in Bonn therefore represented a race against the clock .
It has to be said that the United States honoured President Bush 's promise not to prevent other parties from going ahead on the Kyoto Protocol .
During the final plenary of the ministerial segment of the conference no party objected to the adoption of the political agreement reached .
At the same time the EU and other parties have expressed the hope that the US will rejoin the Kyoto process .
Nothing in the agreement prevents it from doing so .
The European Union showed a strong and unified position during the talks and the Belgian presidency did a good job in coordinating our position .
I should also acknowledge the political support from the NGOs and MEPs present at the meeting , participating in a very constructive way .
The outcome of Bonn represents a victory for multilateral international relations .
Against the background of the current debate on globalisation it sends another political signal that the international community is able to address global problems to the benefit of all countries .
The agreement was a breakthrough , but of course there remain a number of steps to be taken before the Kyoto Protocol can enter into force .
First , the political elements agreed upon will have to be translated into legal texts .
This will be finalised and formally adopted by the conference of the parties at its next session , COP 7 in Marrakesh in November .
What are the prospects now for ratification of the Kyoto Protocol ?
Entry into force requires ratification by 55 parties representing at least 55 % of the CO2 emissions in 1990 of the industrialised countries .
Given that the United States has no intention of ratifying the protocol for the time being , this means that ratification by at least Japan and Russia , in addition to the EU and the candidate countries , is necessary to bring the protocol into effect .
As the candidate countries supported the EU 's positions our attention focuses particularly on Japan , but also on Russia .
Japan feels strongly linked to the Kyoto Protocol and has repeatedly stated its aim of bringing it into force by 2002 .
At the same time Japan has so far refrained from clearly committing itself to ratifying the protocol , even without the United States .
Russia 's position was unclear throughout the negotiations and at the last minute it became clear in Bonn that it would not raise any objections .
This is despite the fact that Russia will benefit economically from the Kyoto Protocol and the establishment of an international emissions trading system as it will be in a position to sell emission credits due to its generous emissions targets .
Both countries now have a major responsibility in determining whether or not the international community takes an important step in combating climate change .
Hence Bonn represented an important step but is not yet the end of the process .
I should also highlight the constructive role played in Bonn by the developing countries , G4-77 / China , under the chairmanship of Iran , sharing EU positions on many points .
Our good relations with this group proved to be an essential element in achieving a successful outcome .
In the difficult situation in which we found ourselves , the EU was forced to make concessions to other parties to obtain an agreement in Bonn and rescue the Kyoto Protocol .
These concessions relate mainly to a generous counting of carbon zincs towards industrialised countries ' emissions targets and , on the last night of the negotiations , to the legally binding character of the compliance regime .
The agreement on zincs means that around 70 % of the overall 5.2 % emission reduction target for industrialised countries under the protocol can be covered by zincs instead of actual emission reductions .
Nonetheless , given that emissions have increased in most industrialised countries since 1990 a significant emission reduction effort in those countries is still required .
Giving up on the legally binding character of the consequences for non-compliance was another concession necessary to get Japan on board .
However , in exchange , the system itself is quite ambitious and , even though for the moment only politically binding , creates a strong incentive for parties to comply .
Once implemented the Kyoto Protocol will have a more elaborate and stringent compliance system than any other multilateral environmental agreement so far .
The agreement includes a declaration by the EU and a number of other countries of a funding package of EUR 450 million per year by 2005 for capacity building , technology transfer and adaptation to climate change for developing countries .
The main progress of the Kyoto Protocol is , in any case , to establish the architecture and general rules of an international framework on climate change : for example , binding emission targets , the flexible mechanisms for achieving those targets , a compliance regime , support to developing countries on which further decisions can build .
Besides its importance in addressing one of the biggest global challenges - climate change - the Kyoto Protocol will establish a new major international market for emissions rights among industrialised countries .
It will also channel new resources to developing countries and the economies in transition in central and eastern Europe .
It is certainly also important for the political acceptance of the Kyoto Protocol that investments in nuclear facilities are excluded from joint implementation and the clean development mechanism .
As I said earlier , the agreement in Bonn paves the way for the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol .
The European Union is committed to ratification by our Heads of State and Government .
I therefore intend to present to the Council and the European Parliament soon , and certainly well before the end of the year , first of all a ratification proposal for the Kyoto Protocol .
This will include a Council decision on the burden sharing among the Member States of the Communities , overall a 8 % emission reduction target on the basis of the political agreement of the Environment Council of 16 June 1998 ; secondly , a communication on a cost-effective implementation strategy for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the EU based on the final report of the Commission 's European climate change programme , the ECCP ; thirdly , a proposal for a framework directive on an EU-wide emission trading scheme as a core element in a cost-effective Kyoto implementation strategy .
I would like to express my appreciation for the ongoing support of the European Parliament for the EU 's position in the international climate negotiations and your continuing interest in this issue .
It was reflected in your strong Parliamentary delegation in Bonn .
I hope to continue our good cooperation in the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Bonn Conference sent out three political messages of enormous importance .
An environmental message , an economic message and one concerning governance .
With regard to the environment , this Conference will go down in history as the one that brought to an end the talks and negotiations on climate change that had been dragging on for ten years and the one that enabled us finally to take action .
It is true that the agreement is less ambitious that we had hoped and was drawn up mainly at the expense of concessions made in negotiations by the European Union .
The alternative to this tiny step forwards , however , would have been incomparably worse . Without the political agreement that was achieved in Bonn , the Kyoto Protocol would be dead and we would have had to waste another ten years working on a global policy to mitigate the damage caused by climate change .
I should , therefore , like to congratulate Commissioner Wallström on her excellent role in the political handling of this dossier since her appointment , and I also congratulate her for the announcement she made today about presenting to this House the process of ratifying the Kyoto protocol , the practical measures on the emissions trading system and the European programme for climate change .
I should also like to highlight the excellent cooperation maintained between the European Parliament delegation , the Commissioner for the Environment and the Council , through the Belgian Presidency , throughout the Conference .
The second message from Bonn is a change in the economic model : from a fire-based , fuel-using economy , to one which is coal-based .
In this economy , a ton of coal has a set price and carbon dioxide emissions represent a cost that must be factored into the overall costs of all products and into the annual financial statements of all companies .
We will therefore be seeing , in all economic sectors , a conversion to cleaner technologies . Obviously , the competitive advantages will go to those who convert the quickest .
This is precisely where the mistake in President Bush ' s calculation lies that is already beginning to concern North American businessmen , as we saw in Bonn : In the short term , Kyoto will cost less than was thought and will bring competitive advantages in the medium term .
The third message from Bonn concerns globalisation .
Climate change has become more than an environmental dossier , it has become an issue that symbolises the environmental regulation of globalisation .
The Bonn conference thereby demonstrated , for the first time , that those who have moved quickly and effectively to promote the advantages of globalisation are also able to act to minimise the harmful effects of that same globalisation .
This is the great hope that was generated in Bonn : it is possible to find common solutions to global problems .
Commissioner , I too want to begin by offering my congratulations on what happened in Bonn .
Many of us went there with misgivings about the likely result of the conference .
These were , of course , felt particularly keenly in July when it was feared that what had been discussed previously would simply go by the board .
I want to emphasise that my political group and I are deeply impressed both with the Commissioner 's work and with the Swedish and Belgian presidencies .
I am talking here not only about what happened at the Bonn conference itself but also about the sound preparatory work which , for example , the Commissioner carried out by travelling around a number of countries to try to convince them of the importance of the Kyoto Protocol .
We can only regret the fact that there is no political will for change on the other side of the Atlantic .
It is only to be hoped that , in time , there will be political developments aimed at persuading the United States too to take part in this necessary work .
American companies will probably also appreciate in the long term that they are missing something by not being involved in this development .
There is no going back now .
If we are to be able to make some impact upon climate change , everyone must participate , especially the United States which is one of the biggest producers of greenhouse gases .
It is now a question of putting words into action .
As I have pointed out throughout these discussions , the Kyoto Protocol is only the beginning .
It sounds hopeful when the Commissioner now promises that we shall have a ratification proposal before the end of the year and that the intention is to return with communications and proposals on trading in emissions rights .
On this issue , I want to emphasise what Parliament has said previously , namely that trading in emissions rights must never become the biggest part of the commitment .
A real change has to take place .
We must change our transport systems and we must reduce emissions if there is to be less of an effect upon the climate .
That also applies to sinks .
There are , of course , a number of shortcomings in the Protocol and the decision .
It had been hoped that the sinks would not have been so important .
Norway has set a good example by saying that it does not intend to make use of its sinks in the same way .
It would be all to the good if more countries were to follow that example .
We must wait to see what happens at the conference in Marrakesh .
Sooner or later , it will also be time to begin discussing how we are to make further progress .
Practical proposals are required if progress is really to take place and if we are not simply to get bogged down in the Kyoto Protocol .
Allow me , finally , to thank the Commissioner and the Presidency for the sound work they have done .
Mr President , I should like to say to the Commissioner that , at a time of violent clashes in Genoa and concern over globalisation , the outcome of the Bonn Summit should have renewed peoples ' faith in the political process .
I hope so - it certainly did mine .
Together with Mr Pronk and the Belgian Presidency , you have achieved a great deal .
You provided an immense service to the environment and strengthened European influence .
I would like to congratulate and thank you .
I was pleased with aspects of the deal , the compromise over nuclear power for example was as good as we could get .
But overall the agreement is weak .
What matters , however , is the process that has now been established .
I know that Mr de Roo has instructed me in the past about how the process and the importance of it cannot be overestimated , pointing for example at the way in which the Montreal Protocol has been developed into a really effective instrument from a rather poor beginning over the past decade .
But the Kyoto process is going to be very much harder .
The priorities are to have it ratified , to get our own Member States to implement effective action plans , and not only to launch emissions trading but to prove that it can work , which is the hardest task of all .
And if we can make it work , then I hope that American business will be attracted and the whole political climate across the globe will change .
You have still a lot to do .
The vast majority in this House will strongly support you in your continuing efforts .
I thank you again .
Commissioner , if we measure the achievements of Bonn against what we hoped for five years ago with regard to climate change , the results are meagre .
On the other hand , if we measure what was achieved by that battle that you waged , Commissioner - in conjunction with Parliament ' s delegation and that of the rest of the Commission - to conclude the agreement that was finally reached , we must thank you , Commissioner , and this delegation for having concluded an agreement that is fundamentally consistent , in that all the countries adopted this approach . The result of this was to isolate the United States who , unfortunately , is sticking to a position that is not in the interests of the world as a whole .
I also feel that the exclusion of nuclear energy as an alternative to reducing greenhouse gases is a positive development .
We cannot conceal our reticence over emissions trading and its monitoring or the use of sinks .
The European Parliament has already stated , on several occasions , that sinks should only be used in a limited and carefully monitored way .
These issues are of concern to us .
We are also concerned about follow-up and monitoring mechanisms for compliance and the issue of possible sanctions in the event of non-compliance .
Of greatest concern to us is the fact that the report by the European Environment Agency states that unless decisions are taken immediately , by 2010 emissions will increase by 6 % .
In our future work - and here I agree with my fellow speakers - it is , therefore , we industrialised countries that will have to lead the way in this reduction of emissions .
It is crucial that we ratify the protocol and make greater reductions than those laid down in the agreement .
We must introduce legally binding measures , take action on transport , which emits huge quantities of CO2 and clarify the amount of aid to be given to developing countries to ensure that they take similar action .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to join in congratulating the Commission on its negotiating tactics and success .
I think it is as the Commissioner said : the protocol has been saved .
Obviously , this in itself will not solve the problems .
The problems inherent in climate change and what needs to be done to stop climate change go far beyond what was agreed in Bonn .
But it is an important first step .
We must counter those who criticise the Kyoto protocol in principle - a number of members from Germany , for example , have said that the whole protocol is useless - and those who , as environmental politicians , have said it is useless because it does not go far enough , by saying that , if your house is on fire and you think it will take ten fire engines to put it out , you are hardly going to turn the first fire engine away and say , please do not start fighting the fire until all ten fire engines are here ; you do what you can as quickly as possible , bearing in mind that other measures are needed .
These other measures are being negotiated both at international level and , of course , in the European Union .
Now we have to tackle the question of implementation .
You made a number of important announcements on that today , Commissioner , and you have our support .
We must keep talking to the Americans at international level .
A lot of people , including here in Parliament , are hugely critical of the Americans because of their policy in just about every political arena .
I think we should concentrate on fundamentals .
We should make it clear to our American friends that we do not agree with them on numerous counts but that we can live with our differences .
However , in this area , we Europeans cannot live with the fact that the Americans keep holding back .
And we need to tell them as much again and again .
Mr President , I too say bravo , Commissioner .
Well done .
For the rest , it never fails to astound me just how united Europeans are on the question of climate change and the measures needed to counter it .
I think that climate policy is a policy people can identify with in Europe and we should turn this to our advantage .
I also think that it is our duty to work on the American public , so that they follow our lead .
Perhaps , in this case , we are one step ahead of the Americans , just as public opinion on other questions is often one step ahead of Europe .
I should like to comment on one point of view : the impact of this climate policy on energy policy .
The whole point of climate policy is that it requires us to put a price on CO2 in the future .
Let us suppose that your estimates are right and that CO2 costs about EUR 30 a tonne .
That means that electricity from brown coal will rise by about 3.5 eurocents and electricity from hard coal will rise by about 3 eurocents .
The price of renewable sources of energy will not rise , i.e. they will become more competitive .
But nor will the price of nuclear energy rise .
As is it not excluded from emission trading and is only banned where there is joint implementation , this works to the advantage of nuclear energy .
This completely changes the weightings within the energy spectrum .
That is not the subject of this evening ' s debate , but it will be subject of debates over coming months and years .
I just wanted to point that out .
For the rest , I share the view of many of my fellow members who said that this is a process .
We have only just begun it and we must stick with it .
The very fact of having been there is , I think a very good thing .
Mr President , Commissioner , may I add my congratulations ?
Kyoto has ultimately not remained an empty promise .
At the last moment , Bonn produced the political signal that was necessary .
It is a signal on the basis of which Kyoto can become a reality .
We must make a start on this project as soon as possible , not only in Europe , but also in other parts of the world .
Political agreements must now be translated into concrete action with visible results , because that is the way to strengthen political support for climate policy .
The signal must now be seen and heard everywhere .
The struggle against the emission of greenhouse gases is a worldwide challenge in third-world countries where the results of the rise in sea level and the change in weather patterns are making themselves painfully felt .
It is a global task , for which Europe must take its share of the responsibility .
We must invest and not forget that at present there are two billion people without electricity .
Sustainable energy can give a boost to development .
Much more discussion is needed with the United States , where the main fear is loss of jobs .
We must now demonstrate that , in fact , the economic effects are favourable .
Sustainable development must lead to sustainable growth .
Within the Union , we must now quickly begin the ratification process and launch the system of emission rights .
Industry is keen to have clarity and to start rightaway .
We must make the transition to a low-CO2 economy and give this a concrete form .
This requires research and innovation .
It is of great importance for us to join forces in a common research programme .
The framework programme for research and Article 169 offer a good basis for this .
Climate policy is also a component of the Sixth Environmental Action Programme .
It must be adopted across the product and packaging policy , transport policy and energy policy .
In each Member State , action programmes must be introduced and clear political choices must be made on the way in which Kyoto is realised .
In this way , Kyoto and Bonn will culminate in an unparalleled burst of innovation .
It is now time for action .
Mr President , the Members of Parliament have been too kind to me personally because the Commission has the best climate change team in the world .
It is thanks to their excellent preparation of our negotiations and the preparatory work within the European Union that we have been able to succeed .
But we were also able to speak with one voice in Bonn , which led to better results , and we stayed united .
We worked well with NGOs and I believe that this also contributed to this good result .
As you said , the real result in Bonn was that we put the international framework in place .
Of course we had to make some very unsatisfactory concessions , and the end result and the real reductions were limited in a way that we are not at all happy with , but we will have to live with this framework for a very long time .
It will be subject to many adaptations and political changes and exposed to market forces , which will lead to change over time .
However , we took the initiative from the very beginning and we were able to carry it through to an international agreement .
Now we can work within that .
We can change and develop it .
The total emission reduction required , for example , for Japan is 14 % and for Canada around 15 % so there is still a real effort to be made for these countries .
But of course we are not happy with some of the substantial concessions we had to make .
The second point I want to make which underlines what you have stated is that we now have to move from words to deeds .
Again it is only by showing the way , leading by example , that we can stay credible .
So I will shortly be presenting these three proposals to continue this work .
We should stay in the lead in the world debate about climate change .
We should be the first to present different initiatives at conferences or whatever , to exchange good practice , and so on .
I would like your cooperation .
My intention is to keep the initiative and ensure that we lead the world in combating climate change .
We now have to concentrate on Marrakesh and putting all the legal texts in place so that these can be implemented .
Everything will stand or fall with their implementation .
Thank you , Commissioner .
At the end of the debate , I have received six draft motions for a resolution pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Safety and air transport
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A5-0279 / 2001 ) , by Mr Schmitt , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on establishing common rules in the field of civil aviation and creating a European Aviation Safety Agency [ COM ( 2000 ) 595 - C5-0663 / 2000 - 2000 / 0246 ( COD ) ] ;
( A5-0249 / 2001 ) , by Mr Collins , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Commission communication on the protection of air passengers in the European Union [ COM ( 2000 ) 365 - C5-0635 / 2000 - 2000 / 2299 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , the advent of competition in the air transport sector has certainly resulted in the lowering of prices of air travel for the 370 million consumers of the European Union . However , there is a growing dissatisfaction among air travellers with regard to the quality of service which they are receiving from many airlines within the EU .
It is very important that air passengers are fully aware of their legal rights when problems arise with flights .
These are matters which I am addressing in my report .
We cannot deny that the issue of developing deep-vein thrombosis is not a serious concern for air passengers .
I am calling on the European Commission as a matter of urgency to allocate more monies from the EU research budget to carry out an independent evaluation of the possible public health risks for air passengers travelling on long-haul flights . This includes the need to carry out a comprehensive study into the whole issue of deep-vein thrombosis .
I am calling on the European Commission to carry out this independent research in consultation with EU airline companies and EU consumer groups .
I believe that European Union airlines should not be afraid of addressing the issue of deep-vein thrombosis .
The solution to this problem may not be as hard as some EU airlines may envisage .
It is very important that passengers are fully informed as to what they should do to guarantee that deep-vein thrombosis will not develop .
European Union airlines , consumer groups and air crew workers must all work together to guarantee that all public health issues concerning air travel are fully addressed .
Safer travel for air passengers in Europe must at all times be the ultimate objective for EU governments and EU airlines .
I have nothing in principle against the implementation of voluntary codes of practice for European Union airlines . However it is very important that any codes of practice which are drawn up by EU airlines are fully evaluated and monitored to ensure that they are rigorously enforced .
While voluntary agreements play an important role with regard to the whole issue of air travel , EU institutions and EU governments must not be afraid to intervene and legislate on issues to promote and protect air passenger rights .
In this report I am calling on the European Commission to bring forward specific proposals outlining how the charter of passenger rights in Europe can be marketed to a greater extent .
This will help to guarantee that all air passengers in Europe are kept fully informed as to their legal rights with regard to air travel .
This charter of passenger rights currently exists in European Union airports but many passengers are not fully aware of its existence or do not fully understand its provisions .
This report includes a proposal calling on European Union airlines to inform passengers of the percentage degree seat pitch available to passengers travelling in economy class .
It is clearly the case that there is more room available for economy class passengers travelling with some airlines than with others .
I am also calling on the European Union and the airlines to improve access for disabled passengers , children and the elderly and to prohibit European Union airlines from charging an extra fee for assisting persons who are immobile onto any aeroplane within the European Union .
Finally I believe that this report had the broad support of the political groups within Parliament 's Committee on Transport .
I am hopeful and confident that the European Commission will now bring forward the necessary legislative proposals to ensure that passenger rights for the citizens of the European Union are greatly improved as a matter of urgency .
, representing the Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first , our thanks to the rapporteur . The Commission proposal for a European Aviation Safety Agency comes in response to a long-standing demand by Parliament .
The Aviation Safety Agency is our second agency in the transport sector ; a third for the railways and rail safety will ensue .
I think this strategy of creating European agencies is an ideal way of helping the European transport markets to integrate .
The Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has already proposed a number of important amendments for the Aviation Safety Agency , such as strengthening the agency , giving it more independence and extending its remit .
I also think it is important - and I speak here on behalf of Mr Kuckelkorn - that we accept an amendment proposed by the Committee on Budgets on funding .
Come what may , we must ensure that we have efficiency , transparency and controlled costs .
These two agencies give us the opportunity to take a clear line right from the outset .
My group has also tabled a number of proposed amendments .
The first concerns the composition of the administrative board .
We are calling for employers and employees to be given a seat on the board .
Another proposed amendment concerns the creation of local offices of the agency , which have been suggested in order to allay the fears of a number of Member States about loss of sovereignty .
We expect the Member State in which the agency is located to make a financial contribution .
One purpose of this rule is to prevent a Member State from pressurising its agency , i.e. the agency established on its sovereign territory , into setting up local offices .
Here too I am positive that this is a reasonable and legitimate concern on the part of Parliament and I therefore call on you to support it .
Mr President , in the extremely interesting debate that we have heard this morning following Mr Prodi ' s presentation of the White Paper on governance , he said that the control exercised by this Parliament , including control over budgetary matters , should not be concerned with questions of detail but should check whether the instruments are achieving their objectives and should adopt more of a political approach and less of an accounting one .
Perhaps this is why the Committee on Budgetary Control has made a few suggestions for the creation of an Aviation Safety Agency , such as , for example , that we again adopt the model of control used by the two agencies set up in 1975 , which are Cedefop , in Thessaloniki and the Dublin Foundation .
According to this model , granting discharge to the agencies was the responsibility of the European Parliament .
Between 1990 and 1997 , nine agencies were created , but it could be said that creating an external agency gives the Council carte blanche to do what it likes .
This idea is not borne out by reality , however , because the agency set up to deal with the issue of Kosovo in Thessaloniki in 1999 is a return to the model according to which it is Parliament , at the behest of the Council , that gives discharge to the Director and the board of management .
This is , I believe , in harmony with the form of governance that we are seeking to adopt on the Commission ' s proposal and that would be beneficial to the Agency itself , because in this way , the external agency does not have to mean lesser control of Community funds , a control which is the responsibility of the European Parliament .
We also emphasise , in the fourth amendment , the need to incorporate in its rules of procedure the requirement for periodical external assessments of the Agency .
I must repeat that the external Agency will have freedom of action , but we would like to have an independent expert cast an eye over it from time to time to see whether the Agency is fulfilling the objective that has been proposed for it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has examined the proposal for a regulation very carefully .
It obviously supports the aim of creating a European Aviation Safety Agency .
However , we realise that we somehow need to harmonise the legal framework within which such agencies are created .
A great many agencies have now been set up : the Aviation Safety Agency , the Food Agency , the Agency for Medical Products .
It is high time we had a clear legal framework for starting up these agencies .
The two previous speakers have already commented on certain aspects .
I am grateful that the Commission announced in its White Paper on European governance that it intends to take a somewhat clearer line here .
Sparks obviously fly when these agencies are created because decision-making powers are transferred to external institutions even if , Mr Schmitt , the final decision does not , of course , always rest with these agencies .
It is especially important to us that the supervisory committees be made up of equal numbers of representatives from the various European institutions and for the European Parliament not to lose its rights of influence by outsourcing decisions .
It is also important to us for the legal recourse created within these agencies ' procedures to be in keeping with the European Treaties and the principles of the rule of law .
Another particular cause for concern is that the powers of intervention created for these agencies need to be in keeping with the fundamental civil rights on which we agreed in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We have tabled proposed amendments on these points and we are grateful that they are at least being accepted in part .
Ladies and gentlemen , let me firstly thank our rapporteur and all the Members for the speed with which the European Parliament has worked on the proposal concerning the implementation of a European Aviation Safety Agency .
I think that it is not totally out of place to say this , and that it practically amounts to the launch of an appeal to the Council and the Commission , to make sure that the proposal comes to fruition as quickly as possible , for the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has , naturally , first ascertained the industrial interest in such an agency .
As you already know , we have an urgent need for the equivalent of the American Federal Aviation Administration if we want the Airbus standard to be commercially viable at international level , in particular the new A 380 programme .
The Committee on Industry has been very sensitive to these issues .
It has not dramatically increased the number of amendments and has made sure that we can proceed as fast as possible towards the effective creation of this tool that the European aeronautical industry has been waiting for with bated breath in the great international competition which places it , fairly regularly and not without controversy , face to face with its great American rival .
This is why we are satisfied with the proposal , in the hope that the Council will prove to be generous enough in the assessment of the amendments that are presented to it .
My second important point concerns the problem of political control .
We think that the concept of safety is formulated by specialists and technicians , but politics cannot be pushed to the sidelines .
With each of the large-scale events and accidents that have recently taken place , for example with Concorde or the Mont-Blanc tunnel , we have requested answers from the public authorities .
It is therefore necessary that this new agency be a technical tool for standardisation and certification primarily fed from the work of experts and manufacturers , but it should also be politically controlled .
This is the reason for which we have put forward amendments requesting that the executive director of such an agency , or even the agency itself , can make itself available to Parliament or , at the very least , be heard by Parliament .
There are those who even hope that it should have parliamentary representatives on the administrative board , for the administrative board is a body that is not technical but political in nature .
Finally , we are hoping that , in the committees of experts , the greatest cooperation will be open to all parties concerned , notably in relation to the creation of the " single sky " or problems relating to air control .
We think that this should be carried out in consultation with both sides of industry and workers ' representatives , otherwise we will be creating insurmountable obstacles to the objectives we are pursuing .
So , ladies and gentlemen , these are the main conclusions of the Committee on Industry .

Mr President , I apologise to Mr Schmitt and to Mr Collins for the fact that I was delayed elsewhere and did not hear their introductory remarks .
The opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , of which I was the draftsman , was unanimously carried and we are delighted to see that many of our recommendations have been endorsed by the two rapporteurs .
We have to move on from the old excuses , the legal challenges mounted by IATA and the opposition to even modest voluntary agreements which we still hear on some sides .
This is essentially a matter of the safety , as well as of the convenience , of the consumer .
For that reason we particularly welcome the adoption of amendments on consumer health and safety in the Schmitt report 's emphasis on the provision of information on health and safety requirements for airline passengers and the Collins report 's adoption of the proposal that there should be an evaluation of health risk and research into matters like deep-vein thrombosis .
The fact is that passengers today suffer not merely from being dumped from airlines , from the problem of lost baggage , but from other things which are often not the fault of the airlines themselves .
They principally suffer from a lack of information .
If the new agency does one thing , like the food standards agency which we are about to set up , it must be open , it must be transparent .
We need to see how its investigations work .
We need to see how its personnel are selected .
It must be done on the basis of merit and without any links to the industry .
All of those are possible if we adopt these two reports .
I hope the House will give an emphatic welcome in the vote tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mr Collins on his work , his serious , objective and rigorous work in drawing up this report on protecting the rights of air passengers in the European Union .
I fully agree with the rapporteur when he states that it is necessary - and I would say quite urgent - that we improve the current level of protection in cases of denied boarding , flight cancellations , unjustified delays which , in many cases , lead to connections with other flights or with other means of transport being missed and a long list of similar problems , which is growing every day , not to mention the fact that we Members of this Parliament are long-suffering victims of these inconveniences .
We must put a stop to this deterioration of quality before it becomes irreversible .
I must thank the Commissioner for the efforts that her department is making to achieve this , but in order to achieve this , we must undertake a thorough and appropriate review of current legislation in this field and improve all aspects of it that will lead to greater and better protection of passengers ' rights .
We also need to closely monitor the voluntary agreements signed by airlines , which are also designed to improve air transport conditions .
Mainly , however , what is essential is a form of vigilance that ensures total compliance with current legislation , which often appears to be nothing more than a useless piece of paper and as such , cannot serve the purposes for which it was intended .
This is the aspect on which immediate and effective action can and must be undertaken .
To start with , we should firmly insist that a ' Charter on Passenger Rights ' be properly marketed - as the rapporteur has already suggested .
Precise , clear , intelligible and full information is necessary to ensure that passengers are aware of their rights and of how to exercise them and , of course , we cannot accept these posters being hidden away in obscure corners into which few people go in many airports .
This information must be sufficiently publicised and made available to all users and not only in airports but also at points of ticket sales , in travel agencies and also , as far as possible , in the media .
Unless we ensure that passengers have access to information on their rights , which in many cases means that they cannot exercise these rights , there is no point at all in embarking on a legislative process whose outcome might also end up being nothing more than a useless piece of paper .
Mr President , I want to talk mainly about the European Aviation Safety Agency , the EASA , but I am bound to make an observation about passengers ' rights , also directed to the Commissioner .
Whatever the airlines promise and whatever agreements they reach among themselves to display splendid lists detailing the rights of passengers , in practice very little comes of it .
Also from my own experience , it is clear that many things often go wrong .
I should therefore wish to call for as many binding agreements as possible that are also laid down in legislation as well as for sanctions for failure to fulfil all kinds of promises to passengers .
As I said , I wish to speak mainly about EASA .
The setting up of EASA and the provisional definition of its responsibilities are an important step on the way to complete harmonisation of safety rules in civil aviation .
This is necessary and desirable , given the growing importance of the sector at European level , of unambiguous competition rules and of uniform standards , and in view of the need to strengthen the EU ' s influence at a global level .
We have opted for a cautious start which , in the first instance , will only involve European certification of new types of aircraft , such as the A 380 .
That is quite reasonable because the Authority still has to find its niche alongside the national aviation bodies , which will , of course , continue to have a role .
Duplication must be avoided by efficient pooling of available expertise and capacity .
Based on a certain timeframe , the mandate of EASA can then be expanded to include other aspects of flight safety , such as the human aspect , the quality of pilot training , etc .
Legislation and the amendments too rightly cover the health and wellbeing of the passengers on board and of the environment , particularly the question of emissions .
Our citizens are increasingly worried about these things .
The work of EASA will have to help reduce these concerns .
The amendments by the European Parliament make it clear that the independence of the Agency has priority .
It must be able to operate free of political interference and certification processes .
At the end of the present Regulation , the inevitable comitology crops up .
We continue to have our doubts , however , whether this will contribute to the efficient and independent functioning of EASA .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Liberal group , I should like to compliment Mr Schmitt on his report .
Safety , decisive action and accountability are the three benchmarks for my group .
Is the Authority contributing to safety in aviation ?
In our eyes it is , certainly now that aircraft that are registered in third countries , but whose flights are carried out by a Member State , fall under this directive .
I have submitted an amendment to define the Authority ' s overall responsibilities more precisely .
The Commission should come up with a proposal by the end of next year at the latest on what new tasks EASA can assume .
The most important of these is the granting of permits for aircraft crew in the European Union .
What matters is the increased safety of people in aircraft , both passengers and crew . It is not only a matter of the quality of the steel .
EASA must also be able to take decisive action and that depends on the structure , but also on the quality of the managers .
That is why the board of management and the director must have relevant experience .
As a ten-year term is quite enough , only one reappointment should be sufficient .
Finally , accountability .
We consider it important that all these independent agencies should be accountable to Parliament .
The best way of achieving this to ensure that the Commission has a place in the structure of these agencies .
If we weaken the role of the Commission too far it will create serious problems of political accountability .
We took the same line on these and other points with the European Maritime Safety Agency .
I also followed Mr Collins ' report with great interest because I myself was rapporteur for a comparable subject , namely liability in aviation .
We can identify well with the final version . Many of our amendments have been adopted , for which we are grateful .
I should like to mention two more things .
Firstly , I consider it essential that passengers should be informed in good time .
Finally , Mr Lynn submitted a number of amendments to stress the fact that airlines should to their utmost to alert passengers to the danger of aviation-related thrombosis , even on short flights .
Mr President , on behalf of the Green Group I would like to welcome both of these reports .
In the limited speaking time I have , I want to focus on just one aspect and that is the health aspects of flying .
It is true to say that in the past the airlines have been woefully neglecting passengers ' health .
That is beginning to change but there is still a long way to go .
I particularly welcome the fact that Mr Collins has devoted a clear section in his report to health and I strongly support his calls for the airlines to be far more proactive in giving information about health risks .
We need far greater clarity .
Information should be available when you book your ticket .
It needs to be there in doctors ' surgeries .
There needs to be a health briefing in the same form as the current safety briefing on board , including advice on the preventative measures that can be taken .
Of course life is not risk-free but there has to be a balance in that risk and if people know what the choices are , they are more likely to be able to make an informed judgement .
On deep-vein thrombosis for example , although for over ten years there have been reports of people getting blood clots after travelling by plane no comprehensive independent research has been carried out .
According to a recent report in The Lancet by a London-based consultant , as many as one in ten people get blood clots of some kind on long-haul flights .
Clearly serious health risks are very slight for the vast majority but for a few they are very real .
We need to respond to that in terms of both research and the action resulting from that research .
More space in aircraft , for example , and less emphasis in getting as many people on board , in as small a place as possible with as much profit as possible .
There was another example in the press this morning .
A Canadian researcher was saying that as a result of air recycling in the cabin some passengers are at risk of catching diseases as serious as tuberculosis .
His claims have been refuted by the airlines .
The issue here is not the rights or wrongs of this latest allegation but the fact that this type of uncertainty will continue unless we have a new proactive strategy based on more and better research , appropriate action by the airlines and better information to the public .
Mr President , I am in favour of anything that leads to the standardisation of safety regulations in air transportation .
The creation of a European Aviation Safety Agency , in place of the current informal collaboration between the fifteen Member States , would be the least that could be done to establish common rules in the field of aviation .
It would however have taken , according to the report , twenty years of bargaining for this measure of simple good sense to be taken .
In spite of the euphemisms used , the report recognises that the length of negotiations is due to the difficulty of reconciling EU Member States ' national interests , and behind these the various , even opposing , industrial interests .
Thus , the report brings to mind the principle of subsidiarity relating to the functioning of airports , and insists on the necessary confidentiality of enquiries made by the agency with regard to legislation on industrial property .
The fact that the differences in interests between the industrial groups concerned have not disappeared augers badly for the authority which will be granted to this agency to impose all the measures useful for the safety of passengers .
Mr President , like motherhood and apple pie , no-one could possibly be against safety , especially when it involves aeroplanes .
But make no mistake : the real agenda of this proposal is further political integration .
For , as the Commission so eloquently puts it in its own document , it intends to create the European Aviation Safety Agency through the gradual integration of national systems .
That seems to me to be a driving force for the whole of the European Union - the gradual integration of national systems .
I wish that phrase could be plastered in massive letters on billboards around the United Kingdom so that my fellow subjects could really understand what is really going on .
As Mr Duisenberg put it recently when he described the euro as a symbol of political integration , we have here yet another symbol - the European Aviation Safety Agency .
But what is particularly striking here , apart from the fact that we already have an independent intergovernmental agency in the Joint Aviation Authority , is the stark admission that continued intergovernmental cooperation is to be abandoned as it is developed and I quote from the rapporteur 's report : " would have involved lengthy ratification procedures in the national parliaments of the states concerned . . . , which would not necessarily have been successful " .
How awkward and inconvenient democracy is .
Rather like the Irish population when they run a referendum , you can never rely on it to behave .
Much easier , therefore , to create another European institution and get rid of the whole messy business .
Administratively convenient it may be , democracy it is not .
But it is symbolic of the European Union 's experience .
Given the aviation content here , and with due deference to the rapporteur , I can only conclude with a phrase that really will not translate from the English : " What a Messerschmidt " .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , first I should like to join Ojeda Sanz in thanking Mr Collins for his excellent report and Mr Schmitt for his excellent report .
Both have presented us with a magnum opus .
As far as the question of aviation safety is concerned , Commissioner , you have now presented us with a proposal on establishing common rules in the field of civil aviation and creating a European Aviation Safety Agency long after the single market was completed and other Commissioners had let the subject drop .
This will at last allow us to replace the safety regulations adopted by bureaucrats in the Member States with uniform , European provisions accepted by Parliament .
At last we can create a truly uniform European area of safety in the European skies .
We hope that safety will be enhanced by strict and uniform controls .
In this respect we support your proposal .
The purpose of the amendments proposed by the committee , as Mr Schmitt rightly said , is to strengthen the technical independence of the European Aviation Safety Agency still further , without wanting to diminish your personal parliamentary responsibility .
We trust that this agency will be able to start work in time to grant the symbol of the independent European aviation industry , namely the new Airbus A380 , a joint project involving numerous employees , numerous engineers and numerous workers in European countries , the first uniform certification for European airspace .
If it does , then I think we will have done both the aviation industry and safety a huge service .
Mr President , Commissioner , I shall deal specifically with the Collins report .
I wish to congratulate Mr Collins on his work and also the Commission on having presented us with this report on protecting the rights of air transport passengers .
This is an issue which concerns an increasing number of people , more Europeans , because the numbers of air passengers are increasing .
Dissatisfaction is also growing , however , with regard to the transport available to us and with the conditions in which they are provided .
The European Parliament and the Commission have the responsibility of protecting the interests of Europeans travelling via air transport .
It is true that the problems faced by passengers are not entirely the fault of the airlines ; they are also caused by the airports , and we must confront both of these situations .
These days , airports feel like underground stations , in which the density of people is such that there is no degree of comfort and it is difficult to feel safe .
With regard to transport , passengers demand safety but they also want to know in advance the conditions in which they will be travelling .
I am grateful to Mr Collins for having accepted many of the amendments that we tabled to his report , because I feel it has been genuinely useful to include them .
Passengers must know in advance and be able to compare the conditions that the transport offers them .
Not only the prices , but also the conditions of safety , of comfort - the distances between seats , for example - and also conditions such as the air quality . One possibility that has been mentioned , admittedly , is for flights to become no smoking , but the conditions of safety against pollution have been reduced in order to reduce air transport costs .
We must confront this problem vigorously and I also wish to ask Commissioner Loyola de Palácio whether she still intends to table legislation in this field by the end of the year , and , if so , what will it be ?
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Collins on his report , which I believe brings a sensible compromise to the Commission 's proposal .
As aviation is the most regulated form of transport , I welcome the commitment by the industry , as agreed in Lisbon in May , to implement the voluntary passenger service commitment .
This is undoubtedly the best way forward as over-regulation would be extremely damaging to the aviation industry Europe-wide , and in particular in the United Kingdom , and would result in our being uncompetitive .
The report is explicit in saying that the desire to protect air passengers should not hinder competition , whilst at the same time the voluntary agreement is comprehensive and detailed in those areas which need to be improved .
I hope the Commission will resist in bringing forward legislative proposals as it is only right and proper that the industry should be given sufficient time to implement fully this agreement .
On one tiny point here from Mr Collins : the UK is the only country which has in place a minimum seat pitch requirement for safety reasons and I therefore believe that the European Union could follow that example .
Turning to the Schmitt Report , we should congratulate Mr Schmitt on clarifying and improving the Commission 's proposals , although I still have deep reservations in a number of areas .
Nevertheless I believe that there is general agreement that a pan-European body is required in particular in the area of aircraft manufacture , although there is still ambiguity in relation to ICAO rules , which clearly state that both individual certification of aircraft and design changes and modifications are the responsibility of states of registering .
Finally despite asking the Commission on a number of occasions , we are still unclear as to the future role of national civil aviation authorities , the JAA , as the proposed regulation does not define its parameters .
In addition , I believe at this stage efforts should be concentrated on achieving uniform applicability of ICAO , JAA , and Eurocontrol standards that are already in existence .
The EC should not seek to parallel and create unwilling distortions of the current ICAO-based safety framework .
I look forward to the Commission 's response .
Mr President , I welcome the proposals to provide legal rights for passengers as well as the increase in denied boarding compensation and the right to reimbursement for delayed flights .
The idea of new contract standards between carriers and consumers is not only welcome but long overdue .
To be delayed is a nuisance .
To be denied information as to the cause of the delay , with little by way of an apology or compensation , is unacceptable .
Hopefully , with the support of the airlines and the work done by Mr Collins in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , things will now change for the better .
We can never take aviation safety for granted .
Today my colleague Mrs Cerdeira told me of the tragic crash last week of an old CN-235 , converted from military use , on a Melilla to Malaga flight , with loss of life .
I extend the sympathies of Mrs Cerdeira and myself to the relatives of the victims .
Regarding the contributions of Mr Titford , I assumed he was speaking in a personal capacity .
Only people with a bizarre outlook on life and a peculiar political perspective can downgrade the importance of aviation safety in the pursuit of their own nationalistic objectives .
Safety should never be used as a political football .
I condemn Mr Titford for so doing .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I should like to congratulate the Commission and particularly the Commissioner on the various important initiatives being put forward for this sector .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Collins and Mr Schmitt , on their magnificent work and mention one idea that I feel is particularly important in this matter .
The passenger protection dossier is , together with the single sky , safety and protection of the environment , an important dossier for air transport , for passengers and also for the image of European integration in the eyes of the public .
We are all aware of the importance of this means of transport and also of the contradiction that exists between the Europe of the air and terrestrial Europe : whilst traditional borders are disappearing , we are seeing these borders persist in the air transport sector .
Initiatives such as those that we are now discussing are , therefore , of great importance to the European public .
I come from the Balearic Islands , where dependence on the aeroplane is , as you all know , extremely high .
I know what it is to suffer airport chaos or interminable delays .
I therefore welcome the Commission ' s intention to seek a balance between legislation and the voluntary commitments affecting airlines , airports and airport authorities , not to mention the tourist industry .
This is an ambitious communication , which seeks to achieve this balance between the needs to establish guarantees for passengers and to ensure that air transport is efficient and competitive .
We must get the message across to users and make them fully aware of their rights , which are recognised by law when problems with flights occur .
I regret the impasse in which many initiatives in this sector are trapped within the Council and I hope that the appropriate agreements will be concluded so that we can move ahead without any further delay .
In the wake and in commemoration of the terrible accident that befell an aircraft en route from the Spanish city of Melilla , I should like to conclude by congratulating the Commission and Mr Schmitt on their work on the proposal to establish the European Aviation Safety Agency .
Reports such as the one by Mr Schmitt will be able , if not to prevent , which is impossible , to considerably reduce the number of these terrible accidents .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when it comes to the Schmitt report , we must congratulate both the Commission , on its proposal in response to the call from Parliament and , of course , the rapporteur on his sterling work .
The basic features of an agency such as this must be independence of action and efficiency , both of which apply in the present case .
However , having myself acted as rapporteur for a similar agency , the Maritime Safety Agency , which we recently debated here in the House , and having therefore addressed a similar issue , I should like to take this opportunity , without repeating the views already expressed , of endorsing the general view that similar rules should govern similar administrative mechanisms .
This obviously logical precept does not always apply to European Union texts or to European Parliament texts because , as we all know full well , each final text depends on the circumstances at the time in the various debating fora , especially when it comes to the vote .
For example , the proposal by our parliamentary committee which prevailed in plenary on the administrative board of the Maritime Safety Agency is completely different from the corresponding proposal in the case being debated today and amendments to improve it have , of course , been proposed .
Similarly , the Commission proposals also differ .
Is there any justification for these differences ?
The same question could be applied to numerous points in many of our legislative texts . This is not something the relevant Union services , including Parliament , can be proud of .
Having said which , I think the Commission could run a comparative check on these texts and then table proposals for similar provisions to be adopted for similar cases and existing unwarranted contradictions to be abolished .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Collins on his excellent report and indeed for accepting my amendments on the health aspects of air travel .
Brenda Wilson is a Greater Manchester constituent of mine who is an active campaigner for the Aviation Health Institute , an organisation working internationally to improve air passenger health .
Tragically her son Neil died of a deep-vein thrombosis after a short flight to Benidorm .
He is one of an alleged 2000 air travellers who , according to some in the medical profession , die each year from deep-vein thrombosis , not just long haul , not just economy class , and therefore there is growing concern about the potential link between air travel and blood clots .
The research is ambiguous .
The World Health Organisation is putting GBP 7 million into research and I am asking you tonight to give your commitment to a European Union study to look at potential links between DVT and air travel and preventative action .
I am also asking the Commission to take up the idea in my amendment on improved health briefings and health warnings on tickets in advance of flying .
This will allow passengers , as consumers , to exercise the choice perhaps not to drink alcohol , perhaps to take aspirin three or four days before flying or to wear these new compression socks which help regulate blood flow in the legs .
There is no need to be an alarmist .
We know that air travel is safe but there is nonetheless a small risk for some passengers that they may develop blood clots .
We owe it to our European passengers to increase our knowledge and science in this area .
I would like your assurance that you will now respond to our call for research and meet as a matter of priority with the aviation industry to look at improved health warnings on tickets .
We are in favour of voluntary action but if it is true that the airlines have known for 30 years about the risks of DVT then maybe we need legislation .
Mr President , I should like to say , first of all , that we are discussing two quite different initiatives here .
One is of a legislative nature and concerns the creation of a European Aviation Safety Agency .
The other initiative concerns Parliament ' s report on the Commission communication on protecting the rights of air transport passengers .
I wish to warmly congratulate both rapporteurs .
I shall begin with the initiative on the creation of the European Aviation Safety Agency .
I should also like to congratulate Mr Schmitt , of course , on his work .
In proposing common regulations for the civil aviation sector and the creation of a European Aviation Safety Agency , the Commission has borne in mind the objective of achieving a high and uniform level of safety , which is an essential factor for air transport .
It is also , perhaps the most fundamental passenger right .
We want to achieve this high and uniform level of safety throughout the European Union and also greater environmental protection .
This system of common regulations will also have the effect of promoting the internal market and of improving the competitiveness of the European aeronautical industry . It is , of course , also an important factor for the Airbus project .
From now on , a single certificate will be sufficient for a company to be able to supply its products to the whole European market , whilst access to external markets will be simplified , as a result of the conclusion of agreements that will facilitate the harmonisation and the mutual recognition of the certificates .
The proposal under consideration today , therefore , represents a considerable step forwards , particularly if you take account of the objectives it is seeking to achieve . It also , however , represents a genuine innovation in the field of Community integration , if we bear in mind that , until now , the civil aviation sector has been greatly influenced by the sovereignty of Member States and by intergovernmental cooperation - an issue that the speakers have already raised .
With regard to the implementation of Community objectives , the Commission is authorised to adopt the appropriate technical standards and administrative procedures .
The purpose of creating this specialised Agency is to assist the Commission in implementing policy but the Agency will also have its own powers , since , in some cases , it will replace national administrations in issuing products with certificates of conformity with Community legislation - I repeat , this is crucial for the Airbus project , as Mr Jarzembowski said a moment ago - and , in other cases , will supervise the issuing of certificates by national administrations .
The parliamentary committees that have worked on this text have understood the importance of what is at stake and I thank them for their support for the Commission proposal .
With regard to the amendments that have been tabled , I can tell you that the Commission can accept most of them , because they improve and clarify our original proposal .
In fact , many of them are very similar to the comments made by the Council itself and will , therefore , be adopted in the consolidated modified proposal , either in part or , in some cases , with minor stylistic changes .
The Commission also unreservedly accepts strengthening the powers of the Executive Director , something to which the rapporteur referred in his speech , and the provisions on the Agency ' s budgetary control .
On the other hand , we cannot accept some of the proposed amendments .
I shall list them with their numbers and explain why .
First of all , we do not feel that it is appropriate to include the revenue of the Agency and , therefore , its entire budget in the budget of the European Union .
This decision would run counter to the flexibility of management that we would like this body to have .
The Commission cannot , therefore , accept Amendments Nos 4 and 56 .
Some amendments could cause a degree of confusion , could be difficult to implement or fall outside the scope of the proposal and must , therefore , be rejected .
I am referring to Amendments Nos 3 , 15 , 17 , 19 , 28 , 29 , 54 and 65 .
Nor can we accept Amendments Nos 5 and 62 , which deal with the scope of the Regulation , as they stand , although , in this case and as a compromise , we can accept proposals being tabled in the year following the adoption of the Regulation , with regard to air operations and staff privileges .
With regard to the other areas , we cannot accept airports being definitively excluded .
We can only accept proposals being tabled later on these matters .
With regard to the publication of the results of inspections by national administrations , set down in Amendments Nos 24 and 30 , the Commission does not consider this to be appropriate because confidential information , which could be the basis of criminal proceedings , is involved .
Such action nevertheless , does comply with Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 on public access to the documents of the Community institutions .
I must also take a stand on the amendments dealing with the Agency ' s independence , specifically , Nos 21 , 32 , 42 , 43 , 45 , 53 , 64 , 70 and 71 .
We all want this to be an independent body when it acts on technical issues , but this does not mean that it can be free from any kind of political control .
We would like to see the Agency independent of individuals , or of the various lobby groups that , as you would expect , exist in this sector and which are very active . We do not want to see the Agency independent of the Community institutions because , I repeat , there must inevitably be some form of political control .
Therefore , the Commission cannot accept the suggestions that seek to reduce its powers of control over the Agency .
Nevertheless , Amendment No 36 , which reflects Parliament ' s will not to participate in the Agency ' s Administrative Board seems quite appropriate , if that is what Parliament wishes .
The work currently being undertaken in this House , as in the Council , proves that we are moving towards consensus on all aspects of this measure , with the exception of that of the influence of the Member States and the Community on control of the Agency .
It is , therefore , important that the Commission has the support of Parliament on this matter .
I should like to congratulate your rapporteur once again and thank you for the excellent work you have carried out .
With regard to the Commission communication on protecting passenger rights , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mr Collins , on having produced a detailed and stimulating report , which I read with great interest .
Having read the report , I have drawn the conclusion that Parliament and the Commission are , to a large extent , in agreement .
Both institutions attach high priority to the protection of passengers and we agree that this protection must be guaranteed by two approaches , which are not contradictory , but complementary .
The first approach is the voluntary agreements signed by the airlines and the second is laws that must be complied with .
Lastly , I shall give a brief summary of the actions planned for the near future and which , as you shall see , fully address your concerns and your suggestions .
Firstly , the monitoring of the voluntary commitments .
We fully concur that these agreements must provide for a mechanism for ensuring compliance with them if we really want them to be effective and to work properly and , therefore , to have credibility in the eyes of travellers .
Over the forthcoming months , we will be working conscientiously on these monitoring measures and on the out-of-court settlement of disputes .
I have already held a meeting with the airlines , to whom I made it very clear that this is a key issue , and I think that we can reach solutions that are acceptable to everyone .
Furthermore , passengers need to be well informed at every step , from the time they plan their trip until the flight itself , as Mr Ojeda said just now .
The airlines have given a serious commitment to provide better information , in line with their voluntary commitments .
With regard to the consumer reports comparing the profits of the various airlines , we will soon be instituting an experiment to try out various methods then to review legislation in light of the experience we have gained .
This is crucial .
Some passenger interests are so important that we must give them protection under the law .
In practical terms , we intend to propose legislation to Parliament and the Council in two specific areas : denied boarding and flight cancellations .
In relation to the first matter , we have drawn up a draft , which we are now fine-tuning , with the help of the comments of the various interested parties .
The second matter concerns the contracts airlines have with their customers .
At the end of this year we shall present a consultation document and , once we have received the reactions of those concerned , we will draft a proposal .
In the document , we shall be paying close attention to the rights of the disabled , an issue that some of the honourable Members have also raised today . We also hope that Parliament and the Council will rapidly approve the regulation , so that the standards of the Montreal Convention on the responsibility of Community airlines can apply and so that these new standards may enter into force by the end of next year .
Lastly , I shall refer to something that various speakers have highlighted , most recently by Mrs McCarthy and which concerns us all : the problems of passenger health .
We feel it is crucial to undertake a thorough and exhaustive assessment of the risks of travelling by aeroplane .
We are , therefore , financing research into cabin conditions under the Fifth Framework Programme and we are looking into how we can better support the studies into deep-vein thrombosis started by the World Health Organisation .
I must tell you that I have written personally to the chairmen of every airline to highlight this issue and to ask them , with the information now available , to immediately adopt measures to improve the situation .
In any event , although both initiatives will take a while , they will provide a solid basis for policy making and we shall keep this House fully informed .
To conclude , Mr President , I must say that I am delighted to see the degree of agreement between Parliament and the Commission . I must also tell you that on a flight with a certain airline , which was delayed by more than twenty minutes , we were informed that we had the right to a free flight with the same company for a period of one month , on the same route , just because there had been a delay of more than twenty minutes , in line with the conditions stated in their contract .
I am telling you this because the concerns and the actions of both Parliament and the Commission are yielding tangible results for the public , for users and for consumers .
Mr President , just a quick question to the Commissioner : we have stated on a number of occasions in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism that we are still unclear as to the future role of the national civil aviation authorities and the JAA as the proposed regulation does not define its parameters .
I would be very grateful for the Commission 's response .
It may not be possible this evening , but I would like more clarification on that area .
. ( ES ) Mr President , at a certain point , the two institutions , EASA and JAA , will converge and work together .
Some competences will remain with the JAA , such as staffing , for example but , with time , these will be incorporated into EASA .
In other words , at a certain point , the two institutions will converge , but only briefly .
In any event , I can send you the particular details of the matter , Mr Foster .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
System of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austria
The next item is the report ( A5-0266 / 2001 ) by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Protocol No 9 to the Act of Accession of Austria , Finland and Sweden as regards the system of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austria [ COM ( 2000 ) 862 - C5-0769 / 2000 - 2000 / 0361 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is certainly no easy task to have to draft a report on ones own country because one is all too subjective .
However , I shall endeavour to paint as objective a picture as I can .
I should start by clarifying that , when Austria negotiated its accession to the European Union , it asked for the content and substance of the Transit Agreement to be taken over in a protocol and hence be made part of its accession and its standing under the Treaty once it acceded to the European Union .
The Transit Agreement is without doubt doubly important because transit traffic in Austria - and this is a unique situation in the whole of the European Union - accounts for a very high proportion of overall traffic - up to 80 % on many routes - and , because of Austria 's geographical position and the fact that it is a relatively small country , it contributes to a relatively heavy environmental impact , especially in sensitive zones .
In addition , it is an area with practically no added value of its own .
Obviously , transit traffic cannot be separated from other types of traffic in the long term .
That is why the Transit Agreement has an expiry date of 2003 , which is fast approaching .
Now the Commission does not like this agreement .
I can understand that it might not please everyone because , from a traffic policy point of view , it is far from perfect .
The Commission has tried various ways of sinking this agreement .
First it opined that the sanction mechanism was too heavy .
I admit that the Commission is materially right , I too understand that .
That is why I have taken account of Uli Stockmann 's suggestion and my point 2 c ) states that we in Parliament take the view that a better , sliding scale needs to be found .
Then the Commission said that the calculation did not work correctly in Austria .
I am not in a position to judge , it is a question of establishing the facts .
We decided in committee to call on the Commission to ensure that the calculations are correct because I for one do not want to sanction erroneous calculations .
But then the Commission decided that the sanction mechanism was all wrong , the calculations were all wrong and , if that does not work , then we are also opposed to the upper ceiling .
But clearly the upper ceiling for transit lorries was part of the agreement from the outset .
A provisional finding of the European Court of Justice states that this was a basic element in the transit agreement .
Nor is it true , as the Commission maintains , that this is , to a certain extent , a negative incentive to use environmentally-friendly vehicles .
Every haulier is better off using environmentally-friendly vehicles because he needs to use fewer ecopoints .
That is why , if nothing else , this regulation motivates hauliers to use more favourable , i.e. more environmentally-friendly vehicles .
Which is why I completely fail to understand why such a sustained attack is being mounted on an existing agreement which , anyway , is due to expire shortly .
Nor do I understand , Commissioner , why it is being mounted at a time when the Commission knows that Austria will have to reckon with a serious increase in transit traffic during the course of forthcoming enlargement .
I can gladly let you have a copy of the study by an independent economic institute concluding that , by the year 2015 - and I know that is a long way off - transit traffic will have increased four- to fivefold .
What I mean is that , in this situation , knowing that people are very sensitive to traffic issues , to change an existing agreement in this situation in order to create a different situation for perhaps one to one and a half years , is totally incomprehensible to me .
I should like to reiterate that this is not , in our view , about passing a new regulation .
It is not about introducing additional restrictions .
It is simply about leaving an existing agreement in place and let 's face it , the principle of trust always applies when agreements are signed .
I must repeat , this is predominantly about not adding fuel to the fire at a sensitive time when the question of enlargement is writ large , because we know where that can lead .
Naturally my recommendation is that we accept the report tomorrow as it was adopted in committee - albeit , I admit , by a very narrow majority , if one can talk of majorities at all here .
Commissioner , I know you will be unable to agree but I should like to ask one favour of you , nonetheless : if , and this might easily be the case , Parliament decides otherwise and rejects my proposal , could you perhaps think twice about forcing it through ?
Could you use the precarious , sensitive situation in this country , which is also important for negotiations with candidate countries , as an opportunity for finding a long-term solution , rather than forcing through a short-term solution ?
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
( DE ) Mr President , the vote on deleting the 108 % clause is about more than just Austria 's environmental concerns .
Transit traffic in a sensitive Alpine region is the secondary issue .
Primarily , it is about the fact that Austria has a valid agreement with the European Union .
The Commission is now trying , in its proposal for a regulation , to cancel this valid agreement unilaterally and expects the European Parliament to validate this illegal move .
If we vote in favour of this proposal , we shall be helping to break an agreement to the detriment of a Member State of the Union .
What this can and will do is to destroy any trust in agreements concluded and hence any trust in the legal security of the European Union .
A large majority of people living in the Alpine regions in question came out in favour of accession to the EU in 1994 , believing in the sanctity of contracts .
If we vote in favour of this unwarranted abolition of the protection clauses , we shall foster reticence towards the Union and force people back on to street blockades .
In this sense I urgently call on you to support Mr Swoboda 's report or , given the present weather , not to leave him out in the rain .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will be voting in favour of the Commission proposal .
First , because the objective of the ecopoint system has more or less been achieved .
The objective was to reduce overall NOx emissions from heavy goods vehicles in transit through Austria by 60 % by the end of 2003 .
In 2000 , we had already achieved a 56 % reduction ; in other words , we are well on the way to achieving the target set in the agreement by 2003 .
Secondly , the Commission proposal does not touch the ecopoint system per se .
The target of a 60 % reduction has been retained .
The Commission expressly calls for the ecopoint system to continue .
Only the so-called 108 % rule is to be abolished .
This rule runs counter to the very objective of the ecopoint system , i.e. to protect the environment by reducing NOx emissions .
It acts as an incentive to buy and use environmentally-friendly lorries .
The 108 % clause sets an upper ceiling on the number of transit journeys and imposes sanctions where it is exceeded .
However , this clause only applies if the lorries have produced 8 % fewer emissions a year .
That is a contradiction in itself .
Which is why the whole thing makes no sense .
Thirdly , reducing ecopoints does not reduce transit traffic through the Alps as a whole because it will either be switched to routes through Switzerland or trickily converted to bilateral traffic to and from Austria or traffic using east European lorries which are subject to a different licensing system and do not come under the ecopoint system .
On balance , all this means is that there will be no further reductions in NOx emissions in Austria .
Fourthly , the sanctions attached to the 108 % rule are disproportionately high .
For example , exceeding 100,000 journeys in 1999 was punished by cutting 150,000 journeys in 2000 .
The last point I wish to raise is this : doubts as to whether primary law , in this case an act of accession , can be changed by secondary law , i.e. by a Commission proposal for a regulation , as is the subject of today 's debate , are to my mind unwarranted .
Protocol no .
9 makes explicit provision for the ecopoint system to be reviewed in 2001 .
On this basis , the Commission proposal is therefore legal .
That is why I am in favour of abolishing the 108 % rule and adopting the Commission proposal as it stands .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the ecopoint system was agreed during Austria 's accession to the EU .
So what we are talking about is an existing , legally valid agreement which expires in 2003 .
The objective , as has already been mentioned , is to use more environmentally-friendly lorries in transit through the Austrian Alps and to reduce NOx emissions by 60 % in comparison with 1992 , which has almost been achieved .
The agreement also sets an upper ceiling on the number of transit journeys , the so-called 108 % clause .
Now the Commission wants to abolish the 108 % clause by the end of 2003 .
The rapporteur , Hannes Swoboda , rejects the Commission proposal and I concur with this view , although there is a conflict between Austrian and German interests , for example , here .
But our concern here must be to act within the context of a European transport policy and that means having a taxation mechanism for ecologically sensitive regions .
In all events , I should like to highlight three problems , as I have done in my proposed amendments .
First , the number of journeys needs to be calculated correctly .
A number of speakers have expressed doubts as to the accuracy of the statistics , because they also include some bilateral journeys .
Care must therefore be taken to calculate the number of journeys correctly , so that sanctions are not wrongly applied .
That brings me to my second point , sanctions .
In 1999 , as has already been mentioned , the number of transit journeys was exceeded by 100,000 , resulting in a cutback of 150,000 journeys by way of " punishment " .
I think the current sanction mechanism is excessive and wrong because it hits individual road hauliers , even though it means state action .
Something needs to be done here .
And my third and final point . Our ultimate transport policy objective is to have a sustainable transport system which allows sustainable mobility in the long term .
However , the Commission has so far omitted to present a conclusive overall concept for the Alps for 2003 onwards and we need one now as a matter of urgency .
Mr President , Commissioner , even though we have taken into account all the concerns that Mr Swoboda and others have expressed as regards the upholding of the commitments that the Union undertakes in signing the Treaties , I believe that in this specific case we have to vote for the Commission proposal .
This is the line my Group has agreed upon and intends to follow tomorrow .
This is because the experiment conducted over these years will instead be used from now on to define a coherent strategy for transit journeys across the Alpine region , which will , in future , be based on as broad a shift from road to rail as possible .


The current system has proved essentially effective , since the basic objective has been or is in the process of being achieved , while on the other hand it is proving ineffective , or rather in some cases I would say it acts against the incentive to make vehicles crossing Austria more eco-friendly , as well as being difficult if not unfair to implement , and therefore the clause has indeed proved to be effectively of little use , even though worthwhile in its intention .
I believe that no serious difficulties should arise and that there should be substantial respect for the agreement in that the desired objective has been achieved , and that the clause should not be implemented because it does not help us at the moment .
It will instead be used or applied , like others , to harmonise different schemes that we should use to work out a better way to cross the whole Alpine region in future .
I hope and we hope that this too will be taken into account in the forthcoming White Paper , both in favouring the choice of those rail links that we have been waiting for for too long , and in identifying tariff measures that will , through better attribution of infrastructure costs , help to encourage more coherent conditions with regard to the Alpine region as a whole .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Swoboda , our rapporteur , and Mr Kronberger are both Austrian .
That is , of course , no coincidence and they have both explained the situation in Austria in detail .
However , I do not see this as a purely Austrian problem .
This report and tomorrow 's vote are about a decision with far-reaching implications .
I am not trying - nor do I have any intention of trying - to play the internal market , competition and environmental and transport policy off against each other .
I see two points at issue here .
First , to repeat the concern expressed by my fellow members , we should not emulate President Bush by ending an agreement unilaterally .
Secondly , how serious are we about our European environmental and transport policy ?
How serious are we about implementing it and how efficiently do we want to promote it ?
So we are not just talking about reducing nitrogen oxide in the Brenner pass .
We need a coherent transport concept for the whole of the Alps and we need to internationalise the external costs .
Until we apply real costs , roads will be cheaper and neither combined transport nor the railways will be able to compete .
The whole of the ecologically sensitive Alpine region needs our support within the terms of the Alpine Convention .
Our citizens , and I do not just mean in these sensitive regions , are counting on the European Parliament and the sense of responsibility of all its members .
Mr President , this topic involves much more than just a traffic problem .
It is a matter of how the European Union treats its promises to newcomers , the rights of its smaller Member States and interests other than simply those of the economy .
For years , Switzerland and Austria have protected their Alpine valleys against noise and air pollution from goods traffic .
That kind of protection gains in importance as this environmentally-unfriendly means of transport increases .
When Austria joined the European Union , a compromise was agreed that enabled this Member State partially to maintain this protection by reducing NOx emissions by 60 % between 1992 and 2004 .
Others also benefit from that measure , since it encourages the restriction of transport or its transfer to rail connections that are better for people and the environment .
The underlying principle was not to wait for cleaner technologies , but to empower a government to limit transport by establishing ceilings .
Seven years after this compromise , the Commission is trying unilaterally to deprive Austria of that right and at this late stage to give free rein to north-south road traffic , even if the limit of 108 % is exceeded .
If the European Union behaves in this way with its smaller Member States , that will increasingly provoke antagonism and opposition .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left supports the rapporteur in his rejection of this attack by the Commission , the large Member States and the big transport conglomerates .
Mr President , not only the number and distribution of ecopoints in Austria , but also the ecopoint system itself , lead to a highly-charged discussion with repeated heated clashes between supporters and opponents .
This time is no exception .
When Austria joined the European Union , limited access for in-transit transport of goods was agreed until the end of 2003 .
The Commission wants to revoke one of the components of this agreement .
The rapporteur regards the unilateral ( partial ) termination of protocol No 9 without acceptable alternatives as a breach of agreements entered into .
The present system in Austria - does not seem to be flawless .
The fact that no account is taken of large groups of road users when measuring emissions does not contribute to a clear picture of emissions caused by in-transit traffic .
At the same time , Austria has not yet fulfilled its obligation to offer sufficient alternatives to the Alpine route .
I am convinced that Europe cannot do without transport , but neither can it do without a healthy natural environment in which we ultimately all live .
Therefore I support initiatives to limit emissions in general and in vulnerable areas of natural beauty , in particular .
The rejection of this proposal by the Commission therefore does not stand in isolation , but falls within this framework .
The question does arise , though , what the future of in-transit traffic through Austria will be after 2003 , when the ecopoint system has disappeared .
In order to tackle environmental damage to the Alps constructively , a policy for vulnerable areas is essential .
For as long as this is lacking , ad hoc measures will appear which are seldom constructive in nature .
Hence my question to the Commission if it is going to tackle this topic in the long-awaited White Paper .
In short , I do not consider it sensible , while there is no wider policy for vulnerable areas , to take unilateral measures that cannot be expected to promote sustainable mobility .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak as an Austrian , but I also speak as a European for three reasons .
First , the Transit Agreement was part of a Union promise to Austria .
The promise being that the sensitive Alpine region would not be buried under an endless avalanche of transit traffic .
Austrians trusted in Europe 's word .
66 % of Austrians were in favour of accession to the Union .
If this Commission proposal is adopted , this promise will be broken .
I speak to you as a European ; this is the sort of thing which will come back to haunt us if another referendum somewhere in Europe turns out badly .
Secondly , transit traffic and hence the 108 % clause , which it is proposed to abolish , forms part of the Act of Accession to the European Union .
In other words , the Transit Agreement is primary law .
I ask you in all conscience : what is an agreement worth if the European Parliament can undermine primary law in a vote ?
This is also a question of principle , not just Austrian , but European principle .
Thirdly , a question to all of you : what are words on paper worth ?
To quote the new Article 6 in the Treaty of Amsterday : " Environmental protection requirements must be integrated into the definition and implementation of the Community policies and activities referred to in Article 3 " , such as the free movement of goods .
Tomorrow 's vote will be a measure of just how seriously this House takes the objective of this article in the Treaty of Amsterday .
Or , ladies and gentlemen , do we just pay lip service here to environmental protection and sustainable development ?
The contest tomorrow is free movement of goods versus environmental protection - it is a fundamentally European question , which is why I call on you to vote in favour of the report .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , we need to get one thing straight here . This hypothesis , that the Community is breaking Treaty law is simply nonsense .
Treaty law makes provision for adjustment and this proposal adjusts just one point of the law .
So it is not a question of breaking Treaty law .
The non-attached member is moaning that we are not treating the environment properly and is calling for environmental protection . Well my question to my fellow Austrian member is this : when will you stump up the money for the Brenner base tunnel ?
Then you would be doing something for environmental protection .
We are , in fact , taking far too long about implementing the Brenner base tunnel .
That is the only real solution to the problem of transit traffic in the Alps .
Instead of bandying fine words , Madam , you would do well to push ahead with plans for the base tunnel and stump up the money .
That would be your job in a government in which you are represented .
We do not need vox pops !
Mr Stockmann made a great number of valid points , namely that the main objective , to reduce NOx emissions , has in fact almost been achieved and that the 108 % clause is disproportionate and inaccurate .
Mr Stockmann , vote with us tomorrow in favour of the Commission proposal and you will achieve exactly what you want to achieve .
I can understand that you do not want to stab your Austrian rapporteur in the back , but consider carefully how you intend to vote tomorrow .
Vote in favour of the Commission proposal .
Just two more brief comments .
If we maintain this clause , there will be no change in real freight volumes ; instead the transit journeys which are no longer possible will be replaced by a journey using one haulier into Austria , transhipment and a journey using another haulier out of Austria .
In other words , transit would be split , we would have more exhaust emissions and more costs to consumers . That is not the solution .
The solution is to build the Brenner base tunnel so that we can shift freight from the roads to the railways in the long term .
That is what we should be fighting for .
Mr President , may I first express my appreciation of Mr Swoboda ' s arguments and also of the thoroughness of the work he has done .
At the same time , we are fully convinced that the set objective of the protocol in question is a good one : the environmental protection of Austria within the Alpine region .
The Commission intends to maintain this objective , and we are also convinced , as the proposed regulation to the Commission suggests , that the 108 % clause should be eliminated .
I shall confine myself quickly to two puzzling facts .
The first is a matter of logic : the clause operates on the number of transit journeys , regardless of the ecological performance of the vehicle , and therefore more ecologically friendly vehicles mean more ecopoints saved , more journeys accumulated and a greater risk of going over the 108 % quota .
The result is a paradox : operators are discouraged from choosing less polluting vehicles .
The second puzzle is a practical one : the sampling system is unreliable , the critical threshold would seem to be exceeded by 0.6 % , or 10 000 journeys , but according to a Commission study there are 92 000 vehicles that entered Austria and did not leave .
We are dealing with a system that has demonstrated that it is absolutely unreliable : the 108 % limit has not been proved effective ; the penalties are quite excessive , with 150 rights of transit less as a result of exceeding the 108 % threshold .
Mr President , these are the technical and objective reasons why the Italian delegation will vote in favour of the Commission proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the long term , our views are not so very different .
As far as we can tell from the Commissioner 's future plans as they stand now , she wants the same thing we all want and need , i.e. specially sensitive transport rules for specially sensitive areas .
That was precisely the intention of the original Transit Agreement between the Community as it was then and Austria , standing as it did on the brink of accession in every sense of the word .
And the solutions worked out just under ten years ago and the compromises brokered for Alpine transit at the time have , on the whole , worked .
The ecopoint system has brought about a net improvement in the environmentally problematic nitrogen oxide situation , despite all its weaknesses , and the quantitative upper ceiling and 108 % rule , which is what this is all about , has at least gone some way towards acting as a safety net , as hoped , despite a whole series of problems .
So why now and why , given the current situation , terminate a fundamental element of the arrangement prematurely for such as short period of time ?
This is the question people in Austria are asking and they are not getting an answer .
Unless the idea is to end transit traffic restrictions , including - more to the point - in sensitive Alpine regions .
I think we shall all be doing future European transport policy a disservice if we jeopardise the common , long-term objective or completely lose sight of it for the sake of a few relatively minor inconsistencies and squabbles .
That is why I think the position adopted two months ago by an admittedly narrow majority in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism is the right one .
This committee position could be used as a springboard for renewed efforts to find jointly acceptable solutions , rather than creating huge emotional and political problems for Austria and its citizens .
Austria versus the rest of the world ?
That cannot and should not be .
We should all being pulling together to find good , forward-looking solutions to European transport problems .
That should be our objective and I trust that we shall return a vote tomorrow which guarantees that .
Mr President , Commissioner , I do not think it is right to separate the supporters of the Commission ' s measure and those against it into those who have the environment at heart and those who do not .
This is an error into which we must not fall , and I must say this with all due respect to the Members from Austria : your representation of the situation is not useful to your fellow citizens .
We are all concerned with safeguarding and protecting the environment , and the question of the Alpine passes , amongst others , affects not only Austria but also a large part of a sensitive area like the Alpine region on the Italian side .
Why do I say this ?
Because in the Commission ' s proposal , which we share and support , we see the same environmental concern .
It has been said that the ecopoints system will not be touched because it has produced results , and this has been confirmed .
On the other hand it has been observed - and this cannot be denied - that the ceiling system actually punishes those hauliers that try to adopt ecologically friendly procedures , as has been said , while instead encouraging bad practice , as you well know , and even fraudulent practices : for instance , many lorries go in with a bill of lading , unload in Austria and then leave , and so are not subject to the points clause .
All that does no more good to the environment than it does to the transport system .
Of course , there is also a problem of guaranteeing mobility , there is a problem of guaranteeing competition among haulage companies , but there is most of all an environmental problem .
I ask you to take in the aspect of concern for the environment that is expressed in the Commission proposal ; I agree with you all that we certainly need to find stable , definitive solutions for the future , which will really protect us from these risks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank Mr Swoboda for the work he has carried out , although having said that , I must tell him that I cannot agree to his suggestion or to what he says in his report , because the Protocol is categorical on this matter .
Article 11 of Protocol No 9 discusses NOx pollution ..
Nowhere does it mention noise or any other type of pollution .
The objective of Article 11 is to limit gas emissions and NOx emissions and nowhere does it mention any other types of pollution that could have been suggested but which , at the time , were not suggested and were not included .
Furthermore , when Article 11 discusses a revision - and I am here attempting to answer what was said earlier - the Commission is not trying to steamroller nor to exceed the legal obligations that bind us all , but to adhere strictly to the provisions of Article 11 of Protocol No 9 to the Act of Accession , in other words , to undertake a revision , to see precisely how it has developed . And yet people are suggesting that we are proposing equivalent measures in order to reduce NOx emissions .
Please read it .
I requested the text in order to read it out to you .
Unfortunately I do not have it here with me , but I can quote you part of the text , which states that , pursuant to Article 71 , which covers codecision , it authorises the Council and now Parliament - following recent changes to the Treaty codecision applies - to adopt Community measures that - and I quote verbatim - " guarantee equivalent protection of the environment , in particular , a 60 % reduction in pollution " .
Ladies and gentlemen , I must tell you that we are not trying to steamroller or to exceed the provisions of Protocol No 9 to Austria ' s Act of Accession .
I fully realise that there may be difficulties and I also know that Austria is suffering as a result of the vehicles transiting through it , as are other countries , which may , incidentally , suffer from other types of problem too .
I also understand that regions such as the Alpine regions and other particularly sensitive areas of the European Union can and should be given special protection where transport is concerned , road transport above all .
Not the whole of Austria , however , which is what this Protocol refers to .
The Alpine regions are a part of Austria , but not only of Austria .
To this end , the principle of ecopoints - let me make this quite clear - has been positive and has reduced NOx emissions by more than 50 % .
We have not reached the ceiling of 60 % , but a reduction of over 50 % has been achieved .
I stated , although I did not give a firm commitment , that I intend to propose , as stated in the White Paper on transport policy - which I hope you will soon be able to read , that for particularly sensitive areas such as the Alps , measures must be taken to limit the potentially harmful effects for the environment .
The system of ecopoints itself could be one solution .
Perhaps .
I am not saying that it is the solution , but it could be one .
There must be an ecopoint system - which leads me to the final point - that really works because this , Mr Swoboda , is the problem and this is another point on which I disagree with you .
You say that with a ceiling of 108 % , hauliers still see a benefit , for the moment , in improving the environmental quality of their lorries .
You are wrong , Mr Swoboda .
It is not in their interest at all , because if their ceiling is 108 % why should they make improvements when , with this number of trips they reach a ceiling that they cannot raise by reducing emissions , since they cannot travel more often without penalties being imposed on them ?
At the moment , the two clauses contradict each other , which is why we are proposing that they be removed .
If we want to continue improving emissions , the 108 % clause must be withdrawn , because otherwise , some of the better lorries might stop transiting through Austria because they have too many ecopoints and lack transit rights as a result of this 108 % .
This could lead to the use of lorries that pollute more .
This is of no importance : it is no longer in anyone ' s interest to improve the quality of their emissions because the ceiling is set at 108 % .
This is why we are proposing that it be removed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , starting from the premise that there can always be divergent legal interpretations , as I freely admit , I feel that the provisions of Protocol No 9 , Article 11 state that a review should be carried out , that equivalent measures should be proposed and that the objective is NOx emissions .
They also state that , if we want to continue improving NOx emissions , our only option is to remove the 108 % ceiling because , if we maintain this ceiling , there is no incentive to improve environmental quality with regard to emissions by European hauliers transiting through Austria .
I therefore urge Parliament to support the Commission proposal and to reject - I am sorry , Mr Swoboda , but for the first time we cannot agree - Mr Swoboda ' s proposal .


Mr President , if you lose , you lose .
I will , of course , have to accept the decision if that is how it turns out .
But , Commissioner , you stressed several times today that you have to propose an equivalent solution .
You have not proposed an equivalent solution , that much is clear .
In that respect you are legally off base .
Mr President , I should like to stress that the Commissioner was quite right in what she said .
The Treaty can only be revised , and rightly so , if equivalent measures are introduced .
Exactly what are they then ?
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Cultural cooperation in the EU
The next item is the report ( A5-0281 / 2001 ) by Mr Ruffolo , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on cultural cooperation in the European Union [ 2000 / 2323 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this motion for a resolution has arisen from some simple but not obvious observations .
The first observation concerns a lack of coordination among the cultural programmes of the Union , especially between those included in Culture 2000 and those in the programmes financed by the Structural Funds .
The second observation is especially that there is a gap between the programmes managed at Union level and national cultural policies , based purely and simply on the reciprocal provision of information .
A positive response to these two observations depends on the recognition of two points : first , the principle of subsidiarity not only does not exclude cooperation but demands it .
It must not be understood in terms of sectarian cultural protectionism , but in a positive and active sense as a fertile encounter of diverse cultures .
The second point to recognise is that the richness and specific character of European civilisation lies in the diversity of its national and regional cultures .
Therefore , the expression ' unity in diversity ' has been chosen as the motto of the report .
European culture is clearly not a homogeneous unit : it is a collection of diverse cultures , each with its own historical roots and its area of radiation ; I might almost say it is a symphony in the technical musical sense of the word , in that it develops through consonance and dissonance : a symphony not created by a single composer , however , but resulting from the course of history , through dramatic conflicts and occasional religious , nationalist and ideological massacres .
Nonetheless , today , at last , there is a convergence on common humanistic values of liberty , equality and , if not fraternity - which would be too much to ask - then at least mutual tolerance .
These are values which are recognised in a common area ; they are distinguished both from distinctly consumer cultures and from fundamentalist ones , and are based upon the great traditions of Christianity , liberalism and socialism .
A common European culture was , besides , recognised at the time of Thomas More and Erasmus of Rotterdam , when Erasmus rode to Oxford on a mule to take his friend In Praise of Folly .
There was a lingua franca but no monetary union , and so on his return his honestly earned pounds sterling were confiscated from him .
Today there are no more journeys on mule-back because we use aeroplanes , there is no longer a lingua franca but we have our wonderful simultaneous interpreters .
In short , all the material conditions are in place for a European culture to spread its message of peace and civil order throughout the world , because Europeans can tap into a rich vein of cooperation in the cultural field .
Such cooperation is affirmed , or rather invoked in the Treaties and official speeches , but funding does not follow as it could and should do .
Instead , concrete decisions end up loudly contradicting the solemn declarations , decisions and non-decisions , like the unfortunate one at Nice which paralysed European cultural policy .
This motion for a resolution is an attempt to react to this paralysis , to pragmatically encourage cooperation among European countries in the field of culture , beginning with the obvious requirements of adopting a common vocabulary , comparable statistics , the reciprocal provision of information , systematic comparisons , a selection of best practices and the opening up of areas in which it seems most suitable and appropriate to adopt common approaches and policies .
I ardently hope , Mr President , that the Commission will match its efforts to the aims and give the resolution the attention it deserves , placing the problem of culture and cultural cooperation at the centre of the great European project .
We are different and united at the same time : this is an opportunity to show it !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Ruffolo ' s report seeks to achieve better and deeper cooperation between the Member States , with regard to their respective cultural policies .
It also makes another good point that should be highlighted : the Commission ' s cultural policy , specifically in its implementation of the Culture 2000 framework programme , should prevent a degree of fluctuation in the criteria for the selection of candidates .
The Commission is swamped every year with a huge variety of proposals , but the resources available to it are ridiculously limited and there are many agents and operators whose valid proposals are passed over as a result of these limitations .
The Commission is currently trying to come up with procedures that will , in its opinion , provide a better response to these problems .
The follow-up to Culture 2000 will soon be studied and we shall make a statement on it .
Using the instruments described in Mr Ruffolo ' s report will ultimately provide the Commission with more precise data on the cultural policies of the Member States and on the cultural requirements they feel they have .
A cultural policy at European level must take these factors into consideration when defining its objectives and outlining its criteria for selecting candidates .
We should not forget that we are talking about a European cultural policy and not about national policies .
These , incidentally , are also covered , to a great extent , by the Structural Funds , and it therefore makes sense to take account of the dual nature of the resources involved . Nevertheless , we must methodically separate the scope of a European cultural policy , on the one hand , from the range of national policies , on the other .
At European level , therefore , the institutions should concern themselves mainly with the implications of the cultural heritage common to all of Europe and avoid confusion with national policies developed by the Member States without prejudice , of course , to stimulating multilateral dialogue between the contemporary creations of these States .
A European cultural policy must contribute to actively placing Europe ' s huge and multifaceted cultural heritage within the grasp of its citizens .
Mr President , I welcome what I believe we will all agree is an exemplary piece of work .
We now have a comprehensive blueprint for the way in which cultural policy could operate in the Union .
The rapporteur has worked particularly well with the initiator of policy and legislation in the European Commission .
I should like to make a few points .
First of all we have to acknowledge in this House and beyond that the creative and knowledge industries have become a driver in our new global economy and that the skills that we need therein have become vital to our performance in the European economy .
More than this , the social and philosophical needs that we have in mastering the cultural question become central to ensuring that we have stability in our globalised world .
This means that we have to recognise the importance of funding for cultural activities .
We have to face some very difficult questions : for instance , an increasingly small part of our economy in the new global world is agriculture .
The common agricultural policy , as we all know , takes a vast amount of our funds .
If we are to recognise the primacy of the knowledge and information economy in the new global economy then we have to face the reality of looking at different priorities for our fundings .
All the measures in the Ruffolo report are deliverable , but in order to deliver we must ensure that we have cooperation across institutions and at different levels of government .
This means that we must look , for instance , at the structural funds and the way in which we monitor the amount of money that is spent on cultural activities .
Recently a Commission official said to me that we could not do this .
I have to inform him that all he needs do is to go to any of the municipalities in the Union and they will tell him how to do it .
That is what officials are employed to do .
He could even look at the Single Programming Documents in order to do this .
It is possible to do it when we need to .
I say this not to slight the Commission or their staff but to say that cooperation is needed in order to achieve what Mr Ruffolo , in such an exemplary manner , has set out .
Mr President , I want first of all to thank Mr Ruffolo for all the dedicated work he has done on this report .
Allow me to remind you that it was also at Mr Ruffolo ' s request that a statistical comparison of the Member States ' cultural activities was made .
This was a very interesting and relevant document .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party has no doubt that culture is a fundamental component of the EU ' s identity .
Our group believes that respect for , and promotion of , cultural and linguistic diversity and of the common cultural inheritance is an essential factor in integration and the promotion of human individuality .
We want to see a European cultural policy which is not in any way aimed at uniformity but which offers the kind of identity that arises in the encounter of differences - a policy which contributes to social cohesion and which is essential to the sense of being a European citizen .
Cultural policy is one of the EU ' s small policy areas , and that is the way it should be , too .
The EU must expend its energies on the key areas : the internal market , economic policy , foreign policy and asylum and immigration policy , and that is why we must also be very cautious about otherwise well-meaning initiatives in the area of cultural policy .
Allow me also to remind you that people want decisions to be taken as close to themselves as possible .
That was what the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , emphasised here in the House earlier today .
The EU must not be involved in governing Europe in detail . That is best left to the Member States .
That is why the ELDR Group has tabled amendments designed completely to remove conclusions 8 and 10 .
We believe that these are conclusions intended to broaden the scope of Article 151 of the treaty , and that is not something we want to be a party to .
We also believe that the proposals are contrary to the principle of subsidiarity , something we take very seriously . Finally , we do not consider that the time is ripe for extending the economic framework of the EU ' s activities in the area of cultural policy , something to which the proposal also refers .
The ELDR Group cannot support the report if conclusions 8 and 10 , or the compromise amendments to these , are adopted .
Mr President , a very good evening and welcome to Europe 's first culture channel .
But joking apart , what can I say to you in just a minute ?
Perhaps I should try to take the wind out of the sceptics ' sails .
This is not about intervention , it is not about interfering in national cultural policy , no new wave of harmonisation is being started ; on the contrary , it is about bringing sermonising politicians down to earth and saying , could you please stop using subsidiarity as a veto .
It is about saying , if you really mean that culture is one of the most important models for the peaceful integration of Europe , then you must put your money where you mouth is .
We try to join forces in so many areas ; why should culture go it alone ?
Joint investment by Europe in culture - I like that expression better than subsidy , it is not just a question of financial support - is long overdue .
May I run over time slightly in order to pay my respects and offer my thanks to all the members who have patiently fought to make headway here over the years , long before my arrival here .
I should like to thank them for every millimetre of ground won and I too shall fight for more , millimetre by millimetre .
Mr President , Commissioner , the nicest compliment that can paid to Mr Ruffolo , I think , is to ask a question which , to my mind , is the most significant , the question of the budget .
If he tells us that 0.1 % of the Community budget is set aside for culture , when we know full well that a Europe of Culture is advancing , how much is coming from the European Structural Funds , as Mrs O 'Toole stated ?
What I would like to know , and I think Mr Ruffolo would also like to know , is what are the European Structural Funds set aside for culture , what this represents and what this means for a Europe of Culture currently under construction .
If this Europe of Culture is effectively under construction , then let us take on board all of Mr Ruffolo ' s proposals : it could be that he is proposing to change the Treaty by proposing a cultural observatory .
Perhaps we could also propose a cultural policy , and I would really like to know your feelings on reinforced cooperation , on the extension of the qualified majority , in short , on all that could be used to build a cultural policy in Europe in a concrete and non-abstract fashion .
Mrs Echerer told us no long debates , and I agree with her , of course , but I must say that as far as I am concerned there should be a clear description of budgetary expenditure on culture .
We know very well that wherever we go in Europe , we find out that it is not such and such a programme that provides the appropriate financing but these often talked about Structural Funds .
Why can we not find out what is happening with these Structural Funds ?
This would perhaps be the best proof and the best argument if those Members who are not interested in culture are to support us in our cultural project .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to offer Mr Ruffolo my warmest thanks for taking the initiative because , without such an effort on his part , we would have no own initiative report and we would not be able to talk about it today or ask for funds from the budget .
So my warmest thanks .
The report was adopted with a broad consensus , it has come at the right time and it represents a political challenge for everyone involved in it .
And I hope that means a lot of people at all levels .
Setting up an observatory for cultural cooperation and the proposed three-year cultural cooperation plan will , in the final analysis , be a gauge of just how seriously politicians at all levels are trying to maintain and develop a European area of culture .
I am also delighted that two points have been included which I addressed in my report on the status of artists in 1992 , Mrs Echerer .
I called at that time for greater support for patrons , including through greater tax incentives .
I called then - as I do now - for a long overdue study to be drafted on the approximation of taxes on works of art and the work of artists .
Because we have social cohesion and are citizens of Europe , we need a European cultural policy and our amazing diversity must be highlighted time and time again .
Project Europe shed its economic and technical orientation a long time ago .
We desperately need to draft a common cultural policy and common education policy if we are to rekindle the soul of Europe , which has been choked by economic expediency and covered in a thick layer of bureaucratic dust at all levels , regional , local , national and even European , for far too long .
Our citizens today simply want more beautiful things .
More beautiful things will reawaken their enthusiasm for Europe and more culture costs a bit more .
So please let us add something to the budget now .
Mr President , we have before us a great own-initiative report which is so important that , in my opinion , it could easily have been called ' Bases for a common cultural policy ' , because this is what they could be if the Council takes a sensitive approach to our requests .
Our cultural identity is being protected all the time and this is right and proper because it is an important part of Europe ' s cultural heritage .
The rapporteur himself , in a cogent phrase , defined the situation in Europe as the unity of diversities .
But do the Members of the Council not think that it is also time that we discussed what is common to all our cultures , to seek it out , to cherish its common components , ways of life , customs , shared values , knowledge , art and scientific development ?
Do they not think that it is time to state that a European culture does indeed exist , to develop joint cultural policies and to set common objectives for all our member States ?
In a globalised world and given the danger of passively adopting one particular dominant culture , cultural convergence within the European Union represents a powerful political bulwark that we should not reject .
To those nationalists who , from within or from outside the Union , reject the future of the European Union because , according to them , we do not share a common identity , we must reply with the words of Levy Strauss , who said : " We do not need one , because we have something much stronger : a common destiny " .
The purpose of my words , Mr President , is to congratulate Mr Ruffolo for having reminded us so brilliantly of the path that we must take in the field of culture .
One final comment .
The request that a work of art be installed in infrastructures and installations financed with Community funds seeks not only to protect and to spread art in Europe , but to ensure that the public knows and remembers that this airport , that motorway , or such-and-such railway line , comes from the Community , a fact of which today , unfortunately , people tend to be unaware .
Mr President , this resolution is Parliament ' s first legislative initiative in cultural matters based on Article 192 of the Treaty and is distinguished from the other resolutions approved by Parliament in the field of culture not only in its content but also in its procedure , certainly the most authoritative yet allowed under the Treaty .
The resolution has come at a delicate time for the European Union , on the eve of major institutional reforms ; it is therefore seen as an indication and a contribution from Parliament to the debate on the future of Europe .
If all this is true , you will of course allow me , Mr President , sincerely , in my capacity as committee Chairman , to congratulate the rapporteur in advance this evening - something that we generally do as a matter of course when we vote - because I really believe this is a step forward , a major revolution that Parliament is on the point of making .
Actually , the lack of coordination at the level of cultural programmes , which the rapporteur has highlighted , is in my mind the most important fact in being able to make Europe grow and , as Mr Ruffolo has said , culture has until now had a much lesser role than the economy .
With the Maastricht Treaty conditions improved but it remained marginal ; then in Nice it was held paralysed in the bonds of unanimity .
All that shows how Europe can be made , Commissioner , not just through the economy , but through a major cultural initiative , of which Parliament should take full note .
Precisely because this resolution is wanted and has , I believe , been passionately discussed by the committee until they reached unanimity - wanted by the rapporteur and discussed and wanted by the committee as a whole - I believe it really shows a difference , a diversity , a new reason for this Parliament , as part of a strategy that must , at a cultural level , lead us to unity in the cultural diversity that this great Europe has , in order for there to be a future in a real strategy over the coming years .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12.10 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of the previous sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , this concerns a matter arising from the Minutes in connection with the distribution of the report promised by Mr Kinnock in response to my oral question on Monday , which was raised in the Chamber yesterday afternoon .
I should like to confirm that this report is available .
I received it by e-mail from Mr Kinnock ' s office , but as far as I can tell it has not yet been officially distributed to Members .
I know that Mr Kinnock was very keen that we should all have it as soon as possible so can I ask you once again to make sure that this is distributed .
On the same topic could I ask you , Mr President , on behalf of all the Members of this Parliament , if we could have a similar report to the one prepared by the Commission on the progress of the human resource reforms as regards the work that is going on with the staff of Parliament .
We are currently in a position where we know less about the progress of the personnel reforms in this House than we do in the Commission .
Could I ask you to discuss with your colleagues and arrange for a statement and a report to be made to this House as soon as possible about the progress of these crucial reforms which were solidly supported by the House when it approved my report last year ?
On the first part , I was here when the President gave you the assurance that Mr Kinnock ' s report would be distributed .
I will ask the services to make sure that is done .
On the second part , the Bureau of Parliament is meeting tonight .
Unfortunately I will not be there but I will ask for this to be raised at the Bureau this evening .
( The Minutes were approved )
Echelon
The next item is the report ( A5-0264 / 2001 ) by Gerhard Schmid , on behalf of the Temporary Committee on the ECHELON Interception System , on the existence of a global system for the interception of private and commercial communications ( ECHELON interception system ) ( 2001 / 2098 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , more than a year ago the European Parliament set up a special committee to ascertain whether there was in fact a global interception system for which the US National Security Agency was ultimately responsible and which was able to intercept any communication by telephone , fax or e-mail in Europe .
This system is allegedly operated by a group of states which includes one of the Member States of the European Union , namely the United Kingdom . Now that the Cold War is over , the main function of the system appears to be industrial espionage .
The system , it is alleged , bears the code name Echelon .
This , Mr President , was a difficult investigative mission , because the European Parliament has no access at all under any circumstances to the files of the intelligence services of the EU Member States , let alone access to details of the activities of American agencies .
However , after a year of painstaking investigation , we are able to communicate the following to the House without any lingering shadow of doubt : first of all , there is no intelligence system operated by the secret services of any one state by means of which any communication in Europe can be intercepted .
This allegation must be consigned to the domain of creative journalism !
The assertion is not made any more credible by the fact that it is repeated , and regrettably so , in a study commissioned by the European Parliament , a fact that lends it a certain cachet of respectability .
What we are looking at here is not what we were expected to find .
Telecommunications obey the laws of physics , and without access to the media of communication it is impossible to intercept the messages they carry . The secret services do not possess magic powers with which they can alter the laws of physics !
The second point we are able to make , however , is that there is indeed an interception system , and these are its characteristics : it operates globally and is run by an intelligence alliance comprising the parties to the UKUSA Agreement , namely the United States , the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia and New Zealand .
There is nothing coincidental about this combination of states , which has its roots in the Second World War .
By and large , it only has access to intercontinental communications which are transmitted with the aid of communications satellites or undersea cables serving the UKUSA countries .
Communications within Europe , therefore , are scarcely affected , but communications with African , Arabic and Latin American countries most certainly are .
We do not know exactly how much local radio communication can be intercepted by embassies , but it is evident that this does not represent the bulk of intelligence operations .
By way of contrast to police surveillance operations , which always target an individual or a clearly defined group of people , the system concerning us here intercepts every communication to which it has access and feeds it into a computer search engine .
On the basis of a catalogue of search terms , the search engine selects those communications that are likely to be of interest to the intelligence services .
In other words , the system works like a vacuum cleaner and the intelligence services operate the filter .
In technical terms this is known as strategic communications monitoring .
The search engine can identify telephone numbers , the voices of prime targets and the content of e-mails and typed faxes .
Given the present state of the art , these search engines will not be able to interpret handwritten faxes and spoken messages in the foreseeable future , which means that these forms of communication cannot be automatically processed by the intelligence services .
In addition , we have evidence that the system does indeed have the code name Echelon .
Its name , however , is irrelevant .
It might just as well be called Rumpelstiltskin ; the important thing for us is what it does .
These are the findings , and let me add that we are not simply hypothesising .
We can back up these statements with a strong chain of evidence that could stand up in a court of law .
Those who wish to know precise details will have to read the report for themselves .
Suffice to say that , if we had made any false allegations in this report , you can safely assume that the intelligence services of the countries in question would have been only too delighted to take us apart in public !
This they did not do , which speaks volumes .
How do we assess these findings ?
One of our assessment criteria must be to ask what our own services actually do .
That is not the sole criterion , but it must be taken into consideration if we intend to hold an honest debate on this subject .
Most of the intelligence services in the EU Member States engage in strategic communications monitoring .
Only Austria , Belgium , Greece , Ireland , Luxembourg and Portugal do not use such technology .
Secondly , it goes without saying that the purpose for which strategic monitoring is used will also affect our assessment .
If it is targeted at internationally organised crime , drug trafficking , trafficking in human beings , the arms trade , terrorism , proliferation or sanctions busting , or if it is used to protect national security , there can be no questioning the legitimacy of its purpose as such .
But if it is being used to spy on foreign companies in order to tip the competitive balance in favour of domestic industries , that is quite a different matter .
Thirdly , the end does not justify the means .
In short , the end is not everything , for each individual case of eavesdropping is an invasion of privacy .
It is not a problem of quantity either .
Human rights are individual rights ; they are not a matter of statistics .
Such an invasion of privacy is only permissible on certain conditions .
The case law of the European Court of Human Rights is crystal clear in this respect .
Briefly , the conditions are as follows : there must be a legal basis for such an operation - it cannot be arbitrary ; a value judgment must be made , the breach of privacy being weighed against the morality of its purpose ; the operation must be foreseeable , which means that the general public must know that such a system exists , and recourse to interception must only be permitted if there is no alternative .
It is , in other words , an ultima ratio .
There are Members of this House who agree that it is acceptable for the police to intercept communications in pursuance of a court order for the purpose of criminal prosecution .
But in the case of the intelligence services , they call it an infringement of human rights .
I fully understand anyone expressing political opposition to this type of action by the secret services .
I can see the logic of that .
It is not my position , but I can follow their reasoning .
But anyone who says it is illegal is disregarding the rulings of our own European Court of Human Rights .
Industrial espionage is certainly not a legitimate reason for intercepting communications .
All intelligence services do , of course , deal with economic issues too , examining developments in financial and commodity markets , for example .
To that extent most of the services engage in espionage in the economic domain .
But we are not criticising them for that .
The problem arises when this espionage goes beyond the clarification of general security issues and the intelligence services pass on details to industrialists in their own country in order to give their companies a competitive advantage .
Such behaviour between EU Member States , furthermore , would be incompatible with Community law , because it constitutes a type of prohibited state aid .
On the international stage it is more than just an unfriendly act , and between allies it is nothing short of a scandal .
Incidentally , intercepting communications is not the preferred method of industrial espionage , which is generally conducted by conventional means .
But there are individual cases in which the instrument of interception can be used to great effect .
The United States , as you know , has come in for the heaviest criticism .
The United States has always denied that intelligence is passed on directly to US companies .
It has admitted , however , that it intercepts detailed communications concerning major contracts that are open to international tender .
The argument used to justify these measures is that European companies would offer bribes and that there is a need for a defence against this .
This position , to put it very politely and diplomatically , must be scrutinised .
First of all , we know that US corporations engage in bribery too .
In the latest Bribe Payers Index published by Transparency International , the United States occupies a mid-table position among the world ' s major exporting countries .
Secondly , this type of thing is now prohibited within the OECD by a Convention , which the Member States of the European Union have transposed into national law .
For the United States , despite this , to remain entrenched in the cowboy mentality which holds that might is right would be a denial of the principle that such problems can be solved by formal international agreements .
Thirdly , if it is true that the American intelligence agencies do not engage in detailed industrial espionage , why is there no law in the United States of America that proscribes such activity by intelligence agencies ?
Why ever not ?
The real political problem , basically , is that , in the European public debate , the United States is considered capable of such measures .
The political problem highlighted by this whole issue is the prevalence of profound mistrust .
This mistrust has to be weeded out .
We have developed a host of proposals , some of which relate to the monitoring of the intelligence services here in Europe , to a code of conduct for the EU Member States and the like .
Ultimately , however , it all boils down to one simple main problem : the protection of privacy is guaranteed by the national legal systems , but communications are becoming increasingly international .
There is no world government to protect them .
This is one of the many problems posed by globalisation . We must reach agreements and enshrine them in international law so that privacy is protected worldwide .
Apart from this , a second problem remains , a problem to which I referred at the start of the report with the Latin tag Sed quis custodiet ipsos custodes , meaning ' But who will watch these watchmen ? '
That is the perennial problem .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the presidency has read the European Parliament ' s motion for a resolution on the ECHELON interception system with great interest and will be following the debate on the subject intently .
I am delighted with Parliament ' s thorough investigation into this matter .
This initiative is in line with the traditional democratic supervisory role of legislative meetings .
It reflects the concerns of many EU citizens with regard to that system .
Moreover , I should like to draw attention to the fact that , during your activities in this connection , the Council presidency has , at all times , shown its willingness to cooperate loyally with Parliament .
The Portuguese , French and Swedish Presidencies have all accepted Parliament ' s invitation to clarify their position in this matter , both at plenary meetings and at meetings of your temporary committee .
It is therefore in that capacity that I am here today attending the discussion of the report and of the resolution of the temporary committee and that I wish to express my sympathy with Parliament ' s concern in this matter . As you will know , the word ' sympathy ' in Greek - to refer to one of the old languages - means ' empathy ' .
The fact that the parliamentary bodies of my own country have also devoted attention to the interception of communications , as evidenced in two Belgian parliamentary reports which were sent to Mr Schmid and which are mentioned in his report , reinforces my belief that the political issue involved is complex , yet important .
I hope that you will nevertheless understand that I , as President of the Council , must limit my reaction to those aspects which are related to the Council or the Union ' s institutions in general .
It is not my role to react on behalf of or in respect of individual Member States .
The basic principles that must govern all communications interception systems are well known .
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights - an article that the EU must respect under the terms of Article 6 of the Treaty establishing the European Union - stipulates that everyone has a right to the respect for his privacy .
Under the same Article , and also according to the Court of Justice ' s established case law , there shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and which is necessary to achieve precisely stated aims and where this respects the principle of proportionality .
Basing its work on these principles , the Justice and Home Affairs Council met on 29 and 30 May 2000 and reiterated the Council ' s commitment , as regards the Echelon network , to the respect of fundamental rights and people ' s freedoms .
The Council also stressed that although a telecommunications interception system may be an important tool to combat crime and to defend national security , under no circumstances , however , should this system be used to gain commercial advantage .
These principles were also included in the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters of 29 May 2000 between the Member States of the European Union .
Article 20 of this Convention thus specifies the conditions in which telecommunications interception may be permitted within the framework of cooperation between Member States in criminal matters .
( FR ) The respect for one ' s private life is now also one of the rights enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights adopted in Nice at the end of last year .
Article 7 of the Charter lays down that any person has a right to the respect for his privacy and family life , the respect for his home and his communications .
The Council is obviously willing to make full use of these provisions .
You will see that Regulation ( EC ) No 45 / 2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 , on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by Community institutions and bodies , is evidence that the Community institutions already share the determination to protect people against the abuse of their personal data .
( NL ) The right to respect for private and family life and data protection are closely related .
Moreover , we know that thanks to continuous technological advancements , the efficient protection of personal data cannot remain restricted to the Union ' s borders but must be extended worldwide .
That is why the Union is trying to promote a dialogue with third countries , as well as a transatlantic dialogue with the United States and Canada .
An initial meeting of experts on legal systems for data protection has already taken place last May in Brussels during the Swedish Presidency .
During a Legal and Home Affairs meeting involving top American officials , which took place on 17 July of this year , both the presidency and the United States recognised the need for reaching an agreement in this area .
A second meeting was to take place under the Belgian Presidency , this time at the invitation of the US , to lay the groundwork for future agreements .
With this report by Mr Schmid drawn up on behalf of the Temporary ECHELON Committee , Parliament has more than met what is expected within the Union in terms of quality . Therefore , Parliament and the Schmid report are fundamental to greater awareness of this issue .
The Council and the presidency , each within their own remit , will make every effort to guarantee fully respect for private and family life and data protection , both within the Union and elsewhere .
After all , electronic communication is only set to increase in future .
Communications are , by definition , private in nature , and their confidentiality must be guaranteed .
It would , therefore , be totally unacceptable , on grounds of principle , for communications to be tapped without a very legitimate reason indeed and without those tapping the communications being subjected to any kind of democratic control .
The Belgian Presidency sets great store by the security of networks and information .
A policy which is predominantly based on Commission communication COM ( 2001 ) 298 which , on the one hand , draws attention to the need to fight cyber crime and , on the other , indicates the need to protect data in the field of telecommunication .
Today ' s communication offers fresh food for thought , and the Belgian Presidency intends to continue on this path .
Accordingly , we wish , first of all , to make progress in the development of an alarm and information system which aims to combat the risks inherent to the use of IT .
More specifically , the presidency hopes that the Telecommunications Council of 15 October next will result in a clear , common objective .
That should enable the Telecommunications Council of December to lay down a detailed action plan and timeframe in terms of e-security .
Moreover , we intend to examine further the progress made by the Member States in the field of systems security within the framework of the implementation of the e-Europe 2002 action plan .
Different initiatives have been launched in the Member States in order to encourage citizens and businesses to make use of safe IT material .
In addition , the sixth Framework Programme concerning research , which is currently being discussed in the Council , should also emphasise all aspects related to security of networks and information traffic .
( FR ) The revision of telecommunications legislation also contains some provisions updating European regulations , particularly on the protection of personal data and privacy .
Parliament will soon issue an opinion , at first reading , on this important text .
The text includes , amongst others , general provisions on the confidentiality of communications , and on the general principle of deleting traffic and location data relating to these communications .
The general principle is , of course , qualified by the option given to the authorities responsible for public safety and for combating crime to request access to the information on a case-by-case basis .
As you know , the debate is still open on the length of time such information can be stored .
To sum up , I would like to return briefly to the issue of intelligence gathering .
In the military capabilities commitment declaration , annexed to the Nice European Council conclusions , the Member States acknowledged that serious effort would be needed in the area of intelligence so that , in future , the European Union has more strategic intelligence at its disposal .
The European Parliament motion for a resolution highlights the need for democratic monitoring of intelligence operations that might be established within the European Union .
This is a general principle , which we can only support .
More specifically , the presidency currently believes that , should this type of intelligence capability be established within the EU , we would have to investigate the procedures that would need to be implemented in order to ensure democratic monitoring of these activities .
These procedures would naturally have to take into account the particular nature of the intelligence field which , in order to function effectively , requires that information gathered remains confidential .
Mr President , to sum up and in conclusion , I would like to congratulate Mr Watson once again for his excellent work and I hope that you have an interesting debate .
I shall be staying in the House to listen to what you have to say .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , recently , when I had to explain the function of our Echelon Committee , I used the following example : I said , ' Imagine you are a detective sergeant .
Various people come to you and report a bombing , carried out by five terrorists .
At the scene of the crime indicated there are two possible victims , but they say nothing .
The five suspects are also silent .
The explosive device is not immediately apparent and no details of the incident are known .
In short , it is a rather difficult case .
This is tantamount to what happened when journalists began to tell us that there was a global interception system called Echelon which was operated by the United States , the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia and New Zealand and which could intercept and analyse phone , fax and e-mail communications worldwide .
Individuals , businesses and institutions , they said , were subjected to systematic surveillance .
So what facts have we established after a year of investigation ?
As the detective sergeant , I would say that the five suspects were indeed at the scene of the crime , but the weapon was a precision rifle rather than a bomb .
Each of the suspects was capable of firing the weapon , but all the evidence suggests that only one of them actually acted in a criminal manner .
The victims have given us clues to help us in our investigations but are not prepared to testify in court , and so we unfortunately have insufficient evidence to secure a conviction .
It will be essential , however , to keep the suspects under observation and to take further precautions . '
What this means is that the five aforementioned states do indeed cooperate within this espionage system .
Its name is irrelevant , but let us call it Echelon for the sake of convenience .
The system , however , can only intercept civilian communications that are routed via Intelsat satellites .
And these satellites only carry a small percentage of global telecommunications traffic and an even smaller percentage of private telephone calls .
Moreover , these activities by intelligence services were tolerated by the international community on condition that they were essential to the protection of national security interests .
There are now indications , however , that the United States is using some of these intercepted data for purposes other than the preservation of national security .
The US agencies have admitted , for example , that they eavesdrop on European companies bidding for major foreign contracts , allegedly because these companies engage in bribery .
The agencies ' intelligence reports are then forwarded to US embassies so that the ambassador to the awarding country can influence the host government by making it aware of the bribery allegations .
The US Department of Commerce also has an Advocacy Center , which maintains , through the US embassies , a worldwide network devoted solely to helping US corporations land major contracts .
There are clear grounds for suspecting the United States of illegal industrial espionage .
Regrettably , the companies that have been victims of these activities remain silent for fear of tarnishing their image .
At this point I should like to thank the rapporteur and his team for resisting the attempts of the Greens , as well as those from the Left of this chamber , to have him write a cloak-and-dagger thriller .
His report is responsible and objective , presents the conclusive and presumptive evidence , distinguishing clearly between the two , and does not prejudge the issue .
Some may feel that his conclusions do not go far enough , but they do exhaust the available legal options .
Protection against illegal acts committed by non-European intelligence services can only be achieved through global instruments .
As far as our own area of responsibility is concerned , the main priority for us is to close the confidentiality gaps in the Commission .
Unlike the Council or the Central Bank , the Commission persists with data protection and confidentiality mechanisms that belong to the Middle Ages .
The dangers posed by non-European countries in this domain have obviously been entirely underestimated .
We therefore call on the competent committee to initiate its own report on this issue .
We also call on our British friends , since they are fellow members of the European Union , to establish effective and legitimate control of American espionage conducted against European targets from British territory ; otherwise they are in breach of European data protection law .
Let me thank the rapporteur once again for his cooperation with us .
I am sure that this report will carry the support of an overwhelming majority of the Members of this House .
Mr President , the Temporary Committee on ECHELON and other large-scale tapping systems was launched over a year ago .
There was then serious doubt as to whether this Committee would be able to complete its mandate that was issued by Parliament within the time period given .
My colleague , Mr Gerhard Schmid , presented the report with the results of the work of this temporary committee a moment ago .
On behalf of my group , I should like to express my great appreciation for the work that the rapporteur , but also the President of the Committee , Mr Coelho , have done over the past year .
The report contains proof for the first time that ECHELON exists , a system based on the cooperation of five countries in the worldwide tapping and interception of international telephone and message traffic .
In addition , it is indicated that other countries too , including most EU Member States , use systems for tapping international telecommunications traffic .
At the same time , the report , however , explodes the myth that , via ECHELON and similar systems , every phone call would be tapped and every fax message or e-mail read .
It is technically impossible to do this , and most countries involved are democracies which impose clear restrictions on the activities of the secret services , at least with regard to their own citizens .
Mainly based on information which was published in the course of the investigation of the ECHELON Committee by the Dutch and German governments , we know that systems for tapping international telecommunication are often used as an aid in the fight against international terrorism , trafficking in human beings , the drugs trade , the illegal arms trade , and to enforce internationally established embargoes .
And nobody objects to that , at least , provided that this is done under sound democratic and political control whilst guaranteeing that the international and national rules protecting the privacy of citizens are upheld .
The unnecessary secrecy , the surreptitious behaviour of the secret services and the lack of openness of many governments prevent systems for tapping international telecommunications from being deployed in a more transparent manner .
Clear and enforceable rules to protect the privacy of all European citizens in all EU countries must form an inherent part of the constitutional rights as laid down in the European Charter .
With this , it must be ensured that the strict rules which currently apply in most countries for tapping a country ' s own citizens will , in the near future , apply to all EU citizens .
Effective democratic and political supervision of activities carried out by secret services , and hence tapping international telephone traffic , form an essential part of every state ' s right to defend the security of its citizens or its democratic fabric against external attacks .
A change in mentality is required .
It is inevitable that some aspects of the work of the intelligence service should remain confidential , but there is also a great deal that could most certainly be brought into the open in a democratic society .
Only countries which , in respect of its citizens , deal with their intelligence services in an open and honest way will also be able to provide the necessary cooperation at European level and be able to help set up a European intelligence force in the framework of an effective common foreign and security policy .
With this , the traditional distrust which intelligence services harbour in respect of outsiders and the equally traditional priority given by countries to their own national interests must be turned into a kind of cooperation in which the treaty concluded between the UK and the US , underlying ECHELON , completely fades into the background .
Not only because it was agreed during the European Summit in Helsinki that a European intelligence force will be created as part of a European intervention force , but especially because the fight against international terrorism and the trafficking in human beings , for example , is a joint European task .
However , I should like to add one more observation in this connection .
Further European cooperation in the gathering of intelligence , which is also significant to the EU in terms of its position within the confederate framework of NATO , will force the British government to make a fundamental choice : either it continues to favour transatlantic cooperation or it becomes fully involved in cooperation at European level .
A bit of both would not only lack credibility , but is also practically impossible .
During the investigation by the ECHELON Committee , we have not obtained any evidence that citizens ' privacy is being intentionally violated or that systems designed for large-scale tapping operations involving international telecommunications traffic are deliberately being used for large-scale and direct industrial espionage .
Furthermore , specific enquiries made to large European companies elicited no reaction .
However , based on remarks made by America , it has transpired that intelligence received accidentally is , in a number of cases , most definitely used .
If one casts the herring nets , but happens to catch a salmon , then that salmon is not always thrown back into the sea but sometimes ends up on the table .
Whoever has confidential information at their disposal does well to protect that confidential information .
In this respect , the European Union and Member States are required to cooperate by giving advice , by developing user-friendly cryptographic hardware and software and especially by raising public awareness .
I hope that the report by the ECHELON Committee in particular has made a major contribution to the aforesaid .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I would like to congratulate Gerhard Schmid on his excellent report .
The reports reaches the conclusion that a global communications interception system exists within the framework of the UKUSA Agreement , that this system is definitely known as Echelon , that it is used to intercept private business , and not military , communications , that the system ' s technical capabilities are probably not nearly as extensive as some have assumed , but that prevention to some extent is necessary .
In spite of what some minority voices say , Mr Schmid was not more preoccupied with industrial espionage than with individual monitoring .
He is proposing no less than eight specific measures to enhance the protection of citizens ' rights within the framework of various international treaties , and he calls upon the Member States and the Council to adopt at least seven specific national legislative measures to protect citizens .
Of course , some specific measures are proposed to assist businesses , but these are more vague and their scope is less extensive than the measures on individual monitoring .
As a citizen of a country whose intelligence service is certainly very small-scale compared to those of its larger neighbours or allies , I still believe that it is misleading and futile to suggest abolishing the secret services .
They exist and they will continue to exist .
We should , therefore , draw political conclusions and seek solutions at this level - we should monitor the activities of these services , subject them to legal and parliamentary scrutiny , adopt uniform rules to protect citizens at the highest national level and apply this throughout the European Union .
The proposals in paragraphs 16 and 17 of the resolution must also be seen from this perspective .
With the strengthening of European security and defence policy and the EU ' s increasing involvement in crisis prevention and management , collaboration amongst intelligence services is growing and the EU will eventually have to have an autonomous European intelligence capability .
This can only be achieved if there is a system for democratic monitoring .
With regard to Echelon , the resolution specifically calls upon Germany and the United Kingdom to make authorisation of communications interception operations by US intelligence services on their territory conditional on their compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights and judgments of the European Court of Human Rights .
Far from having wanted to create repeated diversions , Mr Schmid has dotted the i ' s and crossed the t ' s , he has more than fulfilled the mandate bestowed upon him by the Temporary Committee on Echelon and he has provided Parliament with a tool to enable us to continue the work he has done in the interests of protecting citizens .
Mr President , we welcome the fact that the report recognises and accepts that Echelon exists .
This is something that the Green Group stated a long time ago in this Parliament and we have now been vindicated .
However , the report fails to draw any political conclusions .
It is also extremely hypocritical in that it criticises the Echelon interception system , while at the same time we are planning to establish a European secret service .
In other words , it is not that there is a problem with this system as such , it is just that the EU wants to be able to do the same and have its own system .
The report naively gives the impression that if you have some sort of democratic control , all will be okay .
It is a well known fact that there is no effective public control mechanism of secret services and their undemocratic activities anywhere in the world .
By their very nature , secret services cannot be controlled and therefore we , as Members of this Parliament , who claim to be concerned about human rights and basic civil liberties , should be questioning their very existence .
But , on the contrary , the report serves to legitimise a European secret service which will inevitably infringe fundamental rights in the same way as the Echelon system .
The temporary committee and the report focus mainly on the threat to European industrial competition and the threat posed by industrial espionage .
But this is not the vital and fundamental issue .
The real issue at stake , which is totally lost in this report , is that nobody can communicate in confidence any more .
This is the real threat to us all .
Political spying is a greater threat than economic spying .
Recently there have been reports in British newspapers which point out that European leaders have ordered police and intelligence agencies to coordinate their efforts to identify and track anti-capitalist demonstrators .
This will give a green light to secret services to put under surveillance people whose activities are entirely democratic and legal .
Whole political and social scenes will be criminalised .
Very private information about people will be accessible to police and secret services without those people having any say or control .
The report goes to great lengths to push these kinds of dangers under the carpet .
It also ignores the plans that are forging ahead on the Enfopol interception system in the EU .
We , as Members of the European Parliament , should be demanding that people ' s freedoms and the right to privacy , as enshrined in Article 8 of the European Convention and Article 6 of the EU Treaty , are protected and that people are not forced to live under permanent control where the possibility exists that every communication they make will be accessible to unknown forces .
Finally , the report lets the UK off the hook .
It should have requested at the very least that the UK dissociate itself from the management of the Echelon system and it should also have asked Germany to close down the interception base which is located on its territory .
These Member States , which are collaborating , were let off the hook totally .
Mr President , Echelon is an interception system which does not differentiate between communications , data and documents . It does exist and represents a considerable step forwards .
From now on , the Union ' s institutions , particularly the representatives of the Council and the Commission , will no longer be able to say that information reported in the media is inaccurate .
There is , however , inconsistency between what has been ascertained and the conclusions of the report , for the system flagrantly infringes the fundamental right to privacy guaranteed by Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union .
In fact , because of its technical capabilities , the system nullifies the relationship of proportionality which , precisely within the meaning of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights , has to exist between interference in people ' s private lives and the benefits of interception for protection purposes .
This is all the more serious in that interception is currently carried out by means of these technical capabilities by a third country on EU territory and to the detriment of the citizens of the countries of the Union , without the possibility of any sort of legal , administrative or parliamentary control .
A further problem is that one of the countries managing the Echelon system is the United Kingdom , a Member of the European Union , while other Member States such as Germany have made their territory available for the siting of antennae , listening posts and other equipment .
Quite simply , the group of English-speaking countries managing Echelon is doing what it likes with the privacy of European citizens , as is explicitly noted in point 26 of the conclusion , cited by Mrs Flesch moreover , which means that Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights is being infringed .
However , rather than trusting the United Kingdom not to abuse the information , we should at least have recorded its infringement of this article and noted the fact that its participation in the Echelon system is incompatible with its responsibilities under the European Treaties .
Genuine safeguarding of fundamental rights in the USA is essential for the credibility and democratic legitimacy of that country .
However , we have , yet again , chosen to waste an opportunity , at least for us , to uphold a democratic principle .
For others , on the other hand , at a historic moment when great , dark clouds are gathering over the right to dissent in the EU and at world level - as we have learnt from Genoa - it would be unthinkable to abolish or at least attempt to modify and reduce the capabilities of an indiscriminate listening system , one of the most useful systems for social monitoring and , where necessary , crime prevention .
Mr President , this report and its failure to draw the appropriate conclusions reduce the fundamental right to privacy , so solemnly enshrined in our Treaties and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , to a right which only exists on paper , or rather to a right which , tragically , is worth no more than the paper it is written on .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I would like to congratulate Mr Schmid on his competent and skilful work , and also to praise Mr Coelho , who conducted the debates and organised this work in a very courteous manner .
We cannot , however , accept the political conclusion of the report , and we will therefore vote against it , and I call upon all my fellow Members to do the same .

As previous speakers have mentioned , the report confirmed the existence of a US espionage system , operated by the Americans in collusion with two Member States , in breach of Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union and of the most basic rules on respect for one ' s private life , a system which involves intensive industrial espionage to the benefit of American companies .
The report has shown that the European firms Siemens , Dassault , Phillips , Thomson and Airbus were the targets of espionage , and this has consequently had a serious effect on employment in Europe , on our commercial stability and on Europe ' s defence industries .

Most of the Members in this House from the United Kingdom have put solidarity with the US before solidarity with Europe .
This is something we regret , but the report does not answer two fundamental questions .
The first is , although it has been established that at least one country , the United Kingdom , has been involved in espionage activity against Europe , in breach of the Treaty on European Union , what sanctions must we take ?
This is the first question , which remains unanswered .
The second question is that the Committee ' s work has demonstrated perfectly well that , as long as we are within NATO , and as long as we are tied to using NATO ' s technical and logistical resources , an independent European and common security policy will not be possible .
This is something we deplore .
The conclusion of the report is quite simply disquieting .
Mr President , as a European citizen , even more than as a Member of Parliament , I would like to quietly express my indignation at the way the committee ' s work was carried out .
In its work , the committee systematically violated the Rules of Procedure , failing to comply with the obligation for transparency in Parliament ' s activities and infringing the right of access to public documents .

Without wishing to belittle the work of committee chairman , Mr Coelho , or the rapporteur , Mr Schmid , in any way , it was necessary to organise the work in this way not in the interests of European security - which is an abstract concept in this context - but in order to conceal the responsibility of the Member States of the Union .
The report states quite clearly that Echelon does exist , that it systematically spies on citizens and companies of the Member States of the Union on a huge scale and that the United Kingdom is part of the system , but it does not condemn this fact openly because systematic and generalised interceptions , filtered using search engines are already being carried out by Germany , while Holland , which clearly has the necessary technology , is in the process of producing legislation which will allow it to carry out interceptions as well .
We can see from the report that Echelon is a prime example of a system which does not recognise citizens ' right to privacy and subordinates privacy to national security , which is primarily endangered by the inability of politicians to foresee , prevent and deal with threats .
In the face of all this , the practical , immediate solution that emerges from the report is to invite companies and citizens to encrypt documents , as if the indissoluble link between cryptographic , code breaking and technical interception systems were not well known .
Mr President , the only political response which it is possible to give today is to be found in my minority opinion . Democratic scrutiny is essential .
Mr President , the Temporary Committee on ECHELON has resulted in a thorough investigation which is being backed virtually across the political spectrum , at least where its analysis is concerned .
A sensitive issue , however , is the desire for more European cooperation in intelligence activities .
It would have sufficed to state that cooperation in defence and security affairs gives the Member States a joint responsibility to protect privacy .
The report cannot address all political considerations .
Therefore , it would have been better not to include in the report any references to the desirability for closer cooperation .
To date , moderate use has been made of the current capacity to exchange information .
The protection of privacy is already problematic and the discrepancies between the Member States are considerable .
The consistent exchange of information is therefore not very likely in the near future .
The key reason for setting up the temporary committee was the fear of industrial espionage .
There is no reason to doubt that military and security targets are the primary concern of the intelligence services .
As might be expected with secret service activities , proof of actual industrial espionage by the US is absent .
Neither do the findings substantiate the American accusation of European corruption .
Restricted supervisory scope illustrates the importance of effective access to encryption .
Although confidentiality typifies the very nature of the activities of intelligence services , more supervision is required .
For example , Member States must monitor compliance with the mandate of the intelligence services , hence my amendment to protect communication against interception where supervision is lacking .
By directing efforts to that aspect of interceptions , we can try to prevent their inappropriate use .
This is one of the obligations of the Member States , pursuant to the European Convention on Human Rights and does not only apply in respect of their own citizens .
Similarly , Member States may not allow their intelligence services abroad to act in contravention of privacy .
Similar arrangements can also be sought in a larger context , not least with the US .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to make five brief observations .
The first is to thank all of those who worked so hard to achieve this final outcome : the specialists and technical experts whom we invited and those who wrote and e-mailed us with their studies and opinions , the coordinators of the political groups and the Members of the European Parliament , the staff of our committee , who provided high quality support for our work and the rapporteur , Gerhard Schmid , who has produced an outstanding report and provided evidence once again of his great qualities as a human being and as a politician .
It was an easy task to chair this committee with this kind of rapporteur .
Secondly , Echelon exists , whether under this name or any other .
The European Parliament should be in no doubt about this .
Thirdly , Echelon runs a risk , a serious risk of its network being abused . This is a commercial risk , which compromises the concept of fair trade , but also presents a risk for civil liberties .
The same Union that proclaimed the Charter of Fundamental Rights and which I hope will make it binding cannot be negligent in this matter .
Fourthly , we must improve the relationship between the European Union and the United States .
We must be more effective . In our mission to the United States , we were well received by Congress but met with the hostility of the Administration .
The report contains various important recommendations .
Europe and the United States must cooperate fairly - and I mean fairly - for the sake of the common values that they most definitely share .
Lastly , 44 recommendations have been tabled .
Giving the lie to those who predicted that the committee would not produce anything tangible , we are making 44 recommendations to the House .
I must emphasise the need to strengthen the European Convention on Human Rights with regard to protecting privacy in the information society , the need for Parliamentary and judicial control over the activity of the secret services , the need to extend defence practices such as the use of cryptography and electronic signatures , and the need for the European Institutions themselves to set an example by using these technologies .
Lastly , the request is made to the Union ' s Member States to ensure in the future that the use of their countries by information gathering services , whether their own or of third countries , respects the European Convention on Human Rights .
Mr President , first of all , a big thank-you is due to Mr Schmid for an outstanding piece of work .
I think there are two good reasons for highlighting this work .
For one thing , it has been a mammoth task , but I also think that Mr Schmid can justifiably be commended specifically for not having succumbed to what might be referred to as sensationalism .
It would have been tempting to do so on this particular issue , but he confined himself to the facts and to what is actually the case .
We have , of course , managed to ascertain that ECHELON exists , and this naturally highlights the dilemma arising , on the one hand , from the fact that countries have a legitimate interest in using interception as one means of protecting themselves and their citizens against attacks and terrorism and , on the other , from the fact that the same citizens , as well as companies , have a need for protection against the misuse of precisely this type of surveillance .
Moreover , I specifically think that Mr Schmid ' s report , which we must adopt today , is forward-looking and contains sound proposals for initiatives that might be taken .
I can only highlight a few of these : first and foremost , that the Member States should prepare a code of conduct to ensure the protection of citizens and companies throughout Europe , as required by the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I also think it right to point out that there is a need to reach an understanding , and arrange for an agreement to be prepared , between the EU and the United States so that there might be mutual respect for the protection of citizens and companies .
We have a need for international rules in this area that are as tough as is humanly possible .
The need for legal and parliamentary supervision of the intelligence services in the Member States is also emphasised . Finally , I think that the fourth important point is that both the EU and the Member States have an obligation to ensure that people are thoroughly informed about the risks of interception and about the ways in which they , as well as companies , might best protect themselves against misuse of the system .
I want to say that , with this report , the Member States can no longer put their heads in the sand where this issue is concerned .
They can no longer say that it is just something they have read about in the newspapers .
There is now a need for countries to take responsibility for protecting their citizens and companies against violations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ECHELON exists , as has already been stated this morning by different speakers .
But do you realise that it only managed to surface thanks to the tenacity of this Parliament ? For when I questioned the Council and Commission about this in 1997 , my questions were not at all taken seriously .
This situation is now very different .
The Dutch government has issued a report in which a reasonable case is made for the existence of ECHELON and the Council has also said that it supports our findings .
In the United States too , it has been openly admitted that 5 % of all information the US collects for economic purposes originates from non-open sources .
According to an estimate , this translates for American industry into more than 7 billion dollars in the way of contracts .
That is why agreements must be made globally , preferably in the context of the World Trade Organisation .
Cryptography is a crucial point in the debate on protecting citizens and businesses .
The protection of privacy via legislation is only effective if the law is enforced .
Enforcement is much more difficult if cross-border espionage is involved .
That is why it is necessary to encrypt information , and people must be equipped to protect themselves against espionage .
That is why , Mr President , I should like to hear from Commissioner Liikanen as to what his proposals for additional legislation or measures in this field are .
For whatever is technologically possible will be implemented .
Mr President , it is no secret that the Group of the Greens wanted to introduce a stronger investigative tool , a committee of enquiry , in order to ascertain the truth about ECHELON , but unfortunately , the majority of this Parliament did not feel up to it .
However , a temporary committee has been set up , which is something .
Although a committee of enquiry might have revealed more secrets , I can now say that it is not the lack of facts which disappointed my group , it is the conclusions .
Tapping can be necessary sometimes , but the improper tapping of our citizens and non-governmental organisations contravenes the European Convention on Human Rights , because it is disproportionate by definition .
Although the European Convention on Human Rights has been mentioned , the conclusions do not state in so many words that ECHELON violates citizens ' rights .
Similarly , it is not written anywhere that the United Kingdom and Germany must stop facilitating ECHELON .
Of course , the world will not immediately change by a vote we take in Parliament , but that does not mean that that vote is unimportant : we need to make it clear what is and what is not acceptable .
The Netherlands will soon be debating a law on intelligence and security services in parliament . This law legitimises ECHELON-type activities .
An increasing number of governments want to narrow the information gap compared with other governments by setting up large-scale and improper tapping operations themselves .
It is our task to stop this snowball effect by making clear , political statements against the violation of human rights .
Otherwise , I have no choice but to vote against this motion .
Mr President , it is fortunate that the report , which most of the members of the temporary committee voted in favour of , acknowledges the existence of the Echelon network , despite American authorities maintaining a guilty silence .
I myself did not vote in favour due to the poor quality of the report ' s conclusions .
Echelon is , in fact , one of the essential parts of the NSA , a sprawling global espionage network which employs approximately 90 000 people and which has the technical capacity to carry out hundreds of millions of interceptions each day .
This system is a real instrument of war against individual freedoms , and is controlled by only eight people , one of whom is the President of the United States , cynically called the ' gang of eight ' by the chairman of the Congress monitoring committee .
The industrial and political espionage system was set up during the Cold War and its role is to defend what some dare to call the free world .
The people who hold these views met us in Washington , in this state of mind and not without a degree of annoyance .
They asked us why we had come to try to cause trouble for them , when the money , armies and secret services of both the United States and Europe are defending the same values .
These are values that mean , for example , that on entry visas to the United States , the question ' Are you involved in Communist activities ? ' has been replaced by ' Are you involved in terrorist activities ? '
It is now clear why no state or company has ever complained about the workings of Echelon - it is obviously to acknowledge the debt for services rendered .
It is now known that the United Kingdom and Germany act as intermediaries in this system , despite being members of the European Union and signatories of all the conventions on human rights .
Other countries , however , such as France , have similar practices .
Our response to Echelon will not be fine sounding speeches or technical measures such as encryption .
We will respond by providing accurate information to the public about the choices it has in terms of society and by strictly applying the basic rights enshrined in the conventions on human rights .
Industrial espionage is the lot of a society motivated by profit and competition ; political espionage is the by-product of an undemocratic society and this is the basic problem posed by the Echelon system .
We must respond to the global policing of interceptions with vigilance and popular intervention on a global scale and I maintain that European laws of today are better equipped to protect people against industrial espionage than against individual espionage .
This is one perception of Europe , but it is one that I do not support .
The temporary committee ' s report expresses a thought-provoking blend of power and impotence , something we can , of course , see in the introductory quotation from one of the great satirists of antiquity , Juvenal , who formulates the hard but highly thought-provoking question , ' Who watches the watchmen ? '
Everyone seems to be agreed that the Committee ' s main conclusion is an important demonstration of the fact that this Parliament can achieve a certain power .
The main conclusion is that completely convincing documentation has now successfully been put together to show that this worldwide surveillance system does in fact exist , but that is something of which we were , in actual fact , already well aware .
The Committee has assembled and registered documentation that has actually been available for years , at any rate to whoever has been prepared to do research into this state of affairs . However , it is valuable to have the huge amount of documentation that has been assembled .
It is required reading for every democrat .
However , this is , of course , where the impotence comes in , first of all through the documentation we have to do without .
The report concludes that it is ' surprising , not to say worrying , that many senior Community figures including European Commissioners , who gave evidence to the temporary committee , claimed to be unaware of this phenomenon ' .
The statement is the closest approximation to an acknowledgement of the fact that the senior figures in the Commission are hiding behind a wall of silence and selective memory loss .
To put it bluntly , they are full of lies .
Did you hear that , Commissioner ?
A further demonstration of impotence lies in the sad conclusion that there is no effective supervision in terms of the national constitutions .
The report has an annex containing a survey of parliamentary and judicial supervision in the Member States .
Quite a few Member States have neither judicial nor parliamentary supervision and others - such as my own country , Denmark - have formal systems which , in practice , have shown their astonishing lack of effectiveness .
The sad answer to the question , ' Who watches the watchmen ? ' , is nobody .
Mr President , I believe that if ever there was a time to congratulate a rapporteur and the Chairman of a temporary committee , this is it , since they have produced a report which has been produced against all the odds .
The results of the work of the Temporary Committee on the ECHELON interception system , in my view , send the important political signal that the European institutions , and in particular the Commission , must take much more care over the security of their communications and that the Member States and the European Union must create a new legal framework to protect their citizens and to guarantee that the privacy of their communications is not jeopardised as a result of interception because those States have the technological means and potential to use it inappropriately .
These days , electronic mail , mobile telephones , videoconferencing and the Internet have broken down the physical borders between countries across the world .
And the most serious thing is that organised crime is using these means for their own advantage and even funding .
This gives rise to a question : why not direct all this potential for intercepting communications which , as has been demonstrated , the countries making up the ECHELON system have at their disposal , to combat terrorists , drug traffickers or the organised mafias which traffic in human beings , instead of using it for an international competition between States which is unfair by any reckoning ?
All Member States of the European Union must dedicate all their efforts to defending the rights of their citizens , whether they be economic , social or political in nature , since anything less would represent a lack of compliance with the commitments laid down in the Treaties and , in particular , with the recent Charter of Fundamental Rights proclaimed at the Nice Summit by the fifteen Member States .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Gerhard Schmid , and other colleagues on the committee .
As Mr Schmid said , he had at the beginning a very difficult brief .
Let us remember that the pressure for this report came as a result of some quite fanciful journalism in different countries and some wild , weird and wonderful assertions , most of which served to undermine the very case that the authors themselves were trying to make .
The surprise of this report is the fact that very few of these allegations are substantiated .
Several speakers this morning have referred to the UK ' s role in this matter .
The report acknowledges that every state in the European Union and elsewhere in the world needs some sort of interception to protect national security , safeguard its economy and fight crime .
That is nothing exceptional .
All the Member States do it , cooperating with each other and with other friendly democratic countries .
For example , to counter terrorism threats we need to collaborate with those who have the right skills and can help .
I know the United States is helping Spain in its current difficulties .
The UK also already ensures that any operations on UK soil are carried out with the full knowledge and consent of the UK government and are subject to UK law .
That means - I hope Mrs McKenna is listening - that everything is compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights .
I hope we can put to rest some of the assertions and allegations that are still flying around about what is going on in the UK as well .
Furthermore , the UK stands completely by the conclusion reached in Council that in no circumstances may telecommunications interceptions be used to gain commercial advantage .
Numerous allegations were made before the report was published .
They have been repeated today by a colleague who has since left and , as Mr Schmid will testify and the report shows , there is no evidence to substantiate them .
I thank the rapporteur on his very comprehensive report and Mr Coelho for chairing the committee .
I too should like to thank the rapporteur for an outstanding piece of work .
I want to thank him for having taken the lid off this area and for having found an appropriate balance in the report .
It would not have aided further developments if Parliament had gone off in all possible directions at once .
This is one of the best examples of the European Parliament ' s being able to make a difference and of its being able to perform a task which otherwise could not have been carried out because the individual parliaments would not have been up to the job . It is also a good example of there being a common area of effective operation in Europe that is of potential benefit to all citizens .
The purpose of the task can be summarised in three points .
Is there such a thing as an ECHELON system ?
If so , what does it do ?
And is there a need for democratic initiatives ?
We can conclude that the system exists .
Some say that we knew that already , but it is nonetheless necessary in a community founded on the rule of law to also supply proof of the fact .
We can also conclude that there are unacceptable interceptions of private and commercial communications and , against that background , the European Parliament proposes a long list of initiatives concerning what can be done .
Above all , a higher degree of democratic supervision could be introduced .
In that connection , it was also very pleasing to hear the presidency of the Council speak here today .
It offers hope that something will happen , both in the Member States and in the EU , for it is really astounding to hear those who exercise power reveal the extent of their ignorance and say that they have never heard of the system , even though there have been plenty of odds and ends written about it .
Had it not been for the European Parliament , they could have remained ignorant , and there is now a rather special form of democratic deficit that amounts to the inability either to hear or to read .
' Who watches the watchmen ? '
Well , the people do , of course ; and if democracy is not working , the representatives of the people must be replaced by other representatives .
Mr President , we have now heard it said several times that Echelon really does exist .
The question is : what does Echelon entail ?
It entails a monitoring system which is tantamount to a massive global violation of fundamental rights , infringing not only the privacy of industrial communications but also the privacy of every form of communication between individuals .
This violation of human rights is surely the real scandal of Echelon .
But what exactly is the statement on this issue from the European Parliament ?
The essence of the message contained in this report is , in fact , that we condemn this system because it is operated primarily by the United States and because it works too well .
What countermeasure does the report propose ?
As a countermeasure , it proposes the establishment of an EU intelligence service .
As we know , there are also monitoring standards such as ETST , and European monitoring plans bearing the name Enfopol have come to light too .
Neither of these points is mentioned in the report , which essentially focuses on the monitoring that is undertaken by national intelligence agencies in violation of fundamental rights .
If we are tempted to follow the path that some Members would wish us to pursue and restrict our efforts to establishing control over the intelligence services , relying on democratic control of these bodies to solve the problem , we must first look at the various secret services around the world ; as we do this , it will become clear to us that democratic control has never worked .
I know of no country in which it works .
So in my view it is no solution .
Let me make one more point on the subject of foreign policy , to which several references have already been made .
If an EU armed force is established , the logical consequence would be the creation of an EU intelligence service as well .
I am opposed to both of these developments , because I believe they will result in the militarisation of the EU .
If there is any serious intention to create an area in which peace , security and justice reign supreme , the intelligence services will have to be disbanded ; the surveillance authorities will also have to be dissolved .
Then , perhaps , even former employees of the surveillance authorities will be taking advice from computer hackers on how to protect themselves with the utmost effectiveness against government infringement of their fundamental rights .
Mr President , people outside this House must really wonder what is going on here .
First of all , we conclude that there is in fact such a thing as ECHELON , and then this politically elected assembly chooses not to draw political conclusions .
We then go on to conclude that privacy is being violated , whereupon the European Parliament , which at other times talks of course about guaranteeing people ' s rights , chooses to shift responsibility for guaranteeing these rights from the EU and the Member States to the individual citizen who then has to protect himself through encryption .
Finally , the observation is made that Great Britain and Germany are , in different ways , parties to this cooperation , and yet the report recommends ever closer cooperation on intelligence matters and no conclusions are drawn in relation to the two Member States that are involved in infringing our rights . On the contrary , they are free to participate in this cooperation .
I believe that the European Parliament has lost an opportunity to make it clear that it is serious about citizens ' rights .
It is more than just a matter of high-flown speeches and expensive documents .
It is also about taking action , and action is what is completely missing from the report .
That is why I shall not be able to support it .
Mr President , I should like to say a big thank you to the rapporteur , Mr Schmid , and also to Mr von Boetticher and to the committee chairman , Mr Coelho .
You have all carried out important work .
ECHELON proved to be less extensive than we had believed , and the issue has now been somewhat defused .
The ECHELON debate has nonetheless helped increase awareness of these issues , something which was vital .
Interception and military espionage are phenomena which we shall not be able to abolish , or which we even wish to abolish , as long as terrorism and threats to the EU and its citizens exist .
The issue for the future concerning the way in which total security systems are to be developed without violating fundamental principles has advanced a stage .
There is no proof that the United States has damaged global competitiveness by spreading information about companies .
However , the report shows the need we have to develop security and encryption .
I particularly welcome the clear opposition to bribes .
As a Swede , I feel that is an extremely good development .
Obviously , cooperation at EU level on this issue involves having national control stations in accordance with the network proposed .
The committee ' s work on ECHELON helped bring us closer together , thanks to the very special qualities of the rapporteur , Mr Schmid .
Mr President , I was given the opportunity to take part in the work on Echelon as a representative of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , which was a very welcome change , and I should like to concentrate on a few legal and institutional aspects of that work .
The rapporteur is to be congratulated on presenting us today with a report which is exceptional in terms of both methodology and content .
Another exceptional feature of the report , to my mind , is the response it has already evoked far beyond the bounds of the European Union .
Just recently I had the opportunity to discuss the contents of the report with prominent US senators .
Firstly , they were very familiar with the report - which is highly unusual for one of our parliamentary reports - and , secondly , they did not question its findings and even expressly confirmed the designation or codename Echelon .
How different this was to the situation only a few months ago , a situation that had prevailed over a number of years , when the observations we made in the pursuit of our efforts to clarify the Echelon question fell on many a deaf ear .
The dismissive and stonewalling replies to the questions we have put to past and present commissioners , such as Mr Bangemann and Mr Bolkestein , as well as to the Council , fill bulky volumes in our private archives .
This makes our constructive cooperation on this occasion with Commissioners Liikanen and Vitorino all the more gratifying , and I should like to lay special emphasis on that point .

I am therefore confident that the Commission will help us to ensure that the concrete measures proposed in our draft report are actually taken , particularly the legislative measures to improve the protection of European citizens and European companies , the specific proposal for an additional protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights which would elucidate Article 8 , efforts to reach a much needed agreement with the United States and many more measures besides .
We must appeal to the Member States to desist from any illegal activities in which they may have been engaging , to exercise more effective democratic control of their intelligence agencies and to attach greater importance to protecting the rights of all citizens of the European Union in addition to those of their own nationals .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for a sound report .
The most important conclusion may appear simple : ECHELON does in fact exist .
It took a long time for us to establish this , however .
Allow me to highlight two aspects of the report .
In my view , there is not enough about personal privacy and the protection of individuals .
That is why it was good that the rapporteur should have especially emphasised those issues in his presentation .
As was also pointed out , management interests are obviously very important , but these are not the whole story .
According to certain indices , the surveillance system has not only been used for industrial espionage , but also for intercepting the communications of individuals or organisations .
ECHELON has , of course , the capacity to intercept communications such as e-mails , faxes and telephone conversations between individuals .
The British journalist Duncan Campbell even believes that ECHELON is used to intercept communications from Amnesty and the Red Cross .
If that is true , it is an incredibly serious matter .
Just as was stated earlier , the EU will , in that case , have to be able to take action , in common with national parliaments and governments .
In a democratic state governed by law , protection of the individual must always come first , just as the President-in-Office of the Council indicated earlier .
My second remark concerns encryption .
Encryption offers the only effective protection against interception .
However , encryption technology is still in its infancy , and there are quite a few barriers to the export of civil encryption systems .
Nonetheless , the extensive exchange of information that takes place in Europe lends topicality to the issue of common standards and rules for encryption .
The institutions of the EU must be able to act jointly on this issue .
Mr President , may I say that I share the indignation , doubts and criticism voiced by numerous honourable members in the House about Echelon which , as we can see from the Schmid report , is not the stuff of detective novels .
However , I should like , if I may , to focus on one point .
As I understand it , Echelon allows certain Member States of the European Union - one Member State at least and maybe others - to attend top-level meetings in the European Union armed with knowledge of the negotiating tactics , positions and strategy of the other Member States . What I want to know is , if this is true , then exactly what are the final decisions worth ?
How can we trust them , how biased , to use the English expression , are they ? And how can the Heads of State and Government of the other Member States accept them ?
Madam President-in-Office , I would be most interested in hearing your views on this .
How long will it be before we read the memoirs of some US president or high-ranking British officer and see how much political capital they made from Echelon and how big a laugh they had at our expense ?
Mr President , I have to say that I was slightly surprised that Mr Coelho , who did an excellent job in inspiring difficult debates and maintained a completely objective approach , was given so little speaking time .
I would also like to thank Mr Schmid who has obviously worked very hard on this issue , even though I disagree with some of the points in his report .
The resolution poses a fundamental problem .
It highlights that the Echelon system exists and was set up by the United States with the help of the United Kingdom , in particular .
On the other hand , the resolution raises the problem of whether the participation of an EU Member State in the Echelon system is compatible with European law .
This is a genuine problem in cases where Echelon is used to carry out commercial or industrial espionage and to quote from paragraph F of the resolution " if the system is misused for the purposes of gathering competitive intelligence , such action is at odds with the Member States ' duty of loyalty and with the concept of a common market based on free competition , so that a Member State participating in such a system violates EC law . "
In my view , this point is fundamental and that is why this report , in spite of its values , leaves me with mixed feelings .
In particular , I do not accept the way the use of the territory of a Member State by a third party state - whether or not an ally - is trivialised with the argument that another Member State , France , in this case , could have the resources to set up its own global interception system .
This is not the same situation at all and that was not part of the work of the Echelon Committee .
Today , economic conflicts can be very serious and industrial espionage is only an instrument and , therefore , we should perhaps take care to ensure that we do not use this sort of war-mongering vocabulary to refer to our allies , and , even more so , to the EU Member States .
We in Parliament have a right to expect the Member State or States involved , the Council and the Commission to take preventative measures and action .
Mr President , I would also like to thank Mr Schmid in my capacity as a member of the Temporary Committee on Echelon for his extensive , far-reaching endeavours in collecting and organising a truly impressive mass of highly technical information .
The report and its extensive conclusions and recommendations section , in particular , represent a major contribution on the part of Parliament to the protection of European citizens ' and companies ' freedom .
The main results have already been presented by Mr Schmid and so I will not go back over that ground in my speech , although not all the conclusions are consistent with some of the information given in the report , as Mr Di Lello pointed out .
To increase the effectiveness of the report and with a view to the protection of citizens ' privacy , in particular , as well as companies , may I suggest to Mr Schmid , once again , and to the Members that they include some amendments tabled by Mr Di Lello and others , specifically Amendments Nos 12 , 20 , 21 , 22 and 30 .
These amendments have been rejected by the temporary committee but I believe this was purely out of concern for practicality .
It has , in fact , been maintained that a form of huge-scale , global non-differentiating interception such as Echelon , based solely on recognition of a number of keywords and using search engines , would be invaluable for combating terrorism and crime .
Now , the amendments which I recommend should be put to the vote state , on the other hand , clearly - and rightly so - that these interceptions are contrary to the principle of legality and proportionality which should govern every operation compromising the confidentiality of communications , and therefore cannot be permitted .
It may be that , in the future , we will have to amend the laws in question in line with the development of information technology but , as things stand at the moment , this is the situation .
Including the amendments cited in the Schmid report would be a decisive contribution towards ensuring that the European citizens feel that their interests are fully represented and that the Unions ' institutions do not lose credibility as a result of the report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Gerhard Schmid for his excellent work .
Wiretapping and spying are an intolerable invasion of people ' s privacy and are in direct contravention of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
When the Cold War ended , a massive system that had reached the pinnacle of its development sought a fresh role : it would seem to have gone from spying on enemies to spying on friends .
It was exactly the same in NATO : when the communist system ended the highly paid personnel who depicted images of enmity suddenly looked around for new roles to play , and they appear to have found them .
It even feels as if a sort of bellicose mood somehow lingers in the United States of America .
They are now building a missile shield against a threat that is actually hard to see .
Furthermore , certain recent selfish moves on the part of the new US administration seem bewildering to us here in multicultural Europe .
What is actually happening over there ?
Perhaps we ought to go and take another look , as only one in three of our American colleagues have a passport .
They are notoriously not the most widely travelled of people .
I think we must now establish a watertight agreement at charter level that we do not engage in industrial espionage amongst one another , and our most important trading partner and friend , the United States , must be persuaded to adhere to this principle .
At the same time we must ensure that we are able to check that nobody is violating the privacy of European Union citizens .
And thirdly , here in the appropriate committees , we must continually monitor the situation to ensure that that is what is happening .
We have important work to do in this area .
Mr President , it is a known fact that , when the Cold War ended and the system of the two superpowers broke down , numerous national secret services extended the scope of their activities to commercial and industrial espionage .
The United States , Canada , New Zealand , Australia and our own United Kingdom excelled in this sort of espionage by setting up Åchelon , as our committee has confirmed thanks to the excellent work carried out by the rapporteur , Mr Schmid , and the coordinators .

In my opinion , Åchelon is one of the greatest scandals of all time .
It is a political scandal , it is an economic scandal and it is a scandalous mass violation of human rights and the rules of democracy , which is why any strategic plan dealing with Echelon-type espionage systems should force governments and international organisations to face squarely up to their responsibilities .
Globalisation needs to go hand in glove with legal guarantees that both privacy and the rules of healthy competition will be protected .
We need to improve the security of information technology infrastructures and the application of efficient parliamentary and judicial controls on how secret services operate at national and European level , otherwise our citizens will lose all confidence in the information society .
Finally , European companies need to develop ways of protecting themselves by reviewing their internal procedures , informing and training staff and using firewalls to protect their electronic communications .
Healthy competition between companies should be the cornerstone of the global economy .
In all events , intelligence services should operate on the basis of respect for fundamental rights , as set out in the Charter and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
It is high time we gave European citizens an answer to their question : quis custodiet ipsos custodies ?
Mr President , I have the greatest reservations regarding the mild and , in parts , hesitant nature of the report , for it underestimates the dangers of global monitoring of communications and does not propose adequate autonomous defence measures for Europe .
In theory , the European Union could certainly negotiate a memorandum of understanding allowing the Member States to use this information but , for the moment and in the short term , the European Union must think about protecting itself autonomously with a different cryptographic system from those currently in place , such as the state of the art Hermes system which is the product of European research , with remote point-to-point transport so that the data cannot be captured by the spy satellite .
The report appears to avoid this specific question : can the use of data collected using Echelon by the security services of one of the Member States , the United Kingdom , actually lead to tangible cases of espionage against European citizens or companies by the United States ?
These are questions which we must ask ourselves , seeing as the same US Congress raised the issue of whether the surveillance carried out by the NSA on US citizens was not a practice which contravened the Constitution .
It has been said and must be said again that even NGOs such as Amnesty International and Greenpeace and even people who are completely above suspicion such as Mother Teresa of Calcutta have been intercepted by the Echelon system .
That is worrying .
The President of STOA , an ex-Member of Parliament , Mr Pompidou , commented that many European companies have already suffered because of the existence of ECHELON , but they do not expose it because they still trade with the United States and have to continue to do so in the future .
Therefore , we wonder what legal protection there is to protect European companies against such damages .
What means do they have of proving that they have been wronged ?
Moreover , what funding is there for European research in major , strategic sectors such as cryptography ?
These are questions which the report does not answer .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Coelho , the chairman , and the honourable Members of this Parliament who participated in the work of the Temporary Committee on Echelon , especially the rapporteur , Mr Schmid , for the comprehensive and well-written report on the Echelon interception system .
I should also like to thank Parliament as a whole for this very important debate .
The Commission has been following the parliamentary work over the past year with great interest .
The issue touches on complex technological and political considerations .
The report presents a large number of references to the existence of a global interception system . These build up a body of evidence .
The Commission stated on 30 March last year : " It is the very nature of intelligence activities that those that are not involved in those activities are not able to confirm nor deny their existence " .
Even though the Commission is not involved in intelligence gathering activities , we do not question the findings of the European Parliament .
The report by the Echelon Temporary Committee is based on careful and thorough work .
The European Union is founded on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , based on Article 6 of the Treaty and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
As the guardian of the Treaty , the Commission attaches the utmost importance to the observance of those principles .
The abuse of large-scale communications intelligence is something that can make an individual living in a democratic society feel very uneasy .
Privacy is a fundamental right .
Any derogation from this right has to be specifically provided for by law , necessary for the achievement of objectives , in the public interest , proportionate and subject to adequate checks and guarantees against any form of abuse .
The Commission is determined to look at the practical implications of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights where , in particular , the protection of communications and personal data will be further enhanced .
The Commission has already stated that it considers it would be preferable for the Charter to be integrated into the Treaties for the sake of visibility and legal certainty .
At the same time , the Community has to act within the scope of the powers conferred upon it by the Treaty .
The findings of the committee concerning the compatibility of a system of the Echelon type with EU law distinguish between two scenarios .
First , the use of such a system purely for intelligence purposes and second , abuse of the system for the purpose of gathering competitive intelligence .
The Commission shares the opinion that the operations envisaged in the first scenario in the interest of state security fall within the scope of title V of the Treaty on European Union , which sets out the framework for the establishment of a common foreign security policy .
This lays down no provisions on intelligence activities .
Member States remain responsible for the conduct and supervision of intelligence operations , unless the Council decides otherwise .
The EU Treaty does not empower the Commission to exercise its prerogatives as guardian of the Treaty in this field .
Maintaining an interception system for the purpose of gathering intelligence , even in the context of a Member State ' s defence or national security , is outside the scope of the directives in force on data protection .
As to the second scenario , the gathering of competitive intelligence does not come within the scope of a common foreign and security policy .
It is not an activity that would be allowed in pursuit of a common foreign and security policy .
As far as Community law is concerned , such activity could fall within the scope of data protection directives .
This is the case if data gathered by Echelon-type systems is collected or subsequently passed on to commercial undertakings for purposes unrelated to the prevention of criminal offences or state security matters .
We are all aware that electronic communications play an increasingly important role in everyday life .
Properly functioning electronic communications infrastructures are crucial for our economies .
As was stated in Lisbon , Europe wants to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world .
A precondition for this is the need to build trust in electronic communications .
This concerns both our citizens and our businesses .
The development in technologies can bring protection against surveillance .
It is reassuring that the use of fibre-optic cables instead of satellites for transcontinental communications has decreased the possibilities for large-scale routine interception .
The argument that the rise of the commercial Internet has significantly diminished the possibilities for interception is convincing .
Today the majority of Internet communications by cable no longer leave the European continent .
The Commission has taken important steps over the past years to develop a policy to improve the security of electronic communications .
Encryption has been mentioned here often .
The availability and free circulation of encryption products and technologies in the European Union has now been ensured with the dual-use regulation in place since September 2000 .
The support , through the Community ' s research framework programme , in particular with the information side of technologies programme , has improved the conditions to develop top-of-the-range European encryption products in order to enable EU citizens , companies and governments to protect their communications .
I would ask for your support in this context in our discussions on the next framework programme .
However , it is not sufficient to guarantee a widespread use of encryption .
Citizens and small businesses are not always aware of the potential effects .
We need to inform them about the possibilities of encryption . We need to empower them .
In June this year the Commission adopted a communication on network and information security .
The purpose is to tackle this awareness problem and to further develop a European approach on security-related issues .
I am pleased to note that the conclusions of the report under discussion are very much in line with the approach adopted by the Commission .
The honourable Members are aware that there is already a legal framework in place at EU level addressing data protection and obligations for operators .
There is also an emerging policy on cybercrime , which will be discussed later today .
Network information security is now coming as a third element to complete the picture .
However , communication is not meant to contain a fully fledged action plan .
We have already initiated some broad action lines where progress needs to be made .
I will highlight some of them .
To raise awareness , public information and education campaigns should be launched and best practice should be promoted .
A European warning and information system is needed to strengthen the activities of computer emergency response teams - CRTs - or similar entities and improve the coordination amongst them .
I have noted Parliament ' s support for this idea .
Then we need to examine how best to organise at European level proactive and coordinated measures to develop forward-looking responses to existing and emerging security threats like the European information security observatory .
Finally concerning the legal framework , we will set up an inventory of national measures which have to be taken in accordance with the relevant Community law .
Here I reply to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel ' s question .
I would also like to mention that further action is needed to support the development of technology , to streamline standardisation and certification work , and for the introduction of security in government use and better international cooperation .
As a next step , it is our intention to develop a road map before the end of this year containing concrete actions with firm deadlines in order to start putting a European information security policy in place .
Finally , the Commission is constantly improving the production of its own information systems in terms of availability , integrity and confidentiality , especially in view of the changing nature of the various existing and potential threats .
The entry point to the Commission networks is constantly monitored and actively tested .
Similar efforts are conducted through projects for secure video conferencing , secure telephone systems and encryption of databases .
Furthermore , security audits of Commission information systems are conducted on a regular basis .
A new information system security policy has been drafted and is currently being prepared for discussion within the Commission services .
In addition , the Commission is reviewing its overall security policy as a result of internal reorganisation activities and policy developments .
The new internal Commission security provisions will follow the model of the Council security regulation adopted earlier this year and will be based on the following principles : proportionality of security measures in relation to existing risks ; shared responsibility and accountability of staff , management and security experts ; the creation of all elements into a coherent security strategy , such as personal information and physical security ; and finally , close cooperation between European and national security organisations .
The Commission intends to allocate additional resources to the security domain .
However , scarce technical and human resources , especially in the field of information security specialists , hamper the full deployment of security policies .
This concern is common to most public administrations including the European institutions .
I welcome the support in the report to allocate more resources for the task to be undertaken and I sincerely hope that Parliament as a budgetary authority will follow the position of the committee .
The trust of European citizens and businesses in electronic communications and the well-functioning of information infrastructures has become crucial for economies .
Let me reiterate once more that the Commission attaches the utmost importance to respect for human rights and respect of rule of law .
Mr President , at the end of this debate I should like to say a few words of thanks , first of all to the chairman of the committee .
We did not know each other before the committee was formed , and yet within a few days we were cooperating as if we had been working together for years .
This is not to be taken for granted ; it is no everyday occurrence .
Thank you very much for that .
I thank the members of the committee .
We did not always agree , but the atmosphere between the members was never unpleasant , and our cooperation was constructive .
These are also things we cannot always count on in this House .
So let me express my sincere thanks to them too .
My thanks go the Secretariat , the Secretary-General and his staff , and to the many people who have helped us with their advice and information .
Some of them are mentioned in the report .
There are others who have not been mentioned in their own interest .
My gratitude to them is no less heartfelt .
( Applause )
Combating terrorism
The next item is the report ( A5-0273 / 2001 ) by Mr Watson , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the role of the European Union in combating terrorism [ 2001 / 2016 ( INI ) ] .
Madam President , I have the honour to bring this report to the House on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
It was felt appropriate for the chairman of the committee to pilot through the House a report on a matter which requires a wide consensus of support .
As a Liberal Democrat , I regard terrorist acts as a unique category of crime which negates democracy .
They are designed to destroy the very basis of civil society and I am grateful to committee colleagues for their support for this view and for our subsequent recommendations .
There are some who see my report as a response to current terrorist attacks on the Iberian Peninsula .
I share the profound concern of those who recognise this as an open wound in Europe ' s polity and on behalf of the committee I extend to them my deepest sympathy and solidarity .
In my mind , however , my analysis and recommendations should be no more and no less a response to the situation there than to similar situations which have existed , and in some cases continue to pose a threat , in Northern Ireland , in the UK , in Corsica , in France , in Germany , in Italy or other countries which have been subject to attack by ideological terrorist groups .
Terrorism is not a new phenomenon , but today it has many new aspects and features .
Links between terrorists in different countries now form part of the fretwork of internationally organised crime .
In August , we saw evidence of contacts between terrorists in Northern Ireland and their counterparts in Colombia .
Such links enhance the capacity of those who use terror for political ends to find weapons , exchange ideas on techniques and escape the arm of the law .
Terrorism is also inspired by new motives and new weapons .
Some animal welfare groups launch campaigns to terrorise those connected , sometimes only tenuously , to experiments on live animals .
Some environmental protection groups harass those involved in oil exploration or exploitation .
Computer terrorism and environmental terrorism are worrying features of today ' s world .
Previous attempts by democratic societies to tackle this threat have met with varying success .
Where they have signally failed is in the field of international cooperation between law enforcement agencies or judicial authorities .
In the case of the European Union , the tools to improve such cooperation are provided by Articles 29 and 31 of the TEU and yet governments have hesitated to use them .
Such reluctance is strangely out of place in a Union founded on the values of humanity and dignity , freedom , equality and solidarity , respect for human rights and freedoms and the rule of law .
The decision of Member States to make the Union an area of freedom , security and justice should provide a basis for urgency in tackling a growing terrorist challenge .
An unqualified rejection of terrorist organisations and of terrorism should lead to a coherent and binding set of coordinated policies and a spirit of cooperation between governments at all levels .
Cooperation between France and Spain or between Britain and Ireland has improved in recent months and yet the opportunities offered by the Amsterdam Treaty for more effective action have not been grasped .
I would like to thank Members from all parties in this House for their generous advice and assistance to me in drawing up this report .
The report commands a wide consensus of opinion .
I am pleased that it opposes the introduction of exceptional laws and procedures .
Such measures should not be necessary .
They frequently deprive governments of moral superiority and can descend into instances of state-sponsored terrorism .
Herein lies a potential danger to democracy .
Where the state is not prepared scrupulously to pursue criminal actions against soldiers or policemen guilty of torture , it has little legitimacy .
Nonetheless I am opposed to Amendment No 2 , which could be interpreted as justifying terrorism and to Amendment No 1 , which would delay action in this fight .
I believe that the legal systems of all the EU Member States have the capacity to guarantee justice .
That is not to say that judicial standards could not be higher .
They could be , and raising them is a major challenge for the Union .
Unless we are prepared to trust each other ' s judicial systems and democratic practices , however , more and more families will be deprived of their loved ones as innocent people lose their lives to those who murder for political ends .
My report therefore calls on the Council of Ministers to establish common minimal laws and penalties to counter terrorist acts , to abolish formal extradition procedures for those suspected or convicted of terrorist crimes and to establish a European search and arrest warrant in the fight against terrorist groups .
Some may regard such measures as extreme .
I believe that all are justified in tackling a form of crime designed to destroy democracy based on the rule of law and I hope that the Commission and Council will respond early to this call for action .
Madam President , this part session marks the beginning of a political year which presents us with tasks which could be described as historic : in the coming months we have to launch a constitutional reform of the Union , we are going to introduce the euro and we are going to face the most important chapters in negotiations which will lead to an unprecedented enlargement of the European Union .
For thousands of European citizens , however , these debates pass over their heads .
The fundamental concern of these citizens today is that their children receive a pluralist and open education in their schools ; that they may safely walk the streets of their towns ; that they may be able to publicly express what they think ; that they may be able to exercise their right to a free vote ; that they may be able to hold a position representing their people , without endangering their lives or those of their families .
And these thousands of European citizens rightly expect local , national and European administrations to guarantee their fundamental rights .
That is why it seems to me essential that the Community institutions , as well as dealing with the constitution , the euro and enlargement , respond to what we European citizens , in Spain for example , who live there , consider to be our first priority : the fight against terrorism , that is , the fight for freedom , for respect for human rights and for the rule of law which we Spaniards have built after four decades of dictatorship .
The creation of a common area of freedom , security and justice is what the European Council in Tampere in October 1999 called for .
We must congratulate the current Belgian Presidency for having made this one of its priorities , and we place great value , of course , on the laudable work of Commissioner Vitorino , who I hope will find support in this debate for the use of his powers of legislative initiative .
I believe that the European Parliament , the House which represents the European citizens , has had a special responsibility in this task , which our President , Nicole Fontaine , has taken on with a decisiveness and courage that those who have directly or indirectly suffered terror will never forget .
I am sure that your successors will have this same attitude .
I therefore also believe that we can be reasonably satisfied in voting for this report today on the role of the European Union in the fight against terrorism , the importance of which is demonstrated by the fact that its rapporteur is the very Chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Rights and Freedoms , Graham R. Watson .
He is presenting this House with a text approved in committee by a huge majority , as he has said , and which contains such fundamental considerations as the statement that democratic dialogue must be based on mutual respect and non-violence , or the recognition of the debt that society owes to the victims of terrorist acts and their families .
In approving this report we are making a series of recommendations which , when implemented , will allow us to create a common definition within the European Union of the crime of terrorism ; to adopt the principle of mutual recognition of judgments ; to replace the formal extradition procedures with a European search and arrest warrant for those crimes which cause particular revulsion in society .
I am talking about terrorism of course , but also human trafficking , crimes against children , illegal drug and arms trafficking , corruption , fraud and organised crime .
Madam President , with absolute respect for all the parliamentary groups , regardless of their political orientation and , of course , for the free vote of Members , I would now ask you to support the report because this is a fundamental issue which goes beyond party disputes .
Through the implementation of the measures proposed in it , justice will have more instruments for guaranteeing the fundamental freedoms that formed the basis for the construction of Europe and which have been restricted by terrorism for thousands of Europeans .
Madam President , I will begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Watson , in particular , and naturally all the members of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms , for their work , their cooperation and their efforts on this report which today we are going to firstly study and support , and then vote for .
Ladies and gentlemen , I feel happy today as a Basque , as a Spaniard and as a European .
I am happy because Europe has understood that when ETA violates human rights , when organised Basque fascism commits xenophobic crime and ideological cleansing , when this terrorist organisation , which in Spain today represents the final dying embers of Franco ' s legacy , continues to operate , based within Europe itself , it is not a problem for the direct victims , those of us who live with escorts , those who cannot appear on electoral lists , those who have to overcome fear in order to write daily or in order to talk to the media .
The problem is for Europe .
It is a problem for European democracy as a whole .
Therefore , European democracy is also acting as a whole and is reacting by uniting in the battle against terrorism .
I feel happy because Europe has understood that it is time to go beyond words , beyond fine statements , beyond bilateral cooperation , though this is important .
It has long been time to mobilise the instruments necessary to bring the criminals , the terrorists , the fascists , to justice , to finally arrest the criminals , to implement all the necessary instruments which will make the European democratic institutions more effective in achieving this end .
It also makes me happy to see that Europe has discovered that , when criminals are at liberty , when organised criminals are attacking human rights , freedoms and lives of citizens , the first political decision that must be taken is to make it possible for the criminals to be brought to justice .
We do everything we have to do to ensure that all citizens live in freedom , regardless of their ideology , their beliefs , their origin , their surnames , their native culture , and everything we have to do to defend - if you will allow me - the very concept behind European citizenship : human rights .
The Watson report and its recommendations are not just a commitment against ETA : they are a commitment to democracy .
The aim is to beat ETA , but the fundamental commitment is to defend democracy throughout the whole of Europe .
To defend the idea that everywhere in Europe people may live in freedom , in plurality , and may live together .
And in one place in Europe , in the Basque Country and in Spain , the fascist organisation ETA is jeopardising that coexistence and plurality .
It is said that there will be operative problems , that some countries will have problems harmonising their legislations .
President Verhofstadt said here , during his first intervention , that those who do not believe in utopia do not deserve to be called Europeans .
I believe that a political will which has been capable of introducing a single currency will be capable of also introducing single instruments to fight terrorism .
But please allow me , ladies and gentlemen , to end by making a comment in my capacity not just as a European , but as a Basque and a Spaniard .
As a Basque and a Spaniard , as the daughter of a generation of Spanish democratic citizens who lost the war against Franco and who resisted forty years of dictatorship , I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that through this act today , Europe is performing an act of historical reparation , because for many years , for a long time , we Spanish democrats have felt a sense of isolation , of indifference and distance from Europe .
We often felt it during Franco ' s time and we have often felt it - I can assure you - during these years of fighting the fascism of ETA , of fighting for democracy and freedom .
Today the debt of indifference is being paid off and I feel proud to share this moment with you .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank you as a Basque for this decision .
I would like to thank you in my name but above all in the name of many ordinary anonymous people , who every day fight for freedom , who overcome fear in order to appear on the electoral lists , who overcome fear in order to write , and in the name of those people who cannot talk because ETA has silenced their voices for good .
On behalf of all of them , thank you very much and congratulations on this act today .
Madam President , I would firstly like , of course , to congratulate Mr Watson on his excellent work and his important and difficult report .
Mr Watson has not theorised , but has taken account of what afflicts us and , in particular , he has dealt directly with what is inflicted on us by ETA , and of what affects Basque society , Spanish society and , in my case , Catalan society .
His total condemnation and his call for the need to respect victims must be a constant element in our statements and our positions .
I would firstly and clearly like to highlight in this report the fact that important positive action measures are proposed for the legal and police areas : the establishment of minimum standards , the establishment of a form of extradition , the recognition of judicial resolutions , the execution of arrest warrants and the approximation of national legislations .
I believe that these measures improve the important and priority legal and police action .
In the time that I have available , I believe I should stress that the report has not renounced important values in the fight against terrorism in Europe .
It is very important that Recital N incorporates the idea that ideologies are legitimate if they are compatible with democratic respect and values .
It is significant that in Recital O , the expression ' democratic dialogue ' reappears , as a fundamental principle , based on mutual respect and non-violence .
It is also significant that Recitals R and S state that measures must have restrictions on the part of States so that there is no abuse of the legal regulations .
I believe that all of this is important , given the balance which is provided by priority and efficiency of action and respect for European values .
I must mention my satisfaction with these changes , because they change the resolution , approved by written declaration in September 1999 and in which I expressed my disagreement - even though I signed it - with the removal of the expression ' democratic dialogue ' .
Through this report the European Union is fully recovering its values on this issue , because peace , understood as the exclusion of violence , on the one hand , and dialogue , on the other , is an essential pairing for the European Union , inside and outside Europe .
Europe , when it goes anywhere , inside or outside , does so with this pairing of ' peace and democratic dialogue ' and clearly , as I insist inside and outside , I do not want to give any example because I would not want it to provoke comparisons which would alter what is positive about this report and this debate .
I am very satisfied that this report can be approved and that it will be an effective tool for resolving this serious problem which affects many people .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a report about terrorism .
I should therefore like to examine now what is meant by terrorism , because it is recognised as something evil and is often used as an excuse to legitimise the infringement of fundamental rights by the state .
And so I have considered the things that are designated as terrorism in this report .
Trafficking in drugs is one example .
As we all know , the line between illegal and legal drugs is drawn in a fairly arbitrary manner and cannot be inferred from the principles of health policy , for example .
Many people here in Parliament , indeed , consume copious quantities of drugs .
But I am well aware that the report refers to illegal drugs .
I simply mean to say that drugs are an intrinsic feature of every society ; they always have been , and no doubt they always will be .
Criminalisation will not get us anywhere .
The report then deals with trafficking in human beings , for example .
If the smuggling of human beings is meant - and these two concepts are frequently confused - it would be sufficient to include a reference to the fact that people who have had to enter the EU by illegal means have been recognised here as genuine asylum seekers . They are compelled to seek help from people like the snakeheads because we have created Fortress Europe here .
If traffic in human beings is meant , in other words the essential denial of people ' s fundamental rights and the imposition of forced labour , this raises the question why the report on which we have just voted devotes so little attention to the protection of victims , of those who are traded .
That would surely be the best way to go about eradicating abuses such as traffic in human beings .
At this point , the report says that terrorism is also to be found in the context of illegal trafficking in drugs and arms .
I have already said something on the subject of drugs ; as for arms , I believe trafficking in arms is illegal but , what is far worse , it is immoral .
Quite simply , the question is whether this immorality only applies to illegal arms trafficking .
Does it not , in fact , extend to the legal arms trade ?
Is it not terrorism when civilians are attacked by NATO bombers and killed or made to suffer for the rest of their lives ?
There are people who resist , who take action , such as civil disobedience .
They know very well that such action is illegal .
Whether it is a crime is another matter .
The report refers to corruption and fraud ; many people are sick of government corruption and fraud and decide to do something about it , and we are supposed to construe that here as terrorism .
If the House does not even accept the Greens ' amendment that seeks to establish fundamental human rights as a common minimum level of protection for everyone in the EU , the proposed recommendation must be rejected for the sake of those same fundamental rights .
Madam President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for his work on the extremely serious , topical issue of terrorism , which has recently been spreading with appalling , renewed vigour .
We may have been deluding ourselves in thinking we had banished this scourge which had stained Europe with blood for so long .
It may be that contemporary terrorism is more difficult to fight because it is less ideological and more sensationalist , because it is not based on political ideals but purely on violence , with precisely the aim of destabilising the institutions and terrorising the public .
What , then , should be Parliament ' s role ?
On the one hand , Parliament must certainly address the causes of that social and cultural malaise and distress which clearly lead to terrorism , but , most importantly , it must endeavour in some way to prevent the emergence of terrorist groups , to anticipate it and to identify the first signs as soon as they appear .
There are so many resources available to us : so many data banks , so many police resources and so much legislation , and yet , all too often , when faced with the emergence or transformation of large-scale criminal phenomena such as those related to drugs , crimes against children , the trafficking and exploitation of human beings and , of course , terrorism , Parliament continues to be taken by surprise and ends up arriving too late , incapable of defining effective preventive actions .
This was the case of those violent groups , many of them in contact with terrorist organisations , who infiltrated the peaceful , legitimate anti-globalisation movements .
I therefore look forward to the measures envisaged in the report to contain the spread of terrorism , particularly the European search and arrest warrant and the abolition of the formal extradition procedure .
I would like to end , Madam President , by saying that - to give just one example - there are still Italian citizens who used to be part of the Red Brigades and have been condemned as guilty of terrorist homicide for almost 20 years now , who have been in hiding for that entire period as the guests of other European States , despite repeated applications for their extradition .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I listened with great attention to Mr Watson as he spoke about his report .
I support the report for the most part , although I do wonder - as we often ask ourselves - what exactly terrorism is .
During the debate , we talked about the need to define the nature of terrorism today .
In my view , the measure discussed in the report deals with European terrorism , not just that despicable method which - I regret to say - is developing in present-day Spain , for if we can call that method despicable then we must see the methods used in other European countries by movements with much more dubious aims as just as contemptible .
Italy has suffered a terrible period in which we witnessed the murder of activists in their offices , the murder of young people in the squares and children burned alive in their homes , in the name of an ideology which ultimately led to the murder of the government adviser , Mr D ' Antona , and which often leads , in practice , as happened in this case , to the death of young people during demonstrations which result in blind violence which has nothing to do with opposition to the globalisation of the markets .
Therefore , I look forward to a coordinated policy of all the European States which excludes the abominable special laws which proved to be genuine tools of political persecution when it was a case of striking one party and then tools of political protection when it was a case of protecting others , as Mrs Angelilli said just now .
I look forward to the introduction of the European search and arrest warrant , but let it be genuinely established now .
Let the governments be called upon to incorporate the measures into their legal systems and to ensure that , as of the next few months , we no longer witness events in our squares such as those which took place in Genoa a few days ago .
Madam President , the report describes very graphically the dangers of terrorism in both its old and new forms and the threat it poses as well as the powerlessness of Europe ' s traditional institutions in the face of the terrorist threat .
If I may take the liberty to contest perhaps only one point , the threat of terrorism really has nothing to do with a democratic society - even though such societies are often the target of terrorist activity - but is a far more pervasive threat against all people , whatever the political conditions in which they live .
That is why it is so difficult , and perhaps not even so important , to define the concept of terrorism more precisely . Maybe we should rather do as the report suggests and proceed from a definition of terrorist acts which focuses on the threat they pose to individuals and groups of people .
Agreement at European level is the prerequisite for more effectively coordinated action , and the acceleration of extradition processes , which the report proposes , is certainly important too .
The principle enunciated in Article 29 of the Treaty on European Union , which calls terrorism a form of international crime , must be binding on all EU Member States , whose political representatives of particular ideological persuasions defend acts of violence inside or outside the EU as justifiable .
I recall the discussions on the Middle East conflict , when some of our colleagues were suddenly able to sympathise with terrorist activities on one side or the other , although these were quite simply death squad operations and attacks on the civilian population .
Besides the organisational requirement , namely cooperation between the responsible institutions , the political will to combat terrorist activities is also essential .
There is never any justification for threatening an innocent person .
Madam President , if something characterises the production of this report on terrorism , it has not just been the rigour and know-how of the rapporteur , Mr Watson , whom I would expressly like to congratulate , but also the willingness and understanding of almost all the political groups in this House to reflect not only their rejection and condemnation of terrorism , the people involved in it and the methods it uses , but also to reach a consensus on the legal instruments which we must create at European level in order to combat and pursue the crimes involved in terrorist activity and organised crime .
We can state unreservedly , without any doubt - at least on my part - that the approval of this report would represent a European pact against terrorism .
Because , for the people of Europe , violence and terror are absolutely incompatible with democracy , dialogue and the rules of the game which the democratic States have set ourselves in order to live together in peace and , in particular , in order to resolve absolutely every - and I stress , absolutely every - one of our problems and differences of whatever nature .
Nationalist or independence movements that use terrorist organisations such as ETA in Spain as decoys are only really hiding the reality of their trade whose only objective is to spread terror , destabilise democracy and indiscriminately murder children , young people and adults of any trade or profession .
Another argument endorsed by this report is the urgent need to update the legal instruments which a new area without borders , such as the European Union , must have so that it is not easier for the violent people and terrorist groups to carry out their criminal acts than it is for the police and judges to pursue and punish them .
Because , Madam President , Commissioner , it is contradictory that there should be barriers and borders for judges and police while , for example , criminal groups organise themselves in one country of the European Union , carry out attacks in another and then return to shelter under legislation that is obsolete and incompatible with a common area of freedom , security and justice .
Hence the need for the four recommendations , which are the backbone of the report .
It is true that Spain and its government are particularly interested in what we resolve here today , but so should other countries such as France , Belgium , Italy or the United Kingdom or the other countries of the Union , because the roots of terrorism are in violence , its funding , the technological means it employs and the recruitment of young people who are trained , with money and hatred , to kill .
And this is a problem , ladies and gentlemen , which transcends the borders of the European Union .
Madam President , we are moving in the right direction .
I must insist once again on the urgency of the proposals and the urgent need for us to continue truly creating a new area where there is only room and freedom of movement for those of us who want to live in peace and freedom .
Commissioner Vitorino has the political support of this House .
We genuinely await his proposals with great interest .
Madam President , for reasons that are sometimes hard to admit , Europe is helpless in the face of terrorism .
Most Member States have no anti-terrorist legislation , prison sentences vary from State to State and the tracking of criminals outside the territory in which a crime is committed is only possible - when it is at all possible - by means of the extradition mechanism , which is always subject to the limitations of the reciprocity and constitutionality of each Member State .
Terrorism in Europe , consequently , slips through the net .
Fortunately , the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Tampere Council and our own Commissioner António Vitorino have brought about changes in judicial cooperation in Europe .
For this purpose , in this excellent report by Mr Watson , the European Parliament recommends that the Council lay down minimum rules for a definition of the constituent elements of the crime and its sanctions , replacing extradition with the principle of the mutual recognition of judgments , the definition of a European search and arrest warrant that does not allow criminals to laugh at the courts and the police , and standards for harmonisation in the field of compensation .
Madam President , in addition to these penal and legal matters , we must also ensure that intellectual prejudices and outdated historical opinions do not continue to portray terrorism in the heroic and romantic light of a fight for freedom .
Freedom is guaranteed in constitutional States , which , today , all Member States of the European Community , fortunately , are .
François Mitterand taught us that nationalism is war and we are today seeing , very close to us and right under our eyes , in the name of various cultures , languages , regionalisms and religions , murders , deaths and violence that Europe cannot tolerate .
Europe must either trust in its values or become diluted in their opposites .
Terrorism is the main weapon of madness and of ethnic , religious or cultural fanaticism .
It is the opposite of freedom and of life .
Let us rid Europe of it , with the full might and power of the law .
Mr President , I belong to and represent the Basque Nationalist Party , the party which has been governing the Basque Country uninterruptedly for more than twenty years .
It is a party which , while calling for an independent personality , sovereignty and a right to self-determination for the Basque people , nevertheless firmly rejects and condemns the use of violence and terror as instruments to achieve any political objective and , even more , condemns the unacceptable State terrorism , which we Basques have also suffered , perpetrated by the apparatus of the Spanish State .
Our society and Spanish society clearly have a special sensitivity in relation to the issues dealt with by Mr Watson in his complex report on the role of the EU in the fight against terrorism and , in general terms , we agree with the content of the report and also with the amendments presented by the Confederal Group of the United European Left / Nordic Green Left and my own from the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Northern Ireland was lucky enough to enjoy the decisive support of US Senator Mitchell , which led to the Good Friday agreements and a genuine peace process , despite the ups and downs that it is suffering along the way .
How long will we Basques have to wait for Europe to realise that peace is in its hands , that it must stimulate , promote and oversee a sincere and democratic dialogue between the opposing sides ?
That would be the best recipe the European Parliament could recommend against terrorism and in order to achieve peace .
I particularly value Recital O of the report , which makes it very clear that democratic dialogue based on mutual respect and non-violence is the best means of resolving conflicts , thereby rectifying previous resolutions by this very European Parliament .
What I regret is that the attempt to reflect this same idea in the final recommendations has failed .
I must , therefore , consider this document to be incomplete and insufficient .
However , despite this insufficiency and having reflected on it , I am going to vote in favour of the Watson report in order to give an opportunity to Recital O , that is to say , to democratic dialogue as a means for resolving our conflict .
Mr President , it has been a very happy coincidence for the sake of democracy to have had the previous debate on the Echelon network .
The hypocritical position of the Member States on the violation of citizens ' rights that has been underlined by various speakers can help us in our analysis of the report on terrorism .
The report , very regrettably , ignores state terrorism .
But what is even more regrettable is the fact that there are no specific recommendations to foster measures that could implement political dialogue for resolution of conflicts .
Despite that , this House will most probably accept this report .
Then it will be for you , Commissioner Vitorino , to propose a text that you have already negotiated , mainly with the Spanish and French authorities .
On Monday I mentioned the victims of the Spanish dirty war .
Let me now recall the memory of the journalist , Fernando Pereira .
As you know , he was killed by the action of the French secret service against Greenpeace .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if we succeed in adopting these recommendations to the Council by a large majority here in the European Parliament , we shall not only have sent out a signal ; we shall also have taken absolutely decisive action against the cynical , murderous and anti-democratic terrorism that has been rearing its ugly head most conspicuously in Spain but in other European countries too .
The aims of this package which Mr Watson has proposed , range from harmonisation of laws and regulations to improvement of judicial assistance , from the creation of a European search and arrest warrant to provision for the compensation of victims , and the Member States of the European Union should not only use it to combat the familiar forms of terrorism but should also apply it against the new forms of terror to which we were introduced at the last summit meeting and which I fear will resurface at similar events in the future .
The debate on these new forms of terrorism has left a lot to be desired .
There has been no discussion about the safety of the innocent people who have been exposed to acts of violence , nor has there been any discussion about protecting property from destruction by violent activists and those who are incited to violence , about the police officers who have been seriously wounded or about either the compensation of victims or international police cooperation .
Too little has also been said about the background , about the sources from which these terrorists draw their support and their funding and about the political orchestrators of terrorist activities .
It has been a diluted discussion .
This terrorism that is threatening to sprout up again here , however , is increasingly international and global in character ; its perpetrators are not truly engaged in the globalisation debate that needs to be pursued but are merely using the debate as a vehicle for acts of terror against governments , against state institutions - in short , against our democratic system .
I therefore expect us to confront terrorism in both its old and new forms with the utmost vigour for the sake of the people , the security and the stability of our countries , to press our case uncompromisingly within the European Union , being ever mindful of those who have already fallen victim to this terrorism .
I ask you all to give your overwhelming support to this excellently prepared package of measures , not only for the sake of Spain but also in the interests of Europe , its stability and the security of its people .
Mr President , I am sure we all agree that terrorism is one of the most critical challenges our society has to face .
It is a global phenomenon , with cells operating throughout the world .
It can therefore only be effectively combated internationally .
Fighting terrorism also means defending human rights and democracy .
The cowardly terrorist attacks and murders we have seen recently , which have been at their most virulent in Spain , testify to the need to intensify European anti-terrorist cooperation .
International terrorism , which draws support from many a dictator or Islamic fundamentalist regime , cannot be effectively combated in the European Union unless the competent national authorities cooperate with each other .
Our House also bears responsibility in this respect ; to exercise this responsibility , we must nail our colours to the mast by adopting this report on the role of the Union in combating terrorism and making it clear that we are unanimously committed to the fight against terrorist activity .
I wish to thank the rapporteur for his outstanding work towards this goal .
Our proposals are intended to create the conditions for effective European cooperation among the Member States in order to put an end to the murders committed by terrorist organisations such as ETA in Spain .
Mr President , terrorism is the destruction of democracy .
There can be no successful dialogue with criminal terrorism for it is a lie incarnate .
Releasing terrorist prisoners and seeking to buy them off with places in rigged government is exalting terrorism and not eliminating it .
Northern Ireland is an example , with all terrorist prisoners from both sides released while not one murder weapon has been decommissioned by either side .
The tormented victims of brutal terrorism are largely forgotten .
I welcome this report ' s action call on this issue to look after the interests of these tormented victims and its emphasis on the immediate need to ensure that there is no sanctuary for terrorism in this European Union .
Action on that is imperative .
Mr President , this report is of the utmost importance to the citizens of Europe .
This report should receive the widest possible dissemination throughout the Community .
It is a complex and difficult report that should impact clearly on each and every citizen , so that they can understand precisely what Parliament is trying to accomplish on their behalf .
It does credit to the Chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , Mr Watson .
We will be voting in favour but , nonetheless , we will do so with reservations on many of the paragraphs and recommendations .
No doubt we will revisit the subject after consultation with our national parliaments and citizens ' groups .
We must define exactly and precisely what we mean by terrorism .
We must not confuse terrorism with peaceful protests , with legal and lawful protests by the citizen .
There are a number of paragraphs that we have reservations about but , despite these reservations which we will probably revisit in subsequent discussions and debates on the issue , we will be voting in favour of this .
I congratulate Mr Watson and all concerned in putting together this report .
Mr President , Mr Watson ' s report confirms that the European Union is powerless and has painted itself into a corner in its fight against the ever-increasing phenomenon of terrorism .
It is powerless both because terrorism has changed shape and is now backed up by modern technology and funds and because there is little judicial and police collaboration on the part of the Member States and no common legislative framework .
In Greece , a new anti-terrorism law was passed in May 2001 in a bid to systemise and up the ante in the fight against terrorism without violating fundamental rights and the principles of the rule of law .
However , combating terrorism , be it in Greece or Spain , is a matter for the European Union as a whole .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights should be used as a reference point for any new initiative .
In other words , under no circumstances should increased criminal activities by terrorist groups be used as an alibi , be it at national or European level , for taking measures which are incompatible with the rule of law and democratic principles .
However , in the case of terrorist offences , the Council should immediately abolish formal extradition procedures and adopt the principle of mutual recognition of decisions on criminal matters , including pre-judgment decisions , as proposed in the report .
In addition to these measures , it also makes a great deal of sense to prevent terrorism through education , social and other policies to encourage citizens , especially young people , to value dialogue and reject all forms of violence .
Mr President , may I first of all take the opportunity to congratulate Mr Watson on the preparation of this report .
It is a very balanced and very good report .
Terrorism has been a major problem in the Western world and in Europe it has been prevalent certainly since the Second World War .
It has been proved that a dedicated few can hold a majority to ransom .
We have to face up to the fact that there has not been full cooperation between Member States .
We in Northern Ireland have experienced that very painfully over the past 30 years .
If terrorists have a safe haven they will continue to flourish because they have somewhere to retreat to .
We must end safe havens .
I have some reservations , in that if you abolish extradition what you put in its place may not be effective .
If we do abolish extradition , whatever replaces it must work and must be seen to work , especially between Member States .
The Member States must be free to protect their citizens .
I believe it is the duty of every Member State government to protect the innocent , not the perpetrators of violence .
There must be maximum cooperation to achieve this .
We also see terrorist cooperation throughout the world .
The recent arrest of three IRA activists in Columbia brings home very clearly how widespread terrorism is throughout the world and how terrorists cooperate in the development of new and better weapons .
We also have to recognise that many terrorist organisations are involved in racketeering , drug smuggling and many other forms of normal criminal activity .
They use certain words and pseudonyms .
They threaten the communities in which they live .
We have to recognise the victims .
There must be mutual recognition .
No one has the right to murder in the attempt to achieve a political objective .
We must also remember it is easy to terrorise : I have experience of this .
But believe you me , it is much more difficult to build peace after the terrorism .
Mr President , terrorist acts are intended to weaken democracy and the fundamental values on which Europe is being built .
It is therefore necessary - and this is what we have understood - the strengthen the fight against terrorism and create mechanisms and initiatives which strengthen cooperation between the Member States , bearing in mind , furthermore , the intensification of terrorist actions within the European Union .
Also , the Member States must promote a commitment to rejecting any form of violence among their young people .
Of the four main recommendations in this report ( the definition of the crime of terrorism and applicable penalties , removal of the formal extradition procedure , the application of the principle of mutual recognition of criminal judgments and the European search and arrest warrant ) , I wanted to specifically highlight the last one relating to compensation for the victims of terrorism which , perhaps , has been the one least mentioned by other Members . In this respect , I wish to highlight the fact that this House already adopted , on 24 November 2000 , a report for which I had the honour of being rapporteur , which determined , for the first time , the definition of victims and their role in the judicial process .
Lastly , I would like to stress that , if we are capable of implementing the recommendations of this report , we will have taken a very significant step in developing the European area of freedom , security and justice .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Watson for his work , laying out the role the European Union must play in the fight against terrorism .
I would also like to thank the President of Parliament , Nicole Fontaine , for her personal attitude on opening this sitting in greeting the family of a victim of terrorism , the Councillor from the Union of the Navarrese People , José Javier Múgica , whose widow and three children were present in the Chamber and who have asked me to pass on their thanks to the whole House and to its President .
This Parliament has managed to become a torchbearer in the European fight against terrorism .
It was the first Chamber to produce a recommendation in writing that it was necessary to politically isolate political parties which do not condemn terrorism .
And it has been this Parliament which has managed to gather more than 400 signatures of Members of this House in a public commitment to combat the terrorism of ETA .
We are now discussing the Watson report , and in this regard I would like to stress the need for the Union to have a European search and arrest warrant which replaces the formal extradition procedure for terrorist crimes as soon as possible .
Because terrorism , and specifically the terrorism of ETA , affects all the citizens of Europe , not only the victims , but even Members of this House .
I regret that Mrs Dührkop is not present due to illness .
She could have told us of how ETA deprived her of her husband , Senator Casas .
My own wife and family have also been subject to three attacks , which cost the life of a policeman .
And other Members could also speak of their suffering .
Spain and other places in Europe suffer terrorism .
We are not going to indulge in theorising , because we are aware that , as the Watson report proposes , we have to oblige the Member States to finally reach an agreement , because terrorism represents the greatest violation of human rights suffered by the European people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to stress the very practical , realistic and topical nature of this report .
Indeed , as well as violent terrorism , it talks about a less explosive , very widespread terrorism operating under cover of political groupings whose objective is clearly to fight against democratic systems .
Recitals E , F and G make this clear , stressing that terrorism is on the increase in almost all the European countries and that the nature of terrorism is changing radically , but that there are also , according to recital G , in particular , international networks enjoying strong - as the recital says - logistical and financial support .
Well then , that is precisely what happened in Genoa during the G8 period .
International terrorist organisations used the Black Blocks to exploit genuinely peaceful organisations , working under cover of groups purporting to be non-violent and their complicitous leaders , who were supported in turn by the parties of the Italian and European left , which even lent them the platform of the European Parliament yesterday to hurl frenzied abuse at the Italian government and against the values of democracy and respect for people ' s ideals , values which Parliament supports and develops .
This too , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is terrorism : it may be less potent but it is still effective .
Recital M and recommendation No 3 state this explicitly , and Amendment No 2 , tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , is also negative evidence of this for , if it were to be adopted , this amendment would have Parliament believe that where the democratic and Constitutional structure of a country is working properly there is no terrorism .
Well then , following this reasoning , we could cheerfully label Spain , Ireland and maybe even Italy as undemocratic countries with dysfunctional Constitutions , whereas their governments are the victims of terrorism , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , and cannot be held accountable for it .
This too is a form of terrorism .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to begin by congratulating Mr Watson on the excellent report he has presented us .
He is right to emphasise the need for effective , clear and rapid measures to prevent and combat all acts of terrorism whatever form they may take and whatever they may be trying to achieve .
We reject and condemn all terrorist acts , which are unacceptable because of the blind violence that characterises them and which mainly affect innocent citizens .
We know that terrorism is one of the most terrible challenges facing our societies .
Over the last ten years , the European Union has seen an increase in the number of violent and terrorist acts .
This increase demonstrates that traditional methods of judicial and police cooperation are inadequate , particularly if we take account of the fact that new forms of terrorism are continually arising , such as computer or environmental terrorism .
We also know that these acts increasingly stem from the activity of international organised networks , which manage to exploit the various legal loopholes and the diversity of national legislation .
It is deplorable that most Member States do not have specific legislation in this field .
Only six Member States , including Portugal , have specific legislation and out of these six , only four , again including Portugal , have adopted a definition of the concept of terrorism in their legislation .
By adopting the principle of solidarity in the fight against terrorism , the Treaty of Amsterdam has opened up new possibilities for coordinated action by the European Union .
With the commitments given in Tampere , terrorism has become an integral part of the global approach to fighting crime .
The report we are now debating warrants our support , particularly because it advocates the approximation and harmonisation of the legislation of the fifteen Member States .
Mr President , being the penultimate speaker - Commissioner Vitorino has the honour of closing the debate - exempts me from expressing many considerations which have been expressed by previous speakers , and they have done so very well .
I am only going to make two points .
One of them is addressed to those Members who have said that what we are voting on today , this arrest warrant , replaces extradition ; that is not the case at all ; it accompanies extradition for certain crimes which are particularly odious , such as a terrorist crime , precisely so that the European Union may become more efficient .
And I am going to make my second point , Mr President . I believe that if we look back to 1992 when this Parliament voted in favour of the Maastricht Treaty , we will see that there were considerable gaps in the issues of justice and internal affairs within the third pillar .
It was a great innovation that the European Union was going to deal with issues which had always been at the heart of the Member States .
Very little time has passed since then , practically seven years , since Maastricht entered into force , and nevertheless , what progress has been made !
Progress has not just been made in terms of European solidarity on a specific problem , the terrorism of ETA , which is extraordinarily important and which is of fundamental importance politically ; but progress has also been made in the construction of Europe .
This is the way to move forward together in Europe and to deal with the real concerns of the citizens , as has been said here .
Therefore , as well as expressing gratitude for European solidarity , I would like to say that this Watson report - and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , who has made great efforts - also represents a very important milestone on this journey which we , including all of us here in this European Parliament , are making together in the construction of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , underpinning the European Union and its Member States is the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , the guarantee of human dignity and the protection of individuals and institutions enshrined in the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights .
All of these rights can be breached by acts of terrorism .
In a completely democratic setting , such as we have in the Union and in its Member States , terrorist acts can never be justified , irrespective of where they are carried out or their aim .
Acts of terrorism must never be considered to be political crimes or as crimes connected with , or inspired by , political motives .
Terrorism must never be considered to be a way of solving a problem facing an individual or a group , regardless of its nature .
Over the last few years , Europe has seen an increase in terrorist activity within its borders , characterised by a profound change in the nature of the acts carried out .
The actual or potential impact of armed attacks has become increasingly destructive and lethal as a consequence of technological changes taking place in the arms and explosives sector .
New forms of terrorism are emerging as a result of the on-going and rapid development of information technologies , electronic databases and computer equipment .
Terrorists are able to exploit differences between the legal systems of various Member States and the difficulties in extraditing such people , especially when such an act is not covered by law in a given State .
This aspect illustrates , as has been said several times during the debate , the inadequacy of traditional forms of judicial and police cooperation in combating terrorism .
There is , therefore , a greater need today than ever before to adopt measures to fight terrorism by drafting legislative proposals designed to punish such acts .
The institutions of the European Union , in particular the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council , have continually condemned terrorism at a political level .
Unfortunately , we have been called upon unusually frequently to state this position as a result of the terrorist actions of ETA in Spain .
Our solidarity with the Spanish people and especially with the victims of terrorism in Spain is unequivocal and unceasing .
We must build on this solidarity with more effective actions .
This is why Article 29 of the Treaty of Amsterdam refers specifically to common action in three areas : closer cooperation between police forces , customs agencies and other competent authorities , including Europol , closer cooperation between Member States ' judicial authorities and approximation , where necessary , of criminal law provisions .
Under Article 2 of the Europol Convention , terrorism falls within the competence of Europol .
Pursuant to Article 31 ( b ) of the Treaty establishing the European Union and the Tampere conclusions , which states that formal extradition procedures between Member States will be abolished for individuals trying to escape justice , to be replaced by a simple transfer , the Commission has already announced its intention to present an initiative designed to abolish formal extradition procedures between Member States for certain types of crime and to create a ' European search and arrest warrant ' . The purpose is to combat not only terrorism but also other heinous transnational crimes .
Similarly , the Commission intends to propose an approximation of criminal legislation on acts of terrorism , pursuant to Article 31 ( e ) of the Treaty establishing European Union , not only covering traditional forms of terrorism , but also its newer incarnations .
Lastly , the act of directing , promoting , supporting or belonging to a terrorist organisation must also be subject to a common standard .
The Commission shares Parliament ' s concerns with regard to protecting the victims of terrorism and intends to present , in the course of the current presidency , a Green Paper on compensating victims of crime in general and of terrorist crime in particular within the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in conclusion , the Commission agrees with the principles set out in the excellent report by Mr Watson , whom I wish to warmly congratulate , and with the guidelines contained in the draft recommendation that Parliament is considering today .
Following the work that we have been carrying out over the last few months , in close consultation with all Member States - and I must emphasise , with all Member States and not just with some - the Commission intends to propose to Parliament and to Council , in September , legislative initiatives on harmonising the definition of terrorism , on adopting the European search and arrest warrant and on replacing extradition procedures with rapid handover mechanisms for certain types of crime , including terrorism , thereby , I am sure , fully complying with the requests made in your draft recommendation .
Thank you , Commissioner Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Madam President , as well as thanking the Commissioner for what he has just said , I would like to ask the presidency , in order to reinforce the gesture we have made by means of this debate , to allow us to vote on the Watson report first , not last , as is currently planned .
Mr Barón Crespo , given the applause , I think that the House fully agrees with this proposal and , since there are no objections , we shall begin voting with the vote on the Watson report .
Welcome
Madam President , I must insist on an issue which I have raised several times during these points of order .
Since the last part session in this Parliament , thirty people from Africa have died on Spanish beaches trying to find work in Europe .
During this same period , another 2 800 have been detained and I believe it is now time , Madam President , for this Parliament to deal with this very fundamental problem which should make us all ashamed and which requires this Parliament ' s action .
VOTE
Madam President , Recital M evidently refers to the definition which the Council of Europe gives for the term ' terrorist act ' .
In fact , reference to this definition is also made further down in that report .
I should like to ask whether the Dutch text of Recital M could be brought completely into line with this definition .
The Dutch text should read : " ... en die leiden tot streven naar ... " , and not only : " ... die leiden ... " , because there is no link between the violence and the pursuit at the moment , and it is clear that the Council of Europe did intend this link in the definition .
Of course , Mrs Maes , I can assure you that we take great care that all the language versions are in line , as it is very important to respect what is meant .
( Parliament adopted the recommendation )
Simplified procedure - Procedure without report
Proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 685 / 2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 April 2001 in order to provide for the distribution of authorisations among Member States received through the Agreement between the European Community and Romania establishing certain conditions for the carriage of goods by road and the promotion of combined transport ( COM ( 2001 ) 334 - C5-0273 / 2001 -2001 / 0138 ( COD ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Recommendation without debate ( A5-0268 / 2001 ) by Mr Hatzidakis , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and Romania establishing certain conditions for the carriage of goods by road and the promotion of combined transport ( 8010 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0317 / 2001 - 2001 / 0032 ( AVC ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0281 / 2001 ) by Mr Ruffolo , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on Cultural Cooperation in the European Union ( 2000 / 2323 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0279 / 2001 ) by Mr Schmitt , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on establishing common rules in the field of civil aviation and creating a European Aviation Safety Agency ( COM ( 2000 ) 95 - C5-0663 / 2000 - 2000 / 0246 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0266 / 2001 ) by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Protocol No 9 to the Act of Accession of Austria , Finland and Sweden as regards the system of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austria ( COM ( 2000 ) 862 - C5-0769 / 2000 - 2000 / 0361 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0538 / 2001 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Enlargement of the European Union
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0251 / 2001 ) by Mrs Carlsson , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Estonia ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 704 - C5-0604 / 2000 - 1997 / 2177 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0252 / 2001 ) by Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Latvia ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 706 - C5-0606 / 2000 - 1997 / 2176 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0253 / 2001 ) by Mr Souladakis , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Lithuania ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 707 - C5-0607 / 2000 - 1997 / 2178 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0254 / 2001 ) by Mr Gawronski , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Poland ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 709 - C5-0609 / 2000 - 1997 / 2174 ( COS ) ]
Before the vote on Amendment No 2 by the Group of the Greens
Madam President , I had to wait to see whether the amendment proposed by the Liberal Group was carried .
We are now looking at Amendment No 2 , which relates to the BSE risk in the candidate countries .
This risk is only referred to in the report on Poland .
This is why I have tabled an amendment referring to the fact that this risk is also present in other countries , because the wording would otherwise have amounted to discrimination against Poland .
But I made a mistake : the amendment says ' in all other countries ' , but it should read ' in other countries ' .
There are different risk categories .
Subject to that alteration , I recommend that the House adopt this amendment so as not to discriminate against Poland .
( Parliament agreed to take the oral amendment into account )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0255 / 2001 ) by Mr Jürgen Schröder , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Czech Republic ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 703 - C5-0603 / 2000 - 1997 / 2180 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0256 / 2001 ) by Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Slovakia ' s application for membership to the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ) ( 2000 ) 711 - C5-0611 / 2000 - 1997 / 2173 ( COS ) ]
Before the vote
Madam President , I should like to ask the House to approve an oral amendment to the Slovakia report , which reads as follows - in German :
' bedauert , dass es nicht gelungen ist , einen Kompromiss im Hinblick auf die Neugliederung der Verwaltungsbezirke zu erreichen , der auch die Zustimmung der Vertreter der ungarischen Minderheit finden konnte ' [ regrets that it was not possible to reach a compromise over the rearrangement of administrative districts which was also acceptable to the representatives of the Hungarian minority ] .
( NL ) Madam President , I am making this suggestion in order for it to gain broad approval .
I have also discussed this matter with the rapporteur .
Mr Oostlander , is this amendment at the beginning of the report and could we vote on it now ?
Does it duplicate any other amendment ?
That depends on the Group of the Greens .
If they want to vote on their amendment first , then this amendment , which is a weaker version , could be voted on subsequently .
In that case , I shall consult Mr Wiersma .
.
Madam President , given the formulation of the amendment and given our concerns about the on-going discussion in Slovakia on regional decentralisation , we can support this amendment , also in the context of the knowledge that negotiations and talks are going on about the competences of these provinces .
We all hope that the coalition government in Slovakia will find a solution to the overall package of regional decentralisation .
In that framework , as rapporteur , I support this amendment .
I hope my group will follow my lead .
Madam President , if I understood Mr Oostlander correctly , this relates to our Amendment No 3 .
We are prepared to withdraw it , and the text would then be worded in accordance with Mr Oostlander ' s oral formulation .
Fine . I think this proposal is perfectly acceptable .
( The House agreed to take the oral amendment into account )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0257 / 2001 ) by Mr Queiró , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Hungary ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 705 - C5-0605 / 2000 - 1997 / 2175 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0258 / 2001 ) by Mr Van Orden , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission ' s 2000 Regular Report on Bulgaria ' s progress towards accession [ COM ( 2000 ) 701 - C5-0601 / 2000 - 1997 / 2179 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0259 / 2001 ) by Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Romania ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 710 - C5-0610 / 2000 - 1997 / 2172 ( COS ) ]
Before the vote
Madam President , I want to clarify my remarks of yesterday on my report to avoid any misunderstanding on inter-country adoption by Spanish families of Romanian children in the last ten years .
I can say categorically that the vast majority of these cases have been processed fully and properly by the Spanish authorities and by the families in question .
Indeed I know that they have resulted in many happy outcomes , some of which are known to my Spanish colleagues here in Parliament .
I can add that the authorities in the European Union Member States have , of course , been acting with full propriety on this sensitive matter and that none have acted more rigorously than the Spanish authorities .
I am grateful to Spanish colleagues here for drawing this need for clarification to my attention and in particular to Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado and Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra .
I look forward to continued fruitful cooperation with all of my Spanish colleagues in this Parliament in the future .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0260 / 2001 ) by Mr Volcic , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Slovenia ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 712 - C5-0612 / 2000 - 1997 / 2181 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0261 / 2000 ) by Mr Poos , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Cyprus ' s membership application to the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 702 - C5-0602 / 2000 - 1997 / 2171 ( COS ) ]
Before the vote on Amendment No 16 by the ELDR Group
Madam President , unlike Mr Wiersma , I will simply speak in Dutch .
A minor error has crept into the nominal list , namely Amendment No 16 of the Liberals is identical to Amendment No 9 of the Group of the Greens .
This is as we agreed . It therefore seems more practical to me if we combine the votes on these to avoid confusion .
There are no objections from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , so I shall put to the vote Amendment No 16 , from the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Group and Amendment No 9 , from the Group of the Greens .
The rapporteur is also in favour of this .
Before the vote on Amendment No 5 by the Group of the Greens
Madam President , we would like to present an oral amendment to Amendment No 5 .
Instead of " triggered by unrest and acts of violence starting in the early sixties " , we wish to replace the words " triggered by " with the words " which followed " .
The intent of this oral amendment is just to clarify any misunderstanding that would justify the invasion by Turkey of Cyprus .
Are there any objections to taking into consideration the oral amendment ?
Madam President , I must speak against taking this oral amendment into account .
Everyone knows that Cyprus has a complicated history and that mistakes have been made on both sides .
However , this report is not about history - it is a report on the progress made by Cyprus towards accession and , in my view , this amendment has no place in this report .
( The President took note that more than 12 Members rose to oppose taking the oral amendment into account )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0262 / 2001 ) by Mrs Stenzel , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on Malta ' s application for membership of the European Union and the state of negotiations [ COM ( 2000 ) 708 - C5-0608 / 2000 - 1999 / 2029 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0249 / 2001 ) by Mr Collins , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Commission communication to the European Parliament and the Council on the protection of air passengers in the European Union [ COM ( 2000 ) 365 - C5-0635 / 2000 - 2000 / 2299 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0264 / 2001 ) by Mr Gerhard Schmid , on behalf of the Temporary Committee on the ECHELON Interception System , on the existence of a global system for the interception of private and commercial communications ( ECHELON interception system ) ( 2001 / 2098 ( INI ) )
Madam President , when I was speaking on this report I got the numbers of the amendments which I wanted to be put to the vote wrong .
The numbers of the amendments which I recommend should be put to the vote are Nos 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 and 22 .
These are the numbers in the documents for the sitting .
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Watson Report ( A5-0273 / 2001 )
Madam President , I would especially like to thank you for your kindness in inviting the Members present to listen to my 17 - which are actually 16 - explanations of vote , apart from anything else because an anti-Fatuzzo amendment has been tabled in the document amending the Rules of Procedure , which seeks to limit the number of oral explanations of vote delivered during voting time to a maximum of three .
I am therefore very pleased to accept your invitation to the Members to listen to Mr Fatuzzo ' s explanations of vote , the first of which today concerns the Watson report on the role of the European Union in combating terrorism .
The Pensioners ' Party , in the person of myself , voted for the motion . It recommends that , in order to genuinely combat terrorism , absolute silence of the press and television in matters of terrorism should be established .
The terrorists want their crimes to be publicised and the media must refuse to satisfy them .
Directives must be adopted which lay down absolute silence of the press and television where terrorist acts are concerned .
The Ruffolo motion for a resolution on cultural cooperation in the European Union contains numerous positive proposals and proposed amendments to the original Commission proposal , such as :
earmarking 1 % of the gross budget for artistic and cultural works
an annual Commission report on the European Union ' s cultural policy
the three-year cultural cooperation plan
setting up a European observatory for cultural cooperation
converging VAT .
I should like to take this opportunity to point out that one of the main outstanding obstacles to cultural cooperation between the Fifteen is the fact that the Parthenon marbles have been appropriated by the British Museum .
The European Parliament supported the return of the marbles to Greece when it officially adopted the Lomas written statement a few years ago .
I think that we should take more action in this direction .
. Extradition procedures between Member States cannot , in practice , be extinguished without common minimal standards for procedural law in order to guarantee fundamental rights .
The rejection of the Verts / ALE amendment requiring that Member States reach such an agreement means that the report , which is serious and important , is fundamentally flawed .
This is of such fundamental importance to European citizens that regrettably this has prevented me from voting in favour of this report .
I would like to express my support for this own-initiative report , which urges Member States of the European Union to be better coordinated in the fight against terrorist acts .
In recent years , there has been an increase in the number of terrorist activities within the European Union ' s borders and every Member State has been affected by these activities .
Traditional forms of judicial and police cooperation are often found to be inadequate in combating this new form of terrorism , which stems from the activities of networks operating at international level , which are based in several countries and exploit legal loopholes arising from the geographical limits of investigations , sometimes enjoying extensive logistical and financial support .
We must , of course , condemn these acts , which traumatise whole families and create a climate of terror in the areas that are particularly affected .
More importantly , however , we must make firm proposals that seek to put an end to these despicable acts .
This is the aim of the report , which contains some interesting proposals , such as :
the creation of a ' European search and arrest warrant ' with a view to combating terrorism in the context of action against crime , whether organised or not , trafficking in human beings and crimes against children , illegal trafficking in drugs and arms , and corruption and fraud ,
establishing minimum rules at European level relating to the definition of criminal acts and to penalties in the field of terrorism ,
abolishing formal extradition procedures and adopting the principle of mutual recognition of decisions on criminal matters relating to terrorist offences ,
adopting the appropriate legal instruments for the approximation of national legislation concerning the compensation of victims of terrorist crimes .
Like the rapporteur , I also believe it is essential to work on preventing terrorist acts .
To achieve this , Member States must continue to conduct education and social policies that aim to combat all forms of social , economic and cultural exclusion .
Poverty and a lack of education help to create a favourable hunting ground , which can be exploited by fundamentalists .
We can no longer turn a blind eye to these acts , which threaten the democratic future of our societies .
.
The British Conservatives voted in favour of the Watson report in order to send a message that we will give no quarter in the fight against terrorism , and particularly to show solidarity with our colleagues involved in the on-going fight against terrorists , notably ETA .
However , while the Conservatives have a long and proud record of fighting terrorism , our concerns about undue interference and politicisation in due legal process are equally long-standing .
We are anxious that extending Community competence into this area will impair the ability of Member States to take those measures which they consider necessary to tackle this problem .
We feel that it is premature to grant Europol far-reaching powers , and maintain our conviction that different national legal traditions mean that the way forward must be by cooperation , not harmonisation .
We will never , under any circumstances , give succour to those who seek to use force to undermine legitimate democratic institutions .
, in writing . I regret that I found myself unable to support the request for Parliamentary unanimity on this report .
As a Green , my preferred route is always non-violence and I believe there is absolutely no justification for violence as a means to change in a democratic state .
Where the ballot box is an option , violence is not .
I welcome the distinctions made in paragraph T in relation to third countries .
My " no " vote should not be interpreted as support for terrorism but is based on one key factor .
This is the issue of mutual recognition of decisions on criminal matters .
Unless there are agreed common minimum standards for procedural law , this should not go ahead .
We cannot use the fight against terrorism to undermine the legal procedures and democratic safeguards which differ between Member States .
Parliament chose not to adopt Amendment 1 which would have demanded these minimum standards .
I must also admit to an underlying unease about supporting a report which omits certain issues such as state terrorism , the proscription of certain organisations active in non-EU countries and the basis for such decisions and , indeed , the lack of a definition of " environmental terrorism " .
However , the lack of a commitment to minimum legal safeguards is the deciding factor in my voting " no " .
. I decided to vote in favour of this reform although I have many reservations about the effect of some of the recommendations .
I do so in the hope that we will see meaningful cooperation between Member States in the eradication of violence and terrorism .
Ulster Unionists have stood against violence for decades and will continue to do so in the future .
We see the globalisation of terrorists with the arrest in Columbia of three activists in the IRA .
This brings home how widespread terrorism and the effects of terrorism have become .
Ruffolo Report ( A5-0281 / 2001 )
Madam President , two weeks ago I was in Verona .
I went to the Verona Arena to see a wonderful opera by Giuseppe Verdi , La Traviata .
It was , I am sad to say , the first time I had ever seen an opera live , and it was so beautiful that I feel it is right to make it possible for the whole of Europe to enjoy these cultural products .
Therefore , I welcome reports such as Mr Ruffolo ' s report on cultural cooperation .
Clearly , it is not just Italy which has cultural activities to share but the other 14 States of the European Union and the 12 candidate countries as well .
In its explanatory statement , the report calls on the Commission and Member States to show a greater commitment to culture .
There is a reason for this , since the report also states that , in 2000 , a mere 0.1 % of the Community budget was earmarked for the cultural and audiovisual sectors .
What does the report mean , then , by the terms relating to ' European culture ' , which are constantly used by the authors ?
Apart from the fact that this expression itself is ambiguous , how does European culture differ from universal culture , which is rich with contributions from every continent ?
In one of its recitals , the report includes sectors such as copyright , resale rights , liberalisation of the telecommunications market , international competition law ( including funding of cinematographic works , resale price maintenance for books , theatre subsidies and media concentration ) in the context of culture .
We claim that we are talking about culture when we are actually referring to markets , if not business !
On the other hand , the report does not raise any of the most basic questions .
Is everyone living within the European Union guaranteed access to culture ?
Do they all have even a reasonable level of literacy ?
Were they all able to receive an education that suited their abilities ?
These questions do not interest the European authorities , which are too preoccupied with regulating competition in the cultural business world .
We therefore voted against this report .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament , the body that represents the aspirations of European citizens , has taken its right of initiative to urge the European Commission to propose firm measures in the area of culture .
Since 1974 , the European Parliament has stressed the importance of developing a cultural policy at Community level , and for a good reason .
Culture is a fundamental aspect of the European Union ' s identity .
Culture is a basis which affords people the opportunity to meet , to relate to one another and experience a shared sense of belonging .
Of course , this does not involve putting forward a European cultural policy that seeks to impose uniformity .
On the contrary , this involves emphasising cultural and linguistic diversity and the sharing of a common heritage .
At a time when our citizens are questioning Europe , we must work in order to enhance the feeling of European citizenship .
This is a prerequisite for building a European constitution .
This is the background to Mr Ruffolo ' s report , which suggests several routes to follow .
The Commission is also requested :
to present to the Council and European Parliament a draft recommendation , in which the Commission will undertake to submit an annual report on cultural policies of the Union and of the Member States , and in which the Commission will call on the Member States to contribute actively to drawing up and carrying out a three-year cultural cooperation plan ;
to create a European agency to monitor cultural cooperation ;
to convene , as part of the review of the Culture 2000 framework programme , a second Cultural Forum which , on the basis of this resolution , will redefine the values , objectives and forms of cultural cooperation in Europe ;
to carry out a study into the opportunities for bringing principles more closely into line at Community level governing the tax treatment of works of art and artistic work ;
to restate , in view of the forthcoming WTO summit , the position of the European Union .
I shall conclude by reiterating that , as rapporteur for the Sixth Research and Development Framework Programme , I proposed amendments that seek to enhance cultural research .
. ( DE ) Closer European cultural cooperation is a welcome and desirable aim .
I voted for the Ruffolo report because I firmly believe that closer cultural cooperation will be mutually enriching .
Familiarisation with other cultures helps nations and peoples to understand each other and fosters peace .
The culture and language of the migrant communities in Europe must not go unmentioned in this context , and I call on the European Union to ensure that some of its financial aid is used to support the cultural activity of these ethnic groups .
Cultural cooperation in Europe is a fundamental aspect of closer European integration .
By learning about each other ' s cultures , the people of our countries can undoubtedly develop a sense of European identity .
I consider this particularly important , because Europe is still remote from its people , for whom it is something situated in distant Brussels .
Besides its unity , Europe is also characterised by its cultural diversity .
That is of inestimable value and helps peoples to live together in peace .
I am determined to work for a Europe whose inhabitants do not merely coexist but , above all , engage in fruitful interaction .
Schmitt Report ( A5-0279 / 2001 )
Madam President , as you know , the number of elderly people and pensioners has been increasing constantly for some time now , which makes me very happy as representative of the Pensioners ' Party .
This ever increasing number of pensioners and elderly people travels throughout the world , especially within the European Union , and is choosing to do so increasingly frequently by air .
These pensioners have complained to me a number of times about the treatment they receive on board aircraft , the times of flights and delays , and I can therefore only commend and vote for a report which seeks to improve the quality of air transport .
It is now urgent to have consistent and common safety requirements in air transport .
Air traffic has increased considerably and we must treat safety issues with particular attention .
We agree that this is a necessity .
However , we are not in favour of creating a European Aviation Safety Agency ( AESA ) on the basis proposed .
The issues at stake are obviously related to the increase in international air travel .
The AESA has been created to coincide with the liberalisation of our air space and is an instrument which can be used in the war with the United States over requirements .
Rather than this being an attempt to achieve consistent safety requirements , this is an attempt to increase competition .
The AESA is needed in order to bring about the proposed deregulation in air transport and , in the future , navigation staff and services will also be affected by the decisions taken by this agency .
At the moment , navigation staff are actually informed and consulted , but they are never acknowledged as experts .
This gives cause for concern at a time when massive structural changes and lay-offs are being made at AOM , Sabena and Swissair as well as at other airlines .
This agency must focus on one task alone , namely safety ; employees must be involved in this work and the experience and knowledge of each Member State must be made consistent across the board .
- ( DE ) Mr Schmitt ' s report is supported by the majority of my group .
The advantages of creating a European Aviation Safety Agency in place of 15 national agencies are undisputed :
It can create uniform authorisation procedures ,
it can standardise the rules on air safety and environmental protection , and
it can create standard provisions relating to the safety of products , persons and installations .
At the same time , the new Agency would be a recognised partner for aviation authorities in other parts of the world .
The functions of the Agency are clearly defined : consultancy , providing technical support to the Commission , issuing the requisite official documentation , conducting checks and inspections , monitoring the implementation of statutory provisions , devising and funding research projects and cooperating with the agencies of non-EU countries .
The Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has adopted other important amendments which would make the Agency more independent of the Commission as well as defining the obligation of the Agency to keep the European Parliament informed .
My group also attaches importance to the provisions that are designed to increase transparency .
These would subject the Agency to the following controls :
General Community budgetary procedures would apply to the Agency ,
Community anti-fraud legislation would apply to the Agency , and
the Agency would be subject to regular external assessments .
For these reasons the vast majority of our group voted in favour of the report .
. ( NL ) There is a grave risk that the aviation industry is facing chaos .
As various companies charging different rates and offering different levels of service vie for the same busy connections , the chance of carelessness and risk-taking is greater than in public transport on the ground , which has been reasonably well regulated , so far .
Moreover , airspace is becoming increasingly crowded , leading to many near misses .
The fact that aviation is not only dangerous but also unhealthy is evident from the incidence of thrombosis which occurs in passengers who are cooped up in very confined spaces for long periods of time .
That is why I would welcome a body that can unambiguously implement the best possible safety rules in Europe .
If we consider twelve years of a ' Joint Aviation Authority ' to be too non-committal and wish to set up a new body which , in agreement with EU legislation , must achieve the highest security level possible , the question is raised whether this new European agency for safety in aviation should be independent of the European Commission .
It is certainly unjustifiable to deregulate aviation traffic in the short term for the benefit of what we call a ' single sky ' , where air safety functions are given to competing companies , existing control services are dismantled and airline companies are in a position to reduce their staffing levels further .
.
I would like warmly to welcome Mr Schmitt ' s report which calls for the establishment of a European Safety Agency with a view to improving air safety .
If this proposal comes to fruition , a uniform , high level of safety in civil aviation with common safety requirements will be created .
There are many benefits , both financial and practical , to be gained by creating a single pan-European Aviation Safety Agency : if various national regulatory and certification procedures can be replaced by a single European , uniform system , various asymmetries will be abolished .
This will ultimately lead to lower costs , a standardisation of procedures and more importantly , less red tape and bureaucracy .
Indeed , it is easier to monitor one safety system as opposed to fifteen .
It is highly important that passengers feel safe when travelling on the airlines and establishing common European rules on civil aviation will go some way to achieving this .
Swoboda Report ( A5-0266 / 2001 )
Madam President , Mr Swoboda has tabled a document on heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austrian territory , particularly the valleys and the beautiful areas there are in Austria with which we are or would like to be familiar .
I very much hope that the European Union will strive to ensure that noise and other pollution from heavy goods vehicles and other vehicles are dealt with more resolutely , so that the air remains clean and pure , particularly in the residential and tourist areas frequented by pensioners and elderly people .
Madam President , allow me to explain my vote on the Swoboda report .
Although the problem of transalpine traffic to which Mr Swoboda refers in his report primarily affects Austria , it also relates to the entire Brenner corridor .
That is where we have the problem , which derives from the fact that the proposal and the ideas presented by the Commission lose a very great deal of credibility as far as the area between Verona and Munich is concerned by seeking to amend a Protocol to the Act of Accession unilaterally .
We are in favour of tighter ecological restrictions .
We are in favour of measures if they respect the interests and equal rights of the people and companies that operate in the area in question .
But it is absolutely imperative that contractual law be upheld , both now and in the future .
. ( IT ) By agreement with Europe , Austria and Switzerland have laid down limits for heavy goods vehicles , and new railways , currently being built or designed , are planned .
This is part of the trans-European transport network , which proposes the Turin-Lyon rail link as an alternative to road travel .
The Commission recommended the route for the Aosta-Martigny tunnel , which was restored by the authorities in the Val d ' Aosta , in accordance with the Protocol on the Implementation of the Alpine Convention in the field of Transport signed by the States and soon to be signed by the Commission .
The Mont Blanc and Fréjus tunnels will now serve as a test to see whether the intention is genuine : the former was closed to traffic following the tragedy whereas the latter has seen a great increase in the transiting of heavy goods vehicles .
The communities of the valleys leading to the tunnels voiced their anxiety and concern : in the Chamonix valley there was a request for a ban on heavy goods vehicles and in the Val d ' Aosta a request was made for a quota system .
There are no limits on heavy goods traffic in the western Alps .
Italy and France are going to establish such limits - I recall a draft law I submitted to the Chamber of Deputies - together with the local communities , and communicate them to Europe so that Europe can modify the trans-European transport network and specify the changes in the Commission ' s White Paper , which will also cover vehicle transit through the Alps .
Measures must be laid down to govern road tunnels between Italy and France , in order to achieve a uniform system throughout the Alps now that the Mont Blanc tunnel is being reopened .
- ( DE ) We , the undersigned Members of the European Parliament from the Austrian People ' s Party ( ÖVP ) and the European People ' s Party ( PPE ) , voted unanimously today against the Commission ' s proposal for the amendment of Protocol No 9 to the Act of Accession of Austria , Finland and Sweden regarding the system of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austria , an amendment which would advance the expiry date of the so-called 108 % clause whereby a ceiling is imposed on the number of journeys and which would not replace the clause with another form of restriction .
This plan devised by the Commission is contrary to the letter and spirit of the provisions that were negotiated at the time of Austria ' s accession to the EU .
We , for our part , continue to put our faith in the 108 % clause ; by virtue of our vote on paragraph 2 ( a ) to ( c ) of the legislative resolution , we have helped to ensure that a consensus of all the European institutions - the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament - will be found at all future stages in the quest for appropriate and sustainable solutions to transport problems in the areas designated as sensitive , areas which include Austria and the Alpine region .
The conclusion that Hannes Swoboda reaches in his report on the Commission proposal regarding the system of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austria , namely that we should reject the document presented by the Commission , has my own and my fellow group members ' full support .
We go along with the rapporteur ' s argument that the ceiling on the volume of traffic on transit routes through Austria must be maintained because the original aims of Protocol No 9 on road and rail transport and combined transport in Austria have not yet been achieved .
These aims involved the reduction of nitrogen emissions and noise levels and the improvement of road safety .
Instead of progress towards these goals , we have seen a steady rise in the number of journeys , which rose by 16 % between 1993 and 2000 on the main haulage route through the Inn Valley and the Brenner alone and by 52 % in Austria as a whole - in other words , a total of 580 188 additional journeys !
The EU ceiling of 40 milligrams of nitrogen dioxide per cubic metre is constantly being exceeded by more than the tolerance margin in readings taken at the Vomp measuring station on the A12 autobahn .
The same applies to the other Alpine passes that are crossed by transit routes .
Despite a few reductions in pollutant emissions that have resulted from technical improvements to heavy goods vehicles , the overall level of carbon dioxide emissions has risen .
If the original aim of continuous and sustainable reduction of pollutant emissions is to be achieved , the number of transit journeys by heavy goods vehicles must be reduced .
For these reasons , we advocate rejection of the Commission ' s proposal .
To add another proposal to our debate , let me say that efforts should be made to follow the Swiss example and create rail links for the transport of heavy goods vehicles through Austria .
Motion for a resolution on the enlargement process ( B5-0538 / 2001 )
Madam President , in relation to the enlargement reports - not just Mr Brok ' s report , but also those on the individual applicant states - it is interesting to see that Mr Brok has recognised the rejection of the Nice Treaty in Ireland .
He has confirmed what we have said all along , that basically the Nice Treaty is not necessary for enlargement .
Enlargement can go ahead without the Nice Treaty .
It is deplorable that our own government is trying to force people to change their minds .
In relation to the accession reports on the individual states , I have grave concern about the emphasis on the common foreign and security aspect , the fact that countries are being coerced into joining Nato .
The report on Malta , for example , deplores the fact that Malta is divided on the issue of membership .
I believe it is up to the Maltese themselves to decide on whether or not they want to join .
If there is a clear division , then there should be a free choice .
In Malta , Ireland is being used as an example of how you can be a Member of the European Union and a wonderful economic success and still remain neutral .
All of this is false .
We have to stop dangling artificial carrots in front of the applicant states and be honest .
Ireland is no longer neutral .
It is cooperating in common foreign and security and defence policy .
Ireland ' s economic success is not solely down to the EU , as many economic experts will tell you .
Madam President , in terms of the European Union ' s enlargement process in general , I have to say that I voted for the motion .
The Pensioners ' Party supports the enlargement of the European Union for two reasons : first and foremost , the States of Central and Eastern Europe lived for over 50 years under a totally oppressive dictatorship and their request to be part of Europe with us deserves recognition .
The other reason , Madam President , is that there are already a great many pensioners and elderly people in the current European Union .
With the accession of the candidate countries they will become even more numerous , and I can only rejoice that there will be lots of pensioners in Europe who might vote for the Pensioners ' Party in the future .
There are three reasons why we welcome the debate that has just been held in Parliament on the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union .
First of all , it appears that , as of 2004 , around 10 of the 12 candidate countries ( with the likely exceptions of Romania and Bulgaria ) may all join at the same time .
The Members belonging to the Mouvement pour la France think that this is excellent news , which will allow us to make up for some lost time , after such a long wait .
The second reason is that we have remarked upon a change in tone when referring to the candidate countries , which are now treated like States that are worthy of respect .
The resolution even stresses that the European Union must ensure that the dignity of the people of the candidate countries is never compromised by making inappropriate demands upon them .
We had often condemned the haughty and even contemptuous attitude of the federalists , who demanded that the countries in the East relinquish their sovereignty .
Let us hope that this new development will provide more than just a change in vocabulary .
Lastly , the third reason we welcome the debate is that paragraph 10 of the resolution appears to accept a more flexible Europe that is made up of various circles .
In our view , this is a more realistic position , on the condition , however , that the circle in which France is placed is not dominated by ultra-federalism .
This would allow flexibility for all countries , in return for increased rigidity for a sub-set , which would be illogical .
The resolution still contains , however , some unsatisfactory , even unacceptable paragraphs .
For example , it is a contradiction to demand better monitoring of external borders of candidate countries as well as a relaxation of their asylum policy .
It is hardly responsible to call for a structural policy to be applied to the whole of the European Union following enlargement , whereas we should instead focus the policy for a limited period on the new member countries .
It is unacceptable to assert that the lesson to be learned from the Irish referendum is that we need to find a method of revising the treaties , which are likely to provoke such opposition ( Recital E ) .
It appears that the change in tone does not go as far as respect for national democracies that vote ' no ' !
- ( DA ) So that there shall be no doubt that we are well disposed towards admitting the new candidate countries , we have voted in favour of the report .
There are nonetheless quite a few aspects of the report and of the enlargement negotiations as a whole that are particularly open to criticism .
Recital E , in particular , to the effect that ' ... the citizens of Europe do not understand the historic endeavour of the Union to bring peace , security and prosperity to the entire continent ' is strikingly arrogant .
In the roll-call vote , we voted against change , but we are not in principle opposed to changing the procedure for amending the treaties of the European Union .
However , we have misgivings about whether the proposed change would make any practical difference at all to the result it is hoped to achieve by means of a possible convention model .
On the positive side , however , is the fact that paragraph 2 talks about ' devising alternative options as a precaution ' .
. ( FR ) Behind a presentation that is supposed to be optimistic , the description the reports give of the Eastern European states forming the majority of European Union candidate countries is gloomy .
' Worrying levels of corruption ' , ' overpopulation of prisons ' , ' enormous traffic in women and children for the purposes of prostitution and sexual exploitation ' , ' high level of unemployment ' , ' poverty ' , ' seriously damaged environment ' , ' unpromising economic outlook ' , ' acceleration in the spread of the HIV virus ' , ' oppression of minorities ' , ' discrimination against the Roma ' , these are some of the expressions used in relation to one Eastern European country or another , or , in some extreme cases , to all .
Despite this , the report expresses satisfaction with the fact that privatisations are going ahead , even in the health sector , denying healthcare to a significant proportion of the population , and with the fact that foreign investments and exports are on the increase in these countries .
The return of these states to brutal capitalism and the increasing stranglehold of powerful investors from the west are already causing a considerable rise in social inequalities .
However , despite a few sanctimonious warnings given by the reports to the governments of these countries , what they are mainly asking for is for the remaining obstacles to the penetration of foreign capital to be lifted and for ' the flexibility and mobility of work ' to be increased , that is to say , for their working classes to be submitted to a higher level of exploitation .
Being supporters of a completely unified Europe from one end of the continent to the other , we have not voted against enlargement .
Our abstention expresses our opposition to the master and slave relationship that the European Union is seeking to impose on these countries in collaboration with their privileged classes , in addition to the anti-worker policy imposed under the pretext of enlargement .
- ( DA ) We have not voted in favour of Mr Brok ' s decision .
It is an expression of a development of European cooperation that we cannot support .
We do not therefore consider the development of a common defence to be of benefit either to present or future Member States , and we are opposed to involving NATO in a decision concerning enlargement of the EU .
We believe that the decision skates all too easily over the problems created by Schengen for quite a few candidate countries , for example when it comes to regional cohesion in the form of trade , and other contact , with neighbouring States outside the EU . The issue of Kaliningrad ' s future , to which the rapporteur does not give serious treatment , also comes under this heading .
Moreover , the decision has all too little to say about the problems raised by the transitional arrangements demanded by the EU , for example concerning the freedom of movement of the labour force .
Such arrangements would , for one thing , prolong the problem of illegal labour from candidate countries in current Member States and , for another , give people in the candidate countries the sense of being second-class citizens of the EU .
Furthermore , we think that the decision is far too weak when it comes to the agricultural and structural funds .
We welcome the fact that the rapporteur emphasises the necessity of putting both the environment and the social consequences of the arrangements into the equation ; but , if enlargement is to be an equitable process , a minor adjustment in these two crucial areas is far from being sufficient .
Finally , the author ' s arrogance towards countries ' populations is completely incomprehensible , and we wish to retain the right of each individual country ' s population to decide for itself .
. ( PT ) The contradictions contained in this motion for a resolution , to which 31 proposals for amendments have been tabled , show that there are considerable differences of opinion on the prospect of enlargement and the objectives that people wish to achieve .
The European Union ' s leaders have given commitments to the candidate countries that they are now not only behind in fulfilling , but are also making unacceptable demands which could clearly threaten objectives that they are trumpeting and which should actually be the broad guidelines for accession negotiations , such as the peace , development and prosperity of all peoples , taking into consideration the principle of economic and social cohesion .
On the one hand , however , the resolution voted for by a majority of the European Parliament states that " the dignity of the peoples of the candidate countries must never be wounded by insensitive demands from the EU " and the need to correct certain discriminatory aspects that were approved in Nice is acknowledged . On the other hand , it unacceptably ties the enlargement of the European Union to that of NATO .
The resolution expresses satisfaction with the conclusion of the agreements on liberalising agricultural trade and urges further privatisation , bearing in mind current and future obligations within the WTO , whereas , in social terms , it opens the way for transitional periods in the free movement of people , thereby covering the German and Austrian positions , which we reject , of preventing workers from candidate countries obtaining legal status for seven years , .
The motion for a resolution also fails to adequately address the issue of the future budget of the European Union , despite knowing that major disparities exist in the levels of development , not only between the countries of the European Union but also between the average of the fifteen current Member States and that of the twelve countries applying to join the Union , which we cannot accept .
The move towards economic and social cohesion requires a thorough revision of the financial perspectives and a substantial bolstering of Community funds in order at least to maintain current levels of support for cohesion countries , including Portugal , and to give significant support to the development of the candidate countries .
.
( FR ) In this current process of enlargement , the Council uses the same framework for all 12 candidate countries without taking into account the specific nature of those from Eastern Europe , insofar as we are forcing them to change their entire systems , which makes this round of enlargement a qualitatively different issue to any previous enlargement .
The European Union is therefore asking each candidate country to prove their ability to face up to competition by destroying their environment , their system for social protection and their means for a true policy of modernisation and full employment , thereby encouraging the development of poverty and unemployment .
Far from continuing to give gold stars to those who have privatised the most and to those who have reduced their budgetary expenditure the most , there should be an audit of the true socio-economic effects of these measures , a moratorium on privatisations , public aid for development , and the definition of a Europe-wide social plan for the European Union that is open to the East and to the South , protecting employment , the environment , health and standards of living .
Instead of this , the EU is preparing to welcome these new countries into the Community as members of a second division , commanded to apply the acquis communautaire and excluded from the effects of the CAP or even the structural funds .
The citizens of these countries should be consulted beforehand , preferably by means of a referendum , and Europe give the commitment to accept their response whatever it may be .
This is why we have not voted for the process of enlargement to be pursued under these conditions .
. ( FR ) The enlargement process is without doubt a great adventure .
Yet up to this point it has been reduced to the rank of a commercial-style takeover bid or a company merger , instead of being a major event in history , reuniting all the Christian peoples of Europe at a time when the secular enemy once again is threatening the south .
Within this framework of a camp of freedom and light , pitched against a camp of integrationist obscurantism , Ukraine and Russia , the advanced guard of the West , would have comfortably found their place .
The result of this derisory technical fudging of a political issue at the summit is the expression ' acquis communautaire ' .
In around thirty chapters , from agriculture to taxation , via the environment , SMEs , education and transport , the laws of the candidate countries , their administrations , their sociologies and even their morals are being closely examined with a police-style scrutiny that must remind these former countries suffused with a proletarian morality of heavy-handed practices that have still not been forgotten .
Such states are also seeing their penal codes criticised as an obstacle to their accession , because they forbid certain sexual practices .
Many have received lectures on their levels of fraud and corruption , as if European VAT has not been , since 1993 , a major factor for serious tax fraud .
Malta is even being reproached for attracting too many offshore companies because of its favourable tax laws .
As if Ireland has not been guilty of this with the CSFs and as if the United States does not practice this system on an enormous scale ; a practice condemned by the World Trade Organisation , but tolerated by Europe that will climb down as many rungs as is necessary in its submission to the empire .
At no time has enlargement been the opportunity for a dialogue on experiences and the sharing of success stories .
Poland has good reason to point our that its agricultural heritage will be open to a European heritage of 8 million animals slaughtered for foot-and-mouth disease or BSE and 136 000 people incubating the fatal atypical Creutzfeld-Jakob disease .
Instead of enriching and preserving the heritage of the vegetable and animal biodiversity of these Eastern countries , not to mention their heritage of social relations that have not yet been broken by this ultra-capitalist savagery , the European Commission debases this historic meeting to the level of an unconditional annexation .
An Anschluss , in fact .
This explains why the dossier has been entrusted to a German Commissioner and the European Parliament report to a member who is , as if by chance , also German .
Things are , it is true , clearer than ever .
There is enlargement of course , but as in 1990 , it is still German .
The 1945 brackets are being closed .
The Empire is rebuilding itself .
Mitteleuropa is here , everlasting in its geography and its history .
. ( NL ) Mr Brok ' s assumption is based on close ties between NATO and the European Union .
It is true that Poland , the Czech Republic and Hungary were recently persuaded to join NATO with the prospect of a possible acceleration in the accession process to the EU .
This line of thinking takes no account of the fact that four current EU member states , namely Ireland , Sweden , Finland and Austria , do not belong to NATO and neither do they have any ambitions in this direction .
I am opposed to the idea that NATO must be seen as a military organisation of five member states , being the US , the European Union , Canada , Norway and Turkey .
Moreover , in my opinion , Mr Brok ' s views are not only problematical in respect of NATO .
The enlargement of the EU can heighten national contradictions , partly because many of the companies still existing in the east fail to meet the environmental acquis for which we can , at best , expect typical , temporary low-wage industries modelled on the Mexican example in return .
The new Member States will be plagued by the problems of the former DDR on the one hand , and of Mexico , which serves as the US ' s poor backyard , on the other .
Mr Brok ' s optimism ultimately leads to a Europe full of unsolved problems , partly because he disregards all the social issues .
.
( FR ) At a time when the Member States of the European Union are finally putting together , following the Erika catastrophe , a more stringent set of provisions for maritime safety - a field in which the common interest is obvious - it can only be regretted that the space set aside for this crucial subject in the various resolutions relating to the candidate countries directly involved should be so discreet .
No one can forget the images of the wreck of the Erika and the views of its home port , Valetta .
We are all aware that the merchant fleets of six candidate countries appear on the Paris Memorandum blacklist .
In addition to Turkey , these are Malta , Cyprus , Latvia , Romania and Bulgaria .
These countries ' adoption of the Erika I and Erika II packages and their commitment to get on top of the issue of accepting flags of convenience should be made one of the priorities in accession negotiations .
The safety of our coastal regions depends on it .
Carlsson report ( A5-0251 / 2001 )
Madam President , a few days ago , during the summer , I went on holiday to Estonia .
While I was there , I saw a fisherman - although it was summer , it was very cold up there in the north - fishing in the Baltic Sea .
I stopped for a chat and learned that he was a pensioner who was trying to catch a few fish to supplement his pension .
" Why are you doing that ? "
I asked him . " Don ' t you have good pensions ? "
" I am afraid that our pensions are very low " he replied .
I therefore hope that we will make sure that pensions are large enough in all the candidate countries , especially Estonia .
- ( DA ) I have voted against the reports on enlargement of the European Union inasmuch as the real political goal of the EU ' s project of enlargement is the economic and political subjection of the populations of the candidate countries .
It is about annexing a group of countries and not about real negotiations between equal parties .
A long-term strategy for peace and prosperity would be aimed at opening the EU ' s markets instead of making unreasonable demands upon the candidate countries to enact extensive legislation over which they have no influence .
The most important task for the People ' s Movement against the EU is to internationalise grassroots opposition to the EU project as a whole and to work for a free Europe in which there are full opportunities for open cooperation that are not stymied by the EU ' s closed , supranational bureaucracy .
I would like to give an explanation of vote with regard to the votes cast on today ' s enlargement reports and firstly state that I agree with the points Patricia McKenna made concerning foreign and security policy matters in connection with enlargement .
At the same time I wish to say that I voted in error in favour of Amendment No 4 , which was tabled for Mrs Carlsson ' s report , as in fact I opposed this amendment , which I consider to be of dubious value with regard to the area ' s stability .
Schroedter report ( A5-0252 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted for the accession of Latvia to the European Union .
In the Baltic States , there are many cultural treasures which I am sure many pensioners - and many young people as well - from throughout the European Union would like to visit .
It can only be a good thing to have the possibility of seeing these marvellous works of both nature and man in the European Union , which should therefore be enlarged to include Latvia as well .
Souladakis report ( A5-0253 / 2001 )
Madam President , Lithuania has a great problem of energy and unemployment .
I voted for the motion but I call upon the European Union to provide more substantial financial and other aid to combat the lack of energy and the shortage of jobs in the State of Lithuania .
Gawronski report ( A5-0254 / 2001 )
Madam President , Poland must be the first candidate country to enter the European Union .
This is because the peaceful revolution which brought Eastern Europe into the democratic world , the world of democracies , originated precisely in Poland , as we all know , with the work of Solidarnosc and the election of a Polish Pope .
I therefore voted for the motion and I hope that there will soon be Polish representatives with us in this Chamber .
. ( FR ) As a member of the EU-Poland Joint Parliamentary Committee , I am happy to be able to give my opinion on the report by Mr Gawronski .
This is , in fact , an analysis of the state of progress of accession negotiations with Poland and to check that the Copenhagen criteria , the conditions to be fulfilled at both political and economic levels and in terms of the implementation of the acquis communautaire , are being respected .
As far as Poland is concerned , the government has shown its willingness to implement the necessary reforms that will allow it to join the European Union as soon as possible .
It appears that , on the face of it , Poland will be able to participate in the next European elections in 2004 , which I am delighted about .
There remain , however , several recurrent problems , notably in the area of agriculture .
It is extremely important that a compromise agreement be reached between the Polish authorities and the Commission on Poland ' s participation in the common agricultural policy and , on the basis of Commissioner Fischler ' s proposals , to implement a phasing in of direct payments , which should gradually integrate the Polish agricultural sector into the Community system .
It also seems necessary to return to a question that has not been mentioned in the report for it raises too many controversial issues .
All the same , I would like to remind you of the painful problem of the restitution of property confiscated after the Second World War .
I am , of course , aware that the Polish authorities are finding it particularly difficult to solve this problem for both financial and emotional reasons .
However , the debate should be held in such a way that a balanced solution can be found which , hopefully , will deal carefully with all the sensibilities involved .
Lastly , the efforts of the Polish parliament to adapt national law to the acquis communautaire must be highlighted .
It is obvious that these could be seen as measures that simply complicate people ' s daily lives .
A policy of information and communication should therefore accompany such measures to convince the Polish people of the advantages of joining the European Union .
Whatever happens , I would insist on the fact that , for citizens of both Member States and candidate countries , the cost of enlargement in every sense of the word is nothing when compared with the cost of non-enlargement .
We all have a historical responsibility for this matter .
. ( FR ) This report ' urges ' Poland to speed up the effective implementation of the acquis communautaire so that she can respect the commitments she has given and fully benefit from the advantages inherent in accession to the European Union .
But what exactly is the content of the acquis communautaire that the Polish people , especially the Polish farmers , can expect ?
We certainly support the demand of all candidate countries , especially Poland , not to be treated like members of an EU second division .
Yet the CAP reforms and structural funds require much more than strict budgetary calculations .
Agriculture plays a major role in satisfying needs and fundamental rights , from the right to the sovereignty of food to questions of health and the environment , via regional balances and jobs .
Candidate countries such as Poland should participate fully in the definition of an entirely new European agricultural policy .
As far as the Polish industrial machine is concerned , it is whipping itself into shape for a Europe that has demoted it from the rank of favourite to that of outsider in terms of accession .
In fact , the formulae applied have left entire regions disaster stricken , with an official unemployment rate of 16 % .
The socio-economic failure of Poland will be that of so-called ' liberal ' formulae imposed by accession .
This is the reason why we have not voted for this report .
Jürgen Schröder report ( A5-0255 / 2001 )
Madam President , Mr Fatuzzo is not alone here , which is nice for him .
We Members of Parliament are not normally late going to lunch , but I wanted to explain why I voted against Mrs Nicholson of Winterbourne ' s and Mr Schröder ' s reports .
Of course , I want to welcome these countries , the Czech Republic and Romania , to the EU with open arms , but I wanted to protest about Parliament ' s attitude to nuclear power .
It is not our task to advise independent countries on how they are to manage their affairs regarding energy , and our own credibility suffers if we discuss the issue of nuclear power time and time again in a populist manner that ignores the facts .
Numerous international study trips have been made to Temelin , for example , and it meets all the international criteria .
Why should this brand new nuclear power station be demolished ?
Romania , on the other hand , has coal-fired power stations that are 40 years old - they are nearly as old as me - so it is only reasonable for them to build the modern Canadian nuclear plant there .
I must just say that if people in the candidate countries are reading our thoughts on nuclear energy they are almost certainly choking on the coal dust and their food is going down the wrong way as well .
Madam President , I wish to associate myself with the comments just made by Mr Vatanen .
I too did not support the Jürgen Schröder report , specifically because paragraphs 43 and 44 call into question the completion of the Temelin nuclear power plant and , in fact , contradict the earlier paragraph 42 which welcomes the Melk Accord between the Czech Republic , the Austrian government and the European Commission in December 2000 .
The content of that accord and , in particular , the investigations into the environmental impact assessment that was agreed , have substantially been carried out .
On my examination of the information there are no safety reasons why the commissioning of Number 1 reactor should not proceed .
On the basis of this contradiction in the report I did not support it .
Madam President , the Czech Republic has asked to accede to the European Union and I have voted for the motion .
Point 7 of the report , on pages 7 and 8 , says that , in order to reduce the deficit , the Czech Republic must reform its health and pension systems .
I do not agree .
Health and pensions must not be used to balance States ' budgets .
The health and pensions of the citizens must be the last item on a State ' s budget to be altered .
A good administration must come first .
. ( ES ) The Spanish delegation of the PPE-DE has voted in favour of the report by Baroness Nicholson on the accession of Romania to the European Union in view of the explanations given by the rapporteur with regard to the adoption of Romanian children by Spanish families , explanations which I am grateful for .
It considers that , in this way , the concerns of future Spanish mothers and fathers , who have correctly carried out all the necessary procedures for adoption and have then been extremely alarmed by the revision measures and paralysis of cases adopted recently , may be effectively dealt with .
The Spanish delegation of the PPE-DE is actively monitoring the implementation of these measures and will take all necessary action with the Romanian and Community authorities to protect the rights of children to be adopted , by means of the introduction of provisions which will remove any possibility that , under the guise of adoption , cases of trafficking in children may be covered up , as well as the rights of parents who have a generous desire to adopt and who , to this end , are making every kind of sacrifice .
.
( FR ) The report ' is concerned about the rising budget deficit , which , after deducting privatisation receipts , could reach 7 % of gross domestic product in 2001 , and therefore calls on the Czech government to carry out urgently needed reforms to the healthcare and pensions system ' and ' recalls that budgetary consolidation must not be carried through in such a way as to compromise the mid-term objective of social cohesion in accordance with the European Social Model , in particular the fight against poverty and social exclusion ' .
In direct opposition to European ideology , the rapporteur adds , as if in response to pressure from the demonstrations in Prague against the IMF and World Bank summit , that ' future-oriented public investments are urgently needed for the improvement of social protection , public health and education ' ...
This schizophrenia will become more and more apparent between the proclamations of good intentions and the ' liberal ' formulae directed towards mass privatisations and competition .
It is proof of the refusal to draw up an effective balance sheet for failed policy and disintegrating formulae .
We demand a moratorium on these policies and criteria for European construction that do not impose methods that are detrimental to standards of living and basic needs .
For these reasons , we were unable to vote for this report .
. ( DE ) The FPÖ members voted for the enlargement report on the Czech Republic .
However , I wish to reiterate our position on paragraphs 42-44 of the report .
The Melk Accord between Austria and the Czech Republic has failed to achieve the desired results so far .
Its objectives have not been met .
A satisfactory outcome can only be obtained if the Temelin issue is dealt with at European rather than at bilateral level .
What is required , therefore , is a European initiative on the closure of Temelin which sets forth a timetable and financing options for its final phasing out and involves the Commission and the Member States .
With regard to Mr Schröder ' s report I wish to say that hazardous nuclear power stations are not the internal problem of just one country .
For that reason it was important to adopt paragraphs 43 and 44 of the Temelin report .
It is to be hoped that they will give the right message to the Czech government and also that the zero variant will be taken seriously in any discussion of Temelin ' s future .
Wiersma report ( A5-0256 / 2001 )
Slovakia has applied to enter the European Union and is making progress in incorporating the Community acquis into its legal system .
The Pensioners ' Party voted for the accession of this country , and I am pleased to note , as page 14 of the report states , that Slovakia has authorised the use of many different regional languages in its Republic .
This is an example that we ought to follow in all the Member States .
. ( NL ) Unfortunately , the country reports hardly mention the risk of eastern newcomers reverting to their traditional situation pre-1940 , when they were the West ' s poor relations .
At that time they had to export cheap minerals and agricultural products in order to pay for the import of expensive industrial products .
Only by sealing their markets off from disrupting and currency-consuming imports did they manage to protect their industry and create a level of security for 40 years .
If we do not afford the newcomers any sustainable protection , they will not be able to protect themselves against the clearance sale of land and businesses to people living in countries with a stronger economy , nor against the imports from such countries .
This could result in them being condemned to long-term poverty and deprivation .
This also brings with it the risk that the electorate in those countries will favour forces which will promote themselves as protectors of national independence , national identity and the national economy .
Certainly in Slovakia , with its weak economy and Roma and Hungarian minorities which are not favoured by a majority of people , poverty not only incites an aversion to the EU , but also creates internal conflict .
A time bomb is ticking away unnoticed under the EU ' s enlargement plans .
Queiró report ( A5-0257 / 2001 )
I voted for the report on the state of accession negotiations between Europe and Hungary .
Although I fully support this report , I would have preferred it if it had stated that the Hungarian citizens , in company , moreover , with all the other citizens of the States of Europe , should be informed that , in joining the European Union , they will benefit from being able to add the years of work performed in the State in which they live to the years of work they have performed in other States .
Thus , accession to the European Union will bring better , larger pensions for many cross-border workers .
. ( FR ) The European Union promised Hungary a rapid entry into Europe .
However , this promise has not been kept .
This is why the report ' insists ( ... ) on the need to fix firm dates for the conclusion of negotiations and accession - since the Treaty of Nice has now been signed - so as to help forestall any disappointment or even discontent on the part of the Hungarian public ' .
Disappointment is becoming the norm , however .
The amount of time the process is taking is the main reason for this but also the widespread sacrifices we are trying to pass off as a bitter pill that must be swallowed in order to prepare for a brighter future at the heart of the EU , with certain countries having to swallow this very pill without even any guarantee that they will become full members of the EU .
The fear that people will associate social regression with structural adjustment criteria imposed by the IMF or by the EU is shifting the debate .

The report ' welcomes ( ... ) the approximately 60 % rise in the national minimum wages , and calls on the Hungarian government to encourage the signing of collective bargaining agreements by industrial sectors ' yet the substance of the social measures advocated evaporates when the report ' notes the adoption of a new labour code based on the principle of the flexibility and mobility of labour with a view to adapting the rules and organisation of the labour market to the need for economic growth ... '
This is a liberal formula that we do not accept , either for the new candidate countries or for the European Union as it stands today .
For these reasons , we were not able to vote for this report .
. ( PT ) Despite having delivered , as you would expect , a favourable , vote on this report , I must express my disagreement with its conclusion No 13 , which is the consequence of an amendment tabled in committee being adopted .
This amendment requests the Hungarian government remove the provisions of the Penal Code , specifically Article 199 , which discriminates against homosexual men and women .
If this were in fact the issue , the aforementioned conclusion would not require any comment .
The situation is , however , that following consultation with the Hungarian authorities , I have been informed that the penal provision in question only affects homosexual relations involving partners under 18 years of age .
This is not , therefore , a law of sexual discrimination , but one designed to protect minors , which completely changes my position .
Consequently , although I requested a split vote on this matter , I have voted against the paragraph in question .
Van Orden report ( A5-0258 / 2001 )
Bulgaria has also applied to join the European Union .
I am somewhat concerned by the political situation in this State , Madam President .
I hope that King Simeon , who has become Prime Minister of the Bulgarian Republic , but who does not hold an absolute parliamentary majority and who has acquired the reins of the country by bringing to the government ministers from the both the Turkish and the communist communities , will also be able to incorporate the Community acquis into the Bulgarian legal system without delay , so that the country can become part of the enlarged European Union as soon as possible , entering the European Union among the first wave of States , if possible , rather than the second .
Nicholson of Winterbourne report ( A5-0259 / 2001 )
Madam President , on the Nicholson report , I voted against it because paragraph 20 seeks to delay the completion of the second nuclear reactor at Cernavoda .
It is a " CANDU " nuclear reactor of western design .
There are no safety implications involved .
Paragraph 20 of the report calls for the creation of a sustainable energy strategy .
That strategy has already been put in place .
It has been paid for through the PHARE programme .
I am surprised that a committee like the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy seems to be unaware of this fact .
For that reason I voted against the Nicholson report .
That particular item was inaccurate , unnecessary and an aggravation to a country which is seeking to join us .
I wish that the anti-nuclear people on these committees would realise that this constant sniping at the applicant countries on this issue is not doing our relations with them any good at all .
Madam President , I voted for the entry of Romania into the European Union .
This is not solely - although it is partly - for the reasons contained in the report , but because I cannot disregard the relationship that exists between Rome and Romania .
It is a well-known fact that Romania is a community of people made up , for the most part , of the descendants of Roman soldiers who had set up a large camp there .
And it is a well-known fact that the language spoken by the Romanians is a Latin-based language , unlike the languages of all the other regions .
Well then , these ties have convinced me still further to do all I can and to support the - moreover , extremely positive - report on the state of Romania ' s accession negotiations .
I hope that this country will manage to close the gap on the other States which have applied to accede to the European Union as quickly as possible .
. Recently a TV crew from Romania asked me , was I seriously suggesting that the condition of children ' s institutions in Romania could jeopardise their application for membership of the EU .
These young journalists were totally amazed at the deep concerns many of us have about all aspects of childcare in Romania .
Our concerns about trafficking in children as the world was beating a path to their door in search of children became obscured between the desperation of parents looking for children to adopt and the clear indications that many of those who were facilitating commercial trafficking in children became part of the politics of Romania , and indeed those countries whose nationals were pressurising for open adoption , notably the USA .
Baroness Nicholson has , in her excellent report , highlighted these issues and by her deep concern has finally alerted the Romanian Authorities , and her report will hopefully result in the radical changes required to protect children .
.
( FR ) Broadly speaking , we can only agree with the new strategy decided on at the Helsinki European Council of 10 and 11 December 1999 that aims to open negotiations with all Eastern European candidate countries - but not at any cost .
Although social degradation in Romania continues and in no area is the process of reform complete , the rapporteur dares to say that ' Romania today has opportunities for swift progress unequalled in modern times .
Firm political leadership , exceptional economic signals , clear articulation of , and commitment to , the reform process ... '
Yet its true intentions come to light later on : ' ... a NATO decision to invite Romania to become a member of the North Atlantic Alliance in 2002 would be an important contribution to regional security ; welcomes therefore Romania ' s efforts to satisfy the requisite conditions for NATO membership and , in particular , Romania ' s efforts to restructure its military sector and to adjust its defence policy ' .
There is the strong possibility that Romania will be offered NATO membership as a substitute for accession to the European Union , which is increasingly unimaginable , since the reforms are prohibitive for development due to the huge costs involved in integration .
We are nevertheless asking Romania to prepare herself ... for entry into NATO .
For these reasons , we were not able to vote for this report .
Volcic report ( A5-0260 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted for the report which acknowledges the state of the accession negotiations between Slovenia and the European Union .
In two days time , next Saturday , I shall be the guest of the Slovenian State Secretary for Foreign Affairs in Ljubljana .
Why is that ?
Because he belongs to the Slovenian Pensioners ' Party , and this will be the first meeting between the Pensioners ' Party represented at the European Parliament and one of the many pensioners ' parties that exist in the candidate countries .
The most important of these is the Slovenian Pensioners ' Party and I hope that this party , which is succeeding in getting Slovenia into Europe , will join forces with me in working to improve the lives of pensioners throughout Europe .
.
( IT ) Regretfully , the Alleanza Nazionale delegation to the European Parliament is going to vote against Slovenia ' s accession : regretfully because we believe in the democratic and Europeanist sentiments of the Slovenian people , a people which - we are sure - will make a substantial contribution to the integration of a Europe which is becoming increasingly capable of united political and economic action and of protecting the historical and cultural diversities of its communities .
However , Alleanza Nazionale cannot vote for Slovenia ' s accession today because of the indifference displayed by the Slovenian government towards the legitimate , longstanding claims of the Italian exiles .
This indifference dashes our hopes , although we continue , nevertheless , to call upon the Slovenian government to acknowledge without delay that the concept of democracy also includes acknowledging the damages and suffering that they have inflicted on many Italian-speaking citizens in the past and providing appropriate compensation .
The accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the European Union is clearly a very different issue from the accession of the countries of Eastern Europe .
The accession of Cyprus carries far more weight and is far more important because it could be used as a lever for finding a fair solution to the Cyprus question based on UN resolutions and for defusing political tensions in the eastern Mediterranean , especially following the invasion of the northern part of the island by Turkish forces , which have persisted in their barbaric occupation for more than a quarter of a century now .
Accession will not disadvantage any of the communities on the island and it is interesting that , despite opposition from Turkey and the Denktash regime , the majority of Turkish Cypriots , 90 % according to a recent article in the Turkish newspaper Radikal , are in favour of the accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the European Union .
Mr Ñoos ' motion for a resolution is correct , balanced and well pitched politically .
If the Council takes its cue from the European Parliament , instead of constantly giving in to pressure from Turkey , we would have positive and quick results both for the Republic of Cyprus and for the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities .
Poos report ( A5-0261 / 2001 )
. ( EL ) The only good thing about the report by the Temporary Committee on the Echelon Interception System is that it admits that such a system exists and that similar systems also probably exist .
However , it tries to take our mind off our concerns by playing down its powers and general impact .
Worst of all , the report attempts to give personal and other data collection a legal basis , considering it a legitimate tool in helping to develop an EU security and defence policy to serve the needs of the rapid reaction force , to fight " terrorism " etc .
It also considers that collaboration is needed with the intelligence services of the Member States of the ÅU .
All in all , it " urges the Member States to review and , if necessary , to adapt their own legislation on the operations of the intelligence services to ensure that it is consistent with fundamental rights as laid down in the ECHR and with the case law of the European Court of Human Rights " .
The report talks of " democratic monitoring and control " and " calls on the monitoring bodies responsible for scrutinising the activities of the secret services , when exercising their monitoring powers , to attach great importance to the protection of privacy , regardless of whether the individuals concerned are their own nationals , other EU nationals or third country nationals " .
It voices a degree of concern about industrial espionage , clearly in order to protect the excessive profits raked in by the monopolies .
In all events , the report proposes encoding messages as the main form of protection .
These positions are irritating and most provocative when compared with the rudimentary demand for protection for privacy and for trade union and political activity .
They are an attempt to convince us that we need to live with monitoring , with the personal electronic files of the Schengen Agreement and under the watchful eye of Europol and to shift the onus of protection to each and every one of us .
It is for these reasons that the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
I voted for the report on Cyprus as well .
This summer , Madam President , as well as going to the seas in the north , I went on holiday to Cyprus .
I divided my time equally between the Greek and Turkish parts of Cyprus .
I went to the seaside and got a nice tan .
I spent time first with a beautiful Greek Cypriot girl and then with a beautiful Turkish Cypriot girl .
There was no difference between the first and second parts of the holiday : I had a wonderful time in both Northern and Southern Cyprus .
I therefore hope that Cyprus will enter the European Union as soon as possible .
I voted against the motion on Echelon because , in my view :
First , it plays down the importance and the role of a global monitoring system which is directed by the USA and to which a Member State belongs ( United Kingdom ) .
Secondly , it draws conclusions which cannot be fully substantiated , such as that it is not used for military purposes .
Thirdly , the approach taken in the motion to the issue of legal data collection leaves the way open for what is extremely dangerous indifference in this area to continue .
Fourthly , it gives the United States its blessing to continue its spying missions within the European Union , subject to what are , of course , wholly inadequate conditions .
Fifthly , instead of calling for support for transparency and democratic scrutiny of secret service activities , it flirts with the idea of setting up a " proper " European Echelon system .
. I appreciate the hard work that my friend and colleague , Jacques Poos , has put into preparing this report but regret that I cannot vote for this in the final vote .
Had the amendments tabled by my friend Andrew Duff been passed , I would have been able to support the report .
Europe has , in recent years , seen and accepted the separation of the Czech Republic and Slovakia , the dissolution of the former Soviet Union and the gradual break up of Yugoslavia .
Yet we seem unable to accept the rights of the Turkish population of Cyprus to be accorded their rights to a separate administration and indeed , if this cannot be achieved , the right to secede from the Republic of Cyprus and follow a path of self determination as far from the smallest country in the world .
The Cypriot Turks have as much right to self-determination as the Cypriot Greeks . For many years the Greek Cypriot sought enosis ( union ) with Greece .
The Turkish Cypriots should have the same right , though my own preference would be for two equal states united in some form of bi-zonal , bi-communal federation within the European Union .
.
( FR ) Cyprus is today the candidate country that has advanced the most in its negotiations with the European Union - 23 chapters provisionally closed out of 29 - and we can , on paper , envisage its accession taking place as soon as 2004 .
In practice , however , this will pose formidable problems due to the illegal occupation of the northern part of the island , 37 % of the total territory , by Turkey since 1974 .
The European Union considers that the Cypriot government in the southern part of the island represents the whole island , in accordance with international law , and that it is therefore negotiating for the accession of all the island ' s inhabitants .
It is right to take this approach , for to act differently would mean recognising border changes imposed by force .
However , the result could mean the inclusion in the EU of a closed area - for all communications with the north have been cut , except with Turkey , where human rights are not respected - the European Court condemned Turkey on 10 May for its behaviour in Cyprus - and where the economic situation is completely unregulated .
How can we manage contradictions such as these ?
The Poos report that has just been adopted by our Assembly rightly states that if Turkey were to decide to annex the northern part of the island , " it would put an end to its own ambitions of European Union membership " .
However , if it is not annexed , if it refuses to re-enter into negotiations , that is to say , if the current situation persists , what do we do ?
At the very least , it must be said that Turkey ' s attitude does not correspond to what we would expect from a country wanting to be a candidate for EU membership .
. ( DE ) First of all , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Jacques F. Poos , on his report .
I am pleased that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has taken up my key demand , namely that the adoption of the Community acquis concerning equality between women and men is an indispensable condition for membership .
However , I wish to voice my disappointment , and that of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , that other specific demands have been disregarded .
In this context , I should stress that the employment rate among women in Cyprus is far lower than the Community average .
Measures are required to promote women ' s access to training and employment , improve the situation of women in the jobs market and help them to achieve a better balance between life and work .
I therefore think it is regrettable that Cyprus is not taking part in the Community programme on equal opportunities for women and men .
Given that it is considered the country that has made most progress in negotiation of the chapters concerning the Community acquis , it is hoped that in the first national programme for adoption of the Community acquis , Cyprus will confirm its involvement .
In the EU Member States , the concept of gender mainstreaming has been incorporated systematically into the most important policies and reforms undertaken in recent years .
In light of Cyprus ' forthcoming accession to the European Union , Cypriot legislation needs to be adapted further to bring it fully into line with the other Member States , and gender issues should be dealt with in the framework of the Karolus programme , which aims to bring about better application of the Community acquis by an exchange of national civil servants .
Finally , I should like to underline that although Cyprus does have legislation to combat trafficking in women and domestic violence , progress is still required in both these areas .
. ( NL ) Unfortunately , I am unable to support the Poos report because it assumes that the government which rules Greek-speaking southern Cyprus , is also authorised to conduct negotiations on the country ' s accession to the EU on behalf of the Turkish-speaking north .
In the fifties , I shared the view that an undivided and independent Cyprus would be preferable to an island carved up between Greece and Turkey following decolonisation .
Unfortunately , this Cypriot state of unity which was established in 1960 did not appear to be viable and fell apart as early as 1964 .
During my visits to Cyprus in 1964 and 1966 , it was already clear to me how foreign troops , by UN order , kept the regions occupied by different population groups separated .
This was therefore long before the Turkish occupation of the north in 1974 .
I do not expect that the withdrawal of that army will result in the Turkish-speaking minority wishing to rely again on the Greek-speaking majority .
A peaceful solution on the basis of free will is now only possible thanks to a confederation .
If the EU renders it necessary to take the north from the Turkish population , war will follow .
I denounce this war and the ensuing split between victors and vanquished .
Stenzel report ( A5-0262 / 2001 )
I too voted for the report on Malta , Madam President , and I have seen that point 8 of the report , on page 7 , calls upon Malta " to introduce legislation against discrimination pursuant to Article 13 of the EU Treaty " .
But Madam President , we are asking Malta to do something that Italy , for example , has not done ! "
In Italy , there is discrimination against the disabled and sick who are over 65 years old , who are not entitled to an allowance , and the sick who are less than 65 years old , who are entitled to an allowance .
I cannot see any difference between a disabled person over 65 and a disabled person under 65 !
Collins report ( A5-0249 / 2001 )
This last report concerns the communication on the protection of passengers who travel by air .
This time , a pensioner , Mr Roberto Roberti , came to my aid . As we left the aeroplane together in Strasbourg , he said to me : " What a horrible meal we had on the plane !
I wish they would serve Parma ham , spaghetti with pesto from Genoa , polenta from Veneto and sweet-smelling tomatoes from Naples ! "
Well it is now lunch time , Madam President , and what better way to conclude the morning ' s work than by saying " Buon appetito ! "
.
( FR ) We have approved several points in this report that are likely to bring about an improvement in air passenger protection , but we have not voted for it in its entirety because :
it seeks to exonerate airlines from a whole range of shortcomings by shifting fault onto airports and air traffic control , yet it is the fact that all airlines operate in order to make a profit that puts passengers at risk ;
the deregulation and liberalisation of the air sector , on which this report mistakenly heaps praise , have stepped up this quest for profit and , as a consequence , have multiplied the problems arising from such an approach , for both passengers and airline workers .
It shows utter disregard for everyone involved to believe , as stated in the report , that passenger safety can be improved without affecting competition and to count on the voluntary commitment of the airline companies .
We wish to give notice that we have voted against Mr Collins ' s report , not because we are opposed to providing information to customers or because we consider these issues to be unimportant but because we consider that these are issues which ought not to be discussed in the European Parliament .
. ( DE ) European air travel is expanding rapidly , and this trend is likely to continue in the coming years .
Protecting users of air transport , i.e. passengers , and guaranteeing their safety , health and consumers ' rights are becoming more and more important as air transport increases , especially as the new possibilities for travellers to book and buy airline tickets via the Internet offer advantages but also pose risks .
The Commission ' s proposal on which the report is based offers better protection to air transport users , especially as regards access to information about their rights as passengers .
It also offers the airlines the opportunity to enter into voluntary commitments with the airports .
I especially welcome the proposed strengthening of the legal framework to protect consumers , as it sets forth clear , binding and legally enforceable rules which must be complied with by all the airlines .
Experience has shown that these framework rules are essential so that air passengers are fully aware of their legal rights in the event of a dispute .
This does not mean that I am against voluntary commitments on principle , but I would prefer legally enforceable rules to govern the relationship between the airline and the airport as well .
This is not envisaged in the report , however .
The question which therefore arises is this : who is to regulate compliance with the voluntary commitments , and what methods should be used to address non-compliance ?
Based on these considerations , we also support Mr Collins ' demand that any issues which cannot be settled satisfactorily in the interests of consumers through voluntary commitments should be dealt with in separate proposals at a later date .
On behalf of my group , I therefore support Mr Collins ' report .
.
I warmly welcome Mr Collins ' s report which calls on the European Commission to allocate research funding to study risks to long haul air passengers .
In view of current concerns over the health risks on long haul flights , such as deep vein thrombosis , this report comes at a fitting time .
The report also goes so far as to recommend additional measures aimed at protecting the rights of all European citizens , such as those with disabilities .
I fully support this .
In addition , the report ' s recommendation to appoint an EU air passenger ombudsman , to whom passengers can complain when encountering problems with airlines , would go some way towards empowering European citizens who have encountered problems with European airlines .
Finally , the call for a more simple procedure for logging complaints would simplify and demystify the complaints procedure for European citizens .
This would be a victory for ordinary citizens against big business .
Schmid report ( A5-264 / 2001 )
- ( FR ) We voted against this report , in protest not just at its accommodating attitude to the Echelon system , although we are not so ridiculous as to hope that the European Parliament can influence the decision of those who set it up , but above all in protest at the whole system of relations between states , as well as between financial and industrial groups , of which worldwide espionage is but one of the many consequences .
In their competing efforts to systematically bleed the planet , the big powers use political and military espionage as an instrument of their rivalry .
The industrial and commercial secrecy extolled by all the defenders of the capitalist system in order to conceal from their people the many ways in which they appropriate and waste the riches of society is inevitably accompanied by industrial espionage .
All these practices , in which every state that has the means to do so participates , infringe the democratic freedoms and rights of the individual .
Basically , this report ' s only concern is to protect European industrialists from the handicap of their American rivals discovering their little secrets via the Echelon system .

Even the changes introduced by some of the amendments for which we voted do not alter our opposition to the report as a whole or our disagreement with all the minority opinions , the most innocent of which differ from the majority text only in the derisory desire to improve , control or enhance the morality of a system that can neither be controlled nor made more moral .
And we are certainly not claiming to be defenders of ' the logic of the free market ' , which is nothing but the law of the jungle .
- ( FR ) I was one of those who had called for a committee of inquiry .
For the sake of efficiency , I then endorsed the idea of a temporary committee .
Today , I have no regrets !
Our committee ( of which I was a member ) did sterling work and Mr Gerhard Schmid , its rapporteur , proved highly capable .
A few months ago , most of the political leaders quite simply denied the existence of Echelon .
Now , in early September 2001 , everyone ( or nearly everyone ) recognises that this American illegal espionage network covers much of the world and is ' watching ' the commercial markets and the citizens ' private lives !
True , this system is ' performing ' less well than might have been feared , but it exists and that is intolerable !
The rapporteur proposes measures .
Several groups find them inadequate .
I can understand the views of some of them , because they are true democrats .
But I will not be told what to do by people , especially from the extreme right , who ' could not care two hoots ' about the freedoms of the individual .
For me , what is important , indeed fundamental , is to bring this matter into the public arena .
Nothing will ever really be the same again , whether in regard to the WTO negotiations , the development of new technologies or research ( see my amendments to the Sixth Research Framework Programme ) !
Nobody will be able to pretend they did not know !
Thanks to the excellent Schmid report , which I endorse , our fight in this area is only just beginning .
- ( DA ) We have voted against the report from the Temporary Committee on the ECHELON interception system .
The report has a positive aspect , but all too many negative ones .
The positive aspect is the Committee ' s confirmation that ECHELON exists .
Among the negative aspects , the following three points , in particular , must be emphasised :
1 .
In spite of the Committee ' s conclusion that ECHELON does in fact exist , no precise political consequences of this have been successfully formulated .
In our view , that is the least that could have been expected of a politically elected assembly .
2 .
The committee has chosen to focus upon the illegal interception of communications from private businesses and completely plays down the serious infringement of the right to privacy as formulated in , for example , the European Convention on Human Rights .
What is more , the Committee draws no political conclusions in this area other than that the obligation under the Human Rights Convention to safeguard citizens ' fundamental rights is also of benefit to individual citizens , who are urged to use encryption to protect themselves against the illegal interception of communications .
3 .
The Committee observes that one Member State is participating in the ECHELON cooperation on the illegal interception of communications . On this issue too , however , it does not draw any political conclusions at all .
On the contrary , it encourages speeding up the development of European cooperation on intelligence matters - a form of cooperation in which the ECHELON country , Great Britain , is free to participate if it so wishes .
We are disappointed in the outcome of the Committee ' s work .
The European Parliament has not complied with its responsibility to strengthen human rights .
The fight for human rights is seemingly strongest when solemn speeches have to be made .
When it comes to practical action , citizens ' rights are subordinated to the interests of private enterprise .
. ( PT ) The report of the European Parliament ' s Temporary Committee on the Echelon case states that there is no longer any doubt about the existence of a worldwide communications interception system involving the participation of the United States , Canada , Australia and New Zealand , but seeks to play down its reach and capacity and fails to understand all the serious consequences of the existence of an indiscriminate communications interception system , and for this reason , I have voted against the report .
It is unacceptable that a network should be maintained for the gathering and processing , in a secret and completely unmonitored way , of potentially any type of information , specifically political , economic and military , which clearly breaches the fundamental right to respect for privacy , enshrined in Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union , which demonstrates the need to completely dismantle this global telecommunications interception network .
Although the report suggests some measures for developing systems and adopting protection mechanisms , specifically to protect privacy , in the face of this system - and other , similar ones ... and although it discusses measures of cooperation between Member States , which must take place at judicial level and not be information-gathering measures , on the basis of case-by-case analysis , under the supervision of the courts or even measures for monitoring information systems , particularly by national parliaments , what lies at the heart of all of this is that the system will continue to function and that an EU-level information system could be created and integrated into the CFSP and the CESDP , which is equally unacceptable .
It is incomprehensible that in the report ' s conclusions , no request is even made to the United Kingdom to disassociate itself from the Echelon system and to Germany to close the interception base located in its territory .
It is deplorable that the EU is more deeply concerned with industrial espionage than with the monitoring of individuals and is quite nonchalant about the fact that some Member States have a system for spying on other Member States , with the participation and possible control of third countries , specifically the USA .
. Given that Parliament voluntarily limited itself in the nature of the Enquiry , there is much to be welcomed in this Report .
I am pleased that ECHELON ' s existence is recognised and that the need for transparent international agreements is acknowledged .
However , there are 3 main reasons why I voted against the Report .
Firstly , I believe that member states involved in ECHELON must disengage from this murky , undemocratic system - the report does not make this clear .
Secondly , I feel there is a calm acceptance in this Report that the EU must run an intelligence system as part of the CFSP .
I believe that the CFSP threatens freedoms such as open access to information and personal privacy .
We know that , whatever the safeguards on paper , these do not always apply in practice .
Thirdly , the implications of such systems for individuals are not clear .
While the report says much about the need for protection of privacy and monitoring of the secret services , what should the individual do ?
They can no longer communicate in confidence .
There is no real answer .
Thus , I cannot support the report .
- ( FR ) The main effect of Mr Schmid ' s voluminous report is almost to make us forget the original question .
In fact , neither the rapporteur ' s talent nor the courtesy of the chairman of this committee can make us forget that the strategy followed throughout was to drown the fundamental questions in a general debate which , ranging from moral judgments about the activities of the secret services to doubtful statements about technological matters , attempted to cover everything and everybody except Echelon and those who help to run it .
Yet at a time when the process of European integration is so clearly running out of steam , such fundamental questions would have deserved better than this deafening silence .
And we will certainly have to pose them again .
Firstly , to the extent that it has been shown that EU Member States participate in Echelon , does this whole business not amount to anything more than a blatant violation of the EU Treaty ?
And if so , what sanctions are being envisaged ?
The rapporteur answered yes to the first question .
But what consequences did he draw from this ?
None , because he did not even address the tough but logical issue of sanctions , not even to explain why he refused to contemplate them .
So people are sleeping easy in London and Berlin , because this Parliament , normally so prompt to be roused to indignation by the slightest attack on the constitutional state in any of the four corners of the world , has not even remonstrated about a blatant violation of the principles of the Treaty !
Secondly , since it has become clear during our activities that the European Union cannot embark on any large-scale defence and security operation without technical and logistical support from NATO , is there any point in laying the foundations for a European system equivalent to Echelon without first giving a political clarification of the relations between the European states that are members of Echelon and the Union , and in particular between the Union and NATO ?

For the real source of the rapporteur ' s embarrassment is indeed the fact that so long as the EU so obviously remains technically and financially shackled to NATO , the supposed European solidarity will give way to Atlantic solidarity , the sequel to the cold war , which is incompatible with the existence of an independent , European common defence and security policy .
The plain fact is that the majority of this Parliament - the same Parliament that adopted preventive ' apartheid ' measures against the new , democratically elected Austrian government , that seriously considered placing Silvio Berlusconi ' s government under surveillance - is refusing to take measures against Member States that have now been proven to be supporting an activity that contravenes the provisions of the Treaty , that does serious damage to European firms and represents a permanent threat to individual freedoms .
The least one could say is that there are indisputably two weights and two measures and that to be fair we can only describe this business as a real scandal .
Yet for once , looking at the real problems raised by Echelon , we could have held a genuine debate on the basic principles and objectives of European integration : we could have seen the European nations for what they are , with their own history and their own loyalties .
We could have asked ourselves what type of Europe we wanted to build .
The answer this gives us by default - a Europe shrouded in fog and in words left unsaid , a coward that submits to the law of the strongest - is , in many respects , quite dismaying .
. ( NL ) A few years ago , the existence of ECHELON was still emphatically denied .
After all , the organisation was secret , and the objective of such secrecy is to prevent the people from knowing of its existence .
Such a state of affairs is , of course , completely at odds with democratic decision making , transparency , public order and the protection of individuals .
It is a major step forward that it is now openly being admitted that an EU Member State has been working with the United States , Australia and New Zealand on worldwide espionage for a long time , something which may well adversely affect people , organisations and businesses within the EU .
However , the report does not draw any worthwhile conclusions from this .
It accepts that as a result of the outcome of the Second World War , with the United States playing a dominant role in Western Europe , such agreements were made and that these have persisted through time .
The conclusion should be that the United Kingdom should choose between membership with the EU and that of ECHELON , that cooperation with this system on the part of citizens of EU Member States will be penalised , that similar espionage systems of other Member States will be abandoned and that telephone traffic will no longer be tapped .
The passive stance of a two-thirds majority of this Parliament is sanctioning a Europe of snoopers . I do not agree with this .
. ( IT ) I voted against the motion with great indignation : we would never have imagined that we might be spied on as Europeans , as free citizens , as businesses , not just by our Nato allies but even by our European partners as well .
There needs to be an enquiry into the United Kingdom ' s behaviour in order to understand fully not just the government ' s responsibilities but also what European sentiments link the United Kingdom to the rest of the European Union and even whether these sentiments and political will actually exist .
There are certain questions we must ask .
Since this espionage system exists , why was it not used to prevent the violence which took place during the international summits , most recently the summits in Gothenburg and Genoa ?
It there any plan to dismantle the system or to make it democratically useful to all so that we can achieve even the globalisation of personal thoughts ?
How are the United Kingdom , and Germany too , going to explain this betrayal to the European citizens ?
Could it be that the slowdown in European cohesion , which is becoming increasingly politically and culturally insipid and increasingly weak economically , is partly caused by new information being received and disseminated using Echelon ?
These are important questions which require a committee of inquiry to be set up .
- ( FR ) There are two main reasons why I am opposed to the motion for a resolution drawn up on behalf of Parliament ' s Temporary Committee on the Echelon interception system .
On the one hand , the proposal for a covenant between the European Union and the United States hardly seems relevant for , however good the intentions , it would most likely have no practical effect .
At the same time , if , as its supporters say , Echelon can act as an effective multilateral instrument in the fight against organised crime , terrorism , drugs and arms trafficking and money laundering , then it is not a covenant of mutual good intentions that we need to sign with the United States .
What we need to negotiate is the means of enabling every state that wishes to be involved in active international cooperation in these essential areas to join the Echelon system , which would thus become an open system .
On the other hand , the motion for a resolution is used as a pretext to address a whole range of questions that have no bearing whatsoever on the temporary committee ' s real task .
In the midst of this hotchpotch we come across paragraph 5 , which reflects the federalist obsession with seeing the next IGC make the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding , so that it can constitute a legal basis for appeal , as though the existing protection guaranteed both by national constitutions and by the universal and European declarations on human rights were null and void .
This really is a distortion of the debate on Echelon that cannot be accepted .
. ( IT ) The Italian socialist delegation and the other socialist Members , particularly the French socialist Members , abstained from the final vote on the Schmid report .
I too abstained from the vote , and I would like to explain why .
I have good reason to believe my views are shared by the other Members .
I find it absolutely incomprehensible , not to say outrageous , that the European Parliament , particularly the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to which I belong , should have rejected certain amendments - the ones I referred to when I spoke during the debate : Nos 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 and 22 - which seek explicitly to emphasise that large-scale , indiscriminate interceptions such as those performed by Echelon are a blatant violation of the human rights recognised by the European Convention on Human Rights and other international conventions .
In rejecting these amendments , with the support of the majority of socialists , Parliament has implicitly made it possible - although it may not be completely aware of this - for the private communications of European citizens henceforth to be listened in to by Echelon and similar systems 24 hours a day , with no respect for the principles of legality and proportionality upheld by the European Convention on Human Rights and our Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I call upon the Council and the Commission , who are more aware of the need to respect the principles enshrined in the Treaties , to correct this dangerous drift .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.43 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Conclusions of the G8 meeting in Genoa
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the conclusions of the G8 meeting in Genoa .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I give you the floor .
Madam President and honourable Members , I am glad to present on behalf of the President of the Commission a report on the G7 / G8 summit in Genoa .
From 20 to 22 July this year , the Commission President took part in the G7 / G8 summit , together with the current President of the European Council , Guy Verhofstadt .
The summit took a number of important decisions .
However , most of the media attention was focused on events taking place outside the summit , on the city streets .
These events confirmed that the G8 needs to engage in a genuine dialogue with civil society and with non-member countries .
Demonstrators must have the opportunity to express their opinions .
This is an inalienable right not only guaranteed in law but also defended in practice .
People are genuinely uneasy about various aspects of globalisation , and we must pay attention to their concerns .
However , violence disfigures any demonstration , even one held in an honourable cause .
We cannot allow peaceful demonstrators expressing genuine fears and concerns to be tarred with the same brush as those who commit acts of violence .
To combat violence , whether at Gothenburg or Genoa , we need to improve European cooperation in the field of law and order .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council discussed these issues in late July , and the events at Genoa show how urgent it now is to take action .
But I would like to remind all of you that according to Article 33 of the Treaty the primary responsibility for the maintenance of law and order lies with the Member States .
Member States recognise , however , that better cooperation is required between their law enforcement and judicial authorities in order to safeguard public order at European Council meetings and similar events .
The decisions of the Justice and Home Affairs Council were built upon the existing structures and existing legal instruments , which means that there will be no specific institutions to deal with these issues .
It goes without saying that the Commission has always stressed the need for all police and judicial actions to respect the civil and human rights of the citizens and the legislation providing for privacy protection and for the respect of civil liberties .
We have to reflect on a political response to the two hundred thousand demonstrators in Genoa .
It is the profound belief of the Commission that the Union should promote an active dialogue with bona fide organisations which peacefully exercise their rights to freely express opinion and assemble .
We believe that the European Parliament should play a major role in promoting this dialogue .
The demonstrators want us to tackle the widening gulf between the northern and southern hemispheres of our world , a gulf created by inequality , poverty , disease and war .
In spite of our efforts and even some achievements over the past forty years , tragic disparities and social injustice remain and we have a long way to go in overcoming them .
This is the challenge not only for the G8 but also for our Europe in the years and decades ahead .
The Union has to support those political leaders , especially in Africa , who are on the side of democracy .
It has to prevent illegal trafficking in arms between the North and the South . And it has to implement policies that strengthen the economies of the poorest nations .
Policies such as the " Everything but Arms " initiative that has opened up our markets to products from the least-developed countries are a good example of this approach .
Fortunately , public opinion today is increasingly concerned about where the world is going and people recognise that this North-South inequality cannot be tolerated .
The Commission is well aware of the growing importance of civil society and is eager to involve citizens ' associations and NGOs in shaping and implementing EU policies .
As the Commission President said yesterday , when discussing governance in this plenary , " the Union is still the only concrete , practical and democratic response to globalisation " .
It is therefore essential that the European institutions operate on the basis of five fundamental principles : openness , participation , accountability , effectiveness and coherence .
We need to engage in an open and systematic dialogue with civil society and to involve all stakeholders in designing the Union ' s policies .
It is also essential to strengthen the Union ' s voice and influence in the world so that Europe can make a greater contribution to international prosperity and stability .
Multilateral institutions are the key to harnessing globalisation , but of course we underline that we want to help reform the multilateral organisations , making them more open , more accountable and more democratic .
In this connection , a particularly important event took place in Genoa - the " outreach " meeting with leaders of several non-member countries .
This was a very useful meeting , enabling important representatives of southern countries to express their views directly and frankly and to discuss matters openly with the G8 Heads of State and Government .
As a result , the G8 decided to make Africa one of the main topics of next year ' s summit in Canada .
The Commission for its part can be satisfied with several of the decisions taken at Genoa .
The documents on trade , food safety , climate change and communicable diseases , as well as the emphasis on Africa , by and large reflect the Commission ' s preparatory contributions to the summit .
On trade , there was complete agreement on the need to launch a new round of talks at the ministerial conference in Doha in November .
This view was , by the way , reiterated last week in Mexico City .
During the discussion on trade , President Putin stated that Russia was ready to follow the example set by the European Union in its " Everything But Arms " initiative .
On food safety , the European side successfully insisted that the final Communication include a reference to the precautionary principle .
The G8 had a very long discussion on climate change , opening the way for the conclusions reached at Bonn a few days later and I believe you have discussed these conclusions at this part session .
The summit also provided an opportunity to launch the global health fund .
The purpose of this international fund , which will not be limited to the G8 countries , is to help reduce poverty by dealing with the problem of AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis .
The Community , for its part , is committed to providing EUR 120 million .
As on every occasion when the current presidency of the Union is held by a State that is not a member of the G8 , the Union was represented at the summit by the Council President and by the President of the Commission .
The tandem arrangement worked extremely well and I am pleased to be able to underline that here .
We are sensitive to the fact that several aspects of the G8 will have to be changed in the future and not just cosmetically .
The Commission , for its part , will encourage a return to the original spirit of the G8 summits .
Indeed a joint decision was taken in Genoa to reduce the size of delegations and the summit to be held in Canada next year will be much simpler and - we hope - more effective .
Madam President , it was with some satisfaction that I listened to the statements of the Council and the Commission for we have , at last , started to address the fundamental subject of the G8 .
Indeed , in recent weeks , we have endeavoured to discuss issues of law and order , and we will have the opportunity to deal with this subject as well .
However , there has been very little talk of the results of the Genoa Summit , which I consider to be positive , in terms of the fight against hunger in the world , against poverty and against AIDS ; positive results of a summit under Italian management which , at last , saw the President of the United States and the President of the Russian Federation in dialogue across the table : these were things we would have not have believed possible , and so a powerful message of peace issued from the G8 cities .
We would have liked to launch this debate in Parliament on the contents of the summit before the summit actually took place , but were prevented from doing so by the rejection of our proposal by many left-wing Parliamentary groups .
We are convinced that , for the first time , as Commissioner Vitorino pointed out , the G8 witnessed a focused debate on practical issues between the leaders of the world ' s most industrialised countries and the leaders of the African countries , in which they discussed practical issues and also launched a project for cooperation on the proposal for African union , presented by the industrialised countries with the aim of setting up a partnership with these countries .
An operation to reduce the debt of 23 countries by USD 50 billion , which is 70 % of the total debt , was launched .
The go-ahead was given for a project which seeks to modernise the countries of the developing world : this is an extremely positive development .
Positive , tangible results were achieved , but then it was attempted to turn the G8 summit into a mere question of law and order .
There is much to be said on the subject of what happened , about the exploitation even of Parliament which went on .
Parliament must not become the scene of debates on major national issues ; it must not become the forum for national debates .
Clearly , there can be no objection - and we must make this quite clear - to anti-globalisation demonstrations carried out using lawful methods which do not involve acts of violence , but globalisation cannot be opposed , the summits cannot be opposed through violent demonstration and attacks on the police .
The inquiries carried out by the Italian Courts reveal that European citizens , who came to Italy from elsewhere to organise violent demonstrations of the Union , are also responsible .
Mr President , I would like to end by pledging once again the support of the Italian police force and stressing the need for closer cooperation between police forces and between Ministers for the Interior . Such cooperation may have not have been adequate at the G8 summit and we must concentrate on improving in this area .
Finally , in my opinion , the proposals made in Parliament to place Italy under observation are ridiculous . Italy does not need lessons in democracy from any political grouping in Parliament .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the Socialist Group has requested this debate for two reasons .
The first is because the conclusions and work of the G8 summit were obscured because the debate concentrated on public order .
I must especially thank Mr Vitorino for having talked to us about the results of a summit whose agenda was set by a government , that of Olivo , in Italy , and which was discussed in the European Parliament - Mr Tajani , you were engaged in a municipal campaign , but it was discussed here - and , furthermore , we have asked for a resolution on this debate which has been replied to and denied by the PPE .
We do not understand why they want to speak but refuse a resolution .
However , in any event , ladies and gentlemen , what I would like to point out is that we clearly said that the President of the Commission and the President of the Council were in the Genoa photo and we regret that they have not had time to come to this debate if they considered it so important .
And I must point out that some positive advances have been made .
Commissioner Vitorino has referred to them .
I would say that , on the cancellation of debt , little progress has been made .
The fund for AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis is a positive step , although it is still not enough .
Africa must be a priority ; also the desire for flexibility in the TRIPs Agreements and the ' everything but arms ' initiative as well as the extension of the system of generalised preferences are aspects which we Europeans should be proud of and should value more .
In addition to this there is our firm position on Kyoto which , despite United States resistance , has allowed us to reach a solution in Bonn .
I believe that as a Parliament we must bring this to account and hold a debate because , furthermore , my political family , the Party of European Socialists , which is a member of the Socialist International - we are internationalists and we have been globalised since the Nineteenth Century - is an organisation which is present in 160 countries in the world , and is not just an organisation of white men , that is to say , it is an organisation of all continents .
Therefore , the issue of globalisation which , at our last congress of the International in Paris , two years ago , led to a resolution on the challenges of globalisation , must be , as far as we are concerned , a permanent element of European policy .
Lastly , a comment on issues of public order .
My group has said , from the outset , that it is awaiting the conclusion of the investigation which is being carried out in the Italian Parliament on these issues , because we respect the Parliament of an important democracy which is a member of the European Union .
This does not prevent us from demonstrating a very critical position in relation to the rights of European citizens contained in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
There are no public order policies which restrict citizens - and I say this to the Belgian Presidency - in their right to demonstrate and give vent to their feelings .
A responsible public order policy must guarantee those rights , not repress them .
Just as football cannot be prohibited because of fights between hooligans , rights cannot be restricted because there are nuclei of provocative vandals .
A final request , Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen : to mention civil society has become so commonplace that it is almost impossible to make a political speech without talking about it .
But what I cannot understand is that people talk about speaking with civil society and then they put a comma and say , ' and with Parliament , of course ' .
Society becomes civil when it elects its representatives and therefore the first duty of the President of the Council and the President of the Commission , when they go to these summits , is to come to Parliament and report on them .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the events of the last G8 summit in Genoa could prevent us from focusing on the genuine major issues at hand .
I will therefore concentrate on these latter issues rather than on aspects which , although important , will be discussed within the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and on which it would be appropriate to wait for the opinion of the Italian Parliament , which has set up a special committee of inquiry .
Parliament will , of course , be able to address the issue in a fully informed manner in the future , although , at this point , we can certainly condemn and deplore the use of any form of violence by any party whatsoever in an attempt to resolve issues .
It is therefore absolutely essential for Parliament to discuss the major issues of globalisation now and then to lay down a clear political line to follow , undertaking to define tangible parameters to shape the globalisation process , ensuring that its ultimate goal is the development of a new , comprehensive humanism which places at the centre of history the dignity of the human person rather than large-scale financial interests .
In this sense , far from being an inevitable source of suffering , globalisation is proving to be a great opportunity to genuinely change the balance of play in the world and confront the dreadful scourges afflicting much of humanity which , in these times in which we live , mean that none of us can be sure of our moral innocence .
Even if we take into account the not insignificant humanitarian decisions taken at the G8 summit , it is not easy to accept the considerable unwillingness to change the development model , even partially , step by step .
The model remains essentially focused on consumerism and an unregulated market rather than on accepted criteria of solidarity and participation .
The basic need is therefore to identify a political and institutional position which is acceptable to everybody and which can be used as a guideline for the globalisation processes . This clearly has to be something more than just the G8 .
We must speed up our work on this issue if we want to avoid irreparable damage , for we must start from the realisation that the globalisation of politics - the democratic control of the processes of globalisation - proceeds at an exasperatingly slow pace compared to developments in other sectors .
There is no current " off-the-shelf " recipe , but I feel that we could start from proposal of the 1996 Nobel Peace Prizewinner who envisages a permanent summit made up of the European Union , the G8 , the World Bank , the group of 77 developing countries , Onlus and undertakings to launch and manage a great , worldwide Marshall Plan based on a common universal strategy .
That could be described as a utopian dream , but , as Thomas More , the father of Europe would say , without a utopian dream , what would our politics be ?
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I believe the G8 summit in Genoa will come to be regarded as a milestone in our political life and will probably be seen as marking a turning point in European and international political life . This is not , unfortunately , because of the joint undertakings given by the richest countries in the world to respond to the serious problems facing the poorest countries - and let me point out that the North-South gulf has never been so wide - but rather because of the particular context in which this summit took place .
Mr Vitorino has rightly reminded us of certain decisions or at least guidelines that were adopted at that summit , but I do not think we should give them more importance than they deserve .
It is true that we heard a rather timid acknowledgement of the importance of relieving the debt burden on the poorest countries , but no more than that .
It is also true that a global health fund was set up to combat infectious diseases , but the total funding is pretty inadequate ; it was set at EUR 1.3 billion , while the UN Secretary-General believes that EUR 10 billion is needed .
On the other hand , there is no sign of any common resolve to rectify the inequalities by achieving the long-promised objective of contributing 0.7 % of gross domestic product to development aid .
There is no more talk of that .
The participants did , however , vigorously reiterate their faith in the virtues of the market , free trade , the development of new genetic engineering technologies and the international trade rules .
Today , the European Union certainly wants to launch a new WTO round , but is that any answer to the problems caused by the unfair WTO rules ?
The WTO ' s decision-making rules are indeed unfair in that they penalise the poorest countries compared with the rich ones , if only by giving the poor countries limited access to the information that would enable them to play a proper part in this decision making .
So , no response at all , no real response to the demands and protests of tens of thousands of demonstrators - and , more generally , of a very broad sector of European public opinion - who reject or challenge a globalisation that is essentially financial and commercial .
It is not globalisation as such that they are protesting about , but its basically financial and commercial nature .
I think that distinction needs to be made .
I therefore believe that the European Union must take specific initiatives in this regard and first of all it must no longer seem deaf to the voices of protest .
In this context I welcome the Belgian government ' s proposal to debate the Tobin tax at the next Ecofin summit .
I think that is a good initiative , which ought to be followed by others of the same kind .
First and foremost , however , we need to establish a real dialogue with the parliaments : Mr Barón Crespo is right to say that parliaments are , after all , the prime representatives of public opinion ; that is obviously true .
The European Parliament and the national parliaments must be the forum where the governments explain their initiatives .
In addition , however , to the parliaments - for we are no longer living in the conventional world of politics we knew 50 years ago - we must talk to the associations , talk to organised civil society .
In my view , that is essential .
Many associations have put forward important ideas and serious arguments ; to dismiss them is a political error .
Like everyone here , I deplore and condemn the violence of the Black Blockers demonstrators but , at the same time , I can only condemn the unacceptable behaviour of the Italian police who trampled on human rights in Genoa .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the morning after the G8 meeting my group , which was very much present in Genoa , immediately called for this debate to be entered on the agenda of this new session of Parliament .
The conservative majority in this Parliament , which is feeling very defensive , prevented this debate from concluding with a resolution in which Parliament expressed its opinion .
It will not , however , manage to prevent us from raising the serious questions arising from the events at Genoa again and again on our political agenda , in one form or another , throughout the coming period : the aftermath of Genoa is only just beginning .
One of the issues raised by Genoa is the very legitimacy of G7 , or G8 , perceived as a kind of board of directors of the big powers of this world .
I will not go into that today .
Another issue raised by Genoa is , of course , this whole problem of violence , in particular the unheard-of repression of peaceful demonstrators , who were pursued even to the headquarters of the Social Forum of Genoa .
Yesterday we took the initiative , in association with the Green Group , the Attac association and socialist MEPs , of organising a major debate on the subject with the coordinator of the Genoa Social Forum , Mr Agnoletto .
The extremely grave incidents that were discussed and described during that debate made us even more convinced of the need to shed full light on the course of events that led to the dramatic incidents and acts of violence we saw and on the entire chain of responsibility for respecting the rules and values in which the European Union believes .
For the rest , I proposed that we set up a monitoring committee right here to work in liaison with Italian members of parliament , the Social Forum in Genoa and other partners who wish to help discover the whole truth of the matter .
In the same spirit , we have reiterated our support for players in the social movement who do not want to see their message be perverted by acts of violence of the Black Block type , which our enemies find easy to manipulate .
We will not allow this magnificent commitment on the part of our citizens to be discredited , let alone criminalised , in this way .
That brings me to the third , and perhaps in our view the principal issue of the aftermath of Genoa , namely the political responses we will or will not be able to make to the questions asked by these men , these women , these innumerable young people who are quite wrongly labelled anti-globalist , whereas most of the time what they seek is a democratic globalisation based on solidarity .
At a time when the European Union is debating its future , its ambitions on the world stage and its relations with civil society , we for our part do not see these questions as a threat to be averted , but far more as a chance we must seize if we want Europe to move forward .
Madam President , the positive results of the G8 must bind our governments to respecting the agreements established on combating poverty and regulating globalisation ; we must not see , as we have in the past , the commitments made not being respected or being excessively delayed .
Two thirds of the world live in conditions of extreme poverty .
Our aid must be targeted at genuinely benefiting communities rather than adding to the economic and political wealth of governments who have contributed to exacerbating the wretched conditions in which their peoples live and continue to prevent respect for human rights .
We call for focused actions targeted at implementing initiatives which are genuinely useful for the people , and we must also , therefore , attempt to rethink the concept of globalisation .
Is a European way possible ?
Can we prevent globalisation becoming a boomerang which always strikes the poorest communities ?
I regret to say that , at Genoa , according to some elements of the media and certain politicians , public disorder pushed the issues discussed and the guidelines defined by the summit leaders into the background and yet , for the first time in the presence of representatives of the developing world , issues were tackled which are fundamentally important for the peaceful future of the human race .
Unfortunately , even the legitimate opinions of the peaceful demonstrators were obscured by the globalised violence of those who have become professional rioters .
Faced with the urban guerrilla warfare which has reproduced the acts of violence perpetrated at the Nice and Gothenburg Summits , we must tackle two pressing issues .
Firstly , how can we ensure that democracy is respected on similar occasions in the future ?
In other words , we must ask ourselves how future summits held in European countries need to be organised in order to ensure that the meetings of representatives of the different institutions are productive and not the cause of fruitless , violent controversy .
Secondly , what political and cultural measures can we take to prevent legitimate demonstrations of dissent turning into organised , exploitative acts of violence ?
Is there an area of justice within which Interpol could play a role of preventing and controlling the spread of violence and terrorism ?
Moreover , in the face of Commissioner Vitorino ' s call for greater cooperation to prevent violence , we wonder why Echelon which , with the help of Great Britain , listens in on everything that happens in Europe , did not warn us before Gothenburg and Genoa and help to prevent the violence which took place there .
These are worrying questions and we will come back to them .
It is not Italy which needs to be placed under observation but that part of Europe which speaks of human rights in this Chamber and then allows those same rights to be violated , and the self-interested generosity of certain left-wing voices which condemn violence as a means of persuasion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , Europe needs to act today to make it possible for the goals set at Genoa to be implemented . Its governments must not exploit tragic events that should be tackled by a common effort , for the purposes of internal politics .
Europe must regain a sense of European Union rather than national self-interest !
Madam President , when it comes to political responses to globalisation , we ask you not to force us to choose between Genoa and Durban , between the G8 summit of the major democracies of the western world , the Genoa Summit , and the UN meeting in Durban .
Of course , we will choose the Genoa Summit over international fora where it is the dictatorships of this world that have the majority and the decision-making power and whose final decisions are those of a racist conference , not a conference on racism .
Otherwise , we would be saying we are dissatisfied with both the G8 method and the method of this European Union .
We feel that the western democracies must relaunch the method of democracy and the rule of law , that they must attack rather than playing a defensive game and must relaunch the initiative of the globalisation of rights and democracy .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , if the European Union genuinely has the political will , it should not be possible , at this advanced stage in the process , for the statute of the International Criminal Court to still not have been ratified .
It should not be possible for the universal moratorium on the death penalty not to have been approved by the UN .
It is on these issues that the western democracies must fight back .
On the subject of the G8 , these summits must be made public .
It is not a question of coopting representatives of NGOs or representatives of the poorest countries .
It is a question of involving the parliaments and all the citizens , broadcasting the debates on these issues to them live via audiovisual communications and the Internet , opening the doors of these international summits to all citizens and revitalising the democratic model and the rule of law .
This , I believe , is the way to improve the G8 summits and this European Union , and it is the alternative to satisfying those who call for institutions in which the worst dictatorships in the world have the right of veto to be at the central controls of globalisation .
Madam President , I have asked for the floor in order to protest vehemently against the extremely serious allegation made against the Italian police force . This accusation is completely unfounded and unjustified .
Clearly , the Member in question is unaware of how things really are and I would therefore ask that his comment be removed from the Minutes or that the European Parliament considers , in this House , the consequences of such a serious statement , which I do not feel should have been made in this Chamber .
Mr Ferri , that was not a point of order .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Belgian Presidency and Commissioner Vitorino for their introduction and to make two points of a political nature .
Firstly , I think everyone is aware of the active , prominent role taken for the first time by the European Union at the G8 summit .
Although it may well be true that the results could have been better in practical terms - as other Members have stressed - I would like to quote a politician who is not from my own culture but who is known to many in this Chamber : " The longest journey begins with a single step ! "
And without a doubt , a completely new way of working was established in Genoa compared to that adopted for all the other G8 summits .
Secondly , I am sure that the goal of all the Members of this House is to achieve increasingly closer Union between the peoples of Europe , and that we base our future work and our political activity on consensus , democracy and the law .
Well then , with regard to the Genoa Summit and the messages which subsequently emerged through the media , what concerns me is an attempt to deny representative democracy . I find this unacceptable .
It may be part of the culture of others , but we must reject violence because violence is contrary to the way civilised human beings relate to each other in our culture and , above all , we must adopt an approach which is totally different from this blanket opposition .
I will end with two brief points for consideration .
We did not support the resolution because - as I am sure some of you will remember - in July , we wanted a debate to be held so that we would arrive prepared , as the European Parliament , together with the Council and the Commission , at the Genoa Summit .
This was refused us : we only had time for an oral question .
Secondly , in my opinion , in view , apart from anything else , of the tendencies of some of the previous speakers , I would wait for the conclusions of the work currently being carried out by the Italian judiciary before firing accusations or making scathing judgments about the work of the Italian police force .
Madam President , the course taken by the G8 in Genoa provides food for thought for the governments , particularly the governments of the eight protagonist countries , but also for the Commission and the Council , the institutions , the parties and the movement in which an interesting debate has been opened on the very definition of " no to globalisation " .
This is not the time to tackle the issues of public safety and law and order , which are now assuming a European dimension , as has been pointed out , and which require effective responses which also respect rights such as the right to freedom of association and demonstration which is enshrined in the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I am glad to see that Parliament ' s Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has decided to prepare a recommendation to the Home Affairs Council before it next meets in November .
However , we cannot fail to express here our deep pain at the loss of a young human life , that of Carlo Giuliani , and our unequivocal condemnation of the violence perpetrated by minority groups in Genoa and elsewhere , and our concern at excessive crowd control measures employed to protect the citizens by sections of the police force who had assumed responsibility for the citizens ' safety .
An inquiry into all this is being carried out by the Italian parliament as well as by the Courts , and we ourselves will be able to make use of the results very soon .
With regard to the agenda , it has to be said that , as an informal event , the G8 summit is in danger of raising expectations which are hardly ever matched by practical undertakings .
However , partly due to the attention that the movement has succeeded in drawing to these summits , it would be almost impossible to avoid addressing the role of the poorest countries and undertaking more convincing action with regard to the issues of debt , poverty , trade , the fight against disease and the environment .
To sum up , although it is the responsibility of the movement to reflect on its future , starting with the methods it should use to fight globalisation , and to reflect on the danger of it encouraging unfocused , provocative protectionist tendencies , the task of orienting the global processes , which have hitherto favoured economic concentrations , speculative investment and wide gaps and intolerable injustices , falls to the institution .
The next appointment will be the WTO round of negotiations , when the responsibilities of the European Union and the Commission will be far greater than at the G8 summit .
The European Commission ' s " Everything but Arms " initiative was consolidated by the final statement from Genoa .
It is our responsibility to uphold it consistently in our relationship with our citizens and the poor countries which are excluded from the flow of world trade .
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of Italia dei Valori , an Italian political movement belonging to the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party which was present at Genoa and witnessed the events which took place there .
In short , we feel that a summit such as the G8 , in the form it has taken hitherto , is substantially unproductive .
Never more so than at Genoa has it been clear that similar displays of muscle and power on the part of the world ' s greatest nations are just cinema which certainly does nothing to alleviate hunger in the world or to enhance equality between peoples if it is not matched by practical action to cancel the debt , redistribute wealth , safeguard material rights and eliminate all exploitation of developing countries .
Secondly , amongst the great many people who were exercising their genuine , lawful right to demonstrate for their convictions , there were also many troublemakers who infiltrated the demonstration in order to perpetrate unjust and unjustified acts of violence and thus sabotage the work of both governments and demonstrators .
It is necessary - and this is the third point - for Parliament too to issue , first and foremost , a clear , unambiguous statement condemning and reproaching these people for their actions : they are the criminals who sparked off the violence .
Fourthly , with regard to these criminals , I regret to say that the law and order agencies of the Italian government partly failed in their task .
Their endeavours were both excessive and inadequate : inadequate in that their information activities , intelligence and preventive protection measures did not suffice , and excessive in terms of the crowd control measures employed by certain sections of the police force ; this was true only of certain sections of the police force but , regrettably , methods of crowd control were used which could and should have been avoided .
Lastly , of course this sort of behaviour is to be condemned , but we must not focus on individual members of the police force but on those who gave the orders or who should have controlled or coordinated the activities from both the technical and police points of view .
We regret that this has not been the case .
Let us await the conclusions of the Courts and the Italian Parliament calmly and let us hope that , in future , there will be no more acts of violence .
Madam President , the Minister began her speech by talking about her generation .
I belong to the generation that , in Italy , is called the ' ebb ' [ apolitical ] generation - I am too young for either ' 68 or ' 77 - and I am used to thinking of the police and the carabinieri as those who ensure personal safety and who have made it possible to defeat terrorism in Italy .
The most surprising and shocking thing for me in the Genoa events was therefore to actually see how , within the forces of law and order , something tiny , a mere change of government , a defamatory campaign by the anti-G8 movement , inadequate organisation and a bunch of violent hooligans , was enough to bring out in some of them - I stress some of them - a desire to become the instruments of blind and profoundly stupid intimidation .
This , Mr Tajani , Commissioner Vitorino , is a European , not a national issue .
The divide that , from Nice to Gothenburg to Genoa and , perhaps tomorrow to Laeken - even if the Minister ' s fine words perhaps give us grounds for optimism - is being erected , for right or for wrong , whether we like it or not , between people who , in good faith , want to take action for a better world and the institutions - the police , Parliament , government - is something that should concern us all , on both left and right .
I am convinced that if police cooperation had been applied effectively and with respect for individual rights , if free movement were a true right , with the same level of priority as the free movement of capital , if the Charter of Fundamental Rights were in the DNA of all of us , the worst events of Genoa would , perhaps , not have taken place .
That is why I believe that , to prevent another Nice , another Gothenburg or another Genoa , we need two things , and the first of them is transparency .
In Italy , the Courts are already hard at work , as is the parliamentary committee of inquiry .
Here , we must make a precise assessment of the lines along which the cooperation between European police forces was conducted and ascertain whether or not the Charter of Fundamental Rights was violated in the treatment of prisoners .
The second and last thing , Madam President , is to understand whether suspension of the Schengen rules can justify the indiscriminate , collective ban on free movement .
These are the things we must do in this House , and I hope we shall all work together to achieve them .
Madam President , the G8 meeting in Genoa gave nothing of substance to the poor people of the developing world : that is the truth .
Worst of all , it laughed at the request by Kofi Annan for the allocation of a sum that would have been at all adequate and not just alms for the fight against AIDS .
The pretensions of Western leaders to lead the world and their agencies for managing the world economy along free-enterprise lines have , since Seattle , been the object of criticism and active protest from a movement of thousands of associations and millions of people and even some States - I am thinking of South Africa - who are asking for an alternative , democratic model of globalisation oriented towards satisfying the often tragic needs of communities , especially in the developing world .
In Genoa , then , the Genoa Social Forum - that is , a thousand or so organisations , all of them peaceful and non-violent , half of them Italian - called on 300 000 people to come together and express their dissent and their alternative goals .
You have all seen the pictures and film footage of what happened in Genoa in the media .
That is proof , Mr Ferri !
I have read the newspapers and watched television .
A few hundred hooligans , then , between 600 and 800 according to the Italian police themselves , were left to run riot in Genoa , even though it was known where they were staying , to destroy businesses , banks and public property , while the full strength of the police was most brutally unleashed against the peaceful demonstrators .
They broke into the residences where they were sleeping and beat them ; hundreds of young men and women were arrested , and in the police barracks they were beaten up , insulted , tortured , forced to stand for hours with their arms against a wall and their legs apart , forced to sing fascist anthems and praise Mussolini ; and the girls were even threatened with rape .
I was in Genoa over those days and I was a direct witness of the police jeeps driven at full speed and the police charges against peaceful marches , as well as the hundreds of tear-gas grenades thrown at thousands of defenceless people , amongst whom were children and disabled persons .
I then went to the prisons where hundreds of young people had been transferred - Italians , Spanish , Germans , Austrians , Swedes , Swiss , aged between 18 and 20 , and I collected their statements : all of them , I repeat all of them , had been beaten , insulted or tortured , many had stitches in their heads , and all that had happened in the barracks after their arrest .
Right-wing authoritarian processes have a history in Europe !
Together with the underlying factors , this history includes accidental events , on the one hand , and the complicity or inertia of the moderate , liberal and Catholic right on the other .
The attitude emerging here of underestimation by the Council , and also by part of the political groupings represented here in Parliament , of the general trend dramatically revealed in Genoa which is taking hold of Italy , is therefore - if I may say so - irresponsible , not only towards democracy but also towards these groupings themselves .
For much less , for Haider ' s idle talk , Austria was subjected to surveillance and sanctions by the other 14 Member States of the Union .
Mr Vinci , there were also charges against the police and not just the police excesses that I have condemned , let us make it clear .
But that is not the problem I want to deal with today .
There is one point , however , which unites us all , which is : what can Europe do ?
Minister , you have said that Europe can be a model in facing the problems of tomorrow ' s globalisation .
That is true , but not this Europe , let us be frank , Minister .
Yes , the Europe of human rights , for which we were the cradle , the Europe of respect for minorities and diversity , the Europe of the ' No ' to the death penalty , which responds to the concerns of so many , perhaps the majority of human beings .
But it would really respond to their concerns if Europe had a voice and an instrument to express this idea forcefully in the world .
A divided Europe can have no part in this .
The G8 summit did not give the idea of a Europe able to back up its decisions .
The G8 summit has given the world the idea of the great superpower and a divided Europe that is weak and ineffective because it is fragmented .
This is the real problem facing us .
If we want Europe to respond to the concerns of globalisation , let us move ahead on the road towards building a political Union and giving Europe a single voice .
If , at a G8 summit , there were not four European states speaking but just one speaking on behalf of the whole of Europe , there would no longer be a great America and a number of little States ; there would be two voices with the same weight .
Minister , your government could make a great contribution in this direction at Laeken by presenting and taking forward a draft Constitution that is not divorced from the reality of the problems , as the debate still is today , but which , in a few years ' time , when the euro has become the common currency and globalisation is no longer a contentious issue , can be an instrument for Europe to speak in the world with a single voice and as a single political unit .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the events of Genoa show us several things .
The first , I would say , as regards the European or world leaders , the Euro-globalists who were barricaded in that town , is quite simply that they may govern badly , but they protect themselves well .
The second does not , for all that , tempt us to support the brutal and deliberately violent counter-demonstrations that were organised and that did not create too much indignation among their ranks so long as they were used against the national right-wing parties .
When the targets are Flemish , Italian , French , German or other national militants , that is seen as entirely acceptable and there was no shortage of leaders within the French socialist party to encourage and organise the so-called democratic harassment .
Until the day when , like the man hoist with his own petard , the socialist leaders find themselves at the receiving end of the stone throwing .
Indeed the bloody events of Genoa show that protests against globalisation are not the expression of a moral protest born of the desire for a fairer redistribution of the wealth of the planet .
In fact today , like yesterday , the issue is political and ideological .
Lucas Casarini , leader of the White Overalls movement , said as much in an interview with La Repubblica .
Negri , imprisoned for armed insurrection against the Italian state and now partially free , expressed the same view in a book .
These people are no longer socialist internationalists , proletarian internationalists , but they are still internationalists .
The people who demonstrated in Seattle do not represent the voice of the poor throughout the world ; they are a political instrument directed against the Western world .
In Genoa , they launched their attack from the very heart of the empire they supposedly wanted to destroy ; but in reality another equally subversive form of globalisation is dialectically opposed to liberal globalisation .
We do not support either one of them ; the real reply lies in the defence of national identities .
Madam President , after the spirit of Rambouillet at the first G5 summit , we have reached the sad events in Genoa and many of us are beginning to think that these summits have become too large , unwieldy and bureaucratic and have lost the old , productive atmosphere of confidential meetings .
The Commission spoke about this a while ago and this is certainly a subject to examine in greater depth .
On occasions such as these , however , many of us have also realised that there are forces in Parliament that are able to exploit even tragedies for their own ends , for the death in Genoa was a tragedy .
This was simply to achieve their political objectives : that is , to discredit the centre-right government in Italy .
To achieve this outcome , they use the European Parliament , organising in Parliament , as they did yesterday , for example , meetings with exponents of antiglobalisation movements that spread ridiculous , false accusations and offend a European Union Member State by calling it an incomplete democracy that should be placed under supervision .
I regret to say that an active part is played in these demonstrations by Italian Members of this House - I need only name Mr Vinci - who perhaps do not realise that they are discrediting not so much the centre-right government but the whole of their country .
My question is quite obvious and simple : if a left-wing government had been in power in Italy , would there have been the same mobilisation of forces in this Parliament , with pilgrimages by our fellow Members who had never dreamt of going to previous summits but who - as if by coincidence - were present in Genoa ?
I hope that the protests in Genoa and elsewhere never succeed in preventing world leaders from continuing to talk to each other , as could well happen .
Madam President , the Socialists are opposed to globalisation if it stands for survival of the fittest , but welcomes globalisation with a human dimension .
Worldwide , we are becoming increasingly connected and dependent on one another .
It therefore makes absolutely no sense whatsoever to hide behind national , European or other borders .
At the same time , however , we also see the other side of globalisation .
World trade is flourishing , but the richest countries earn 37 times more than the poorest countries , and despite the enormous increase in world trade over the past few years , the chasm between rich and poor has only widened .
One in five people who live in this global village still have no access to education or health care .
It is precisely in this global village that this complete and utter imbalance concerns us all .
Europe - which , to me , encompasses the Commission , the Council , Parliament and the Member States - must stand united .
This is something we can do and thereby be able to play a crucial role .
We can fulfil a pioneering role as the largest trading power .
We must defend our social model within and outside our borders , and , therefore , assume our responsibility , as well as support new social and innovative solutions .
We must , for example , lend support to those poor countries which are endeavouring to produce cheap AIDS medication .
We must make this possible and also defend their rights .
If we act on our own behalf , let us then show that we mean business .
Certainly at a time when the United States now and then threatens to stray from multilateralism and withdraw behind a wall of self-interest , it is extremely important for Europe to fulfil this active global role .
This then , of course , raises the question of what role that is and what the activities are we should be carrying out .
I would like to list a few promising initiatives : " Everything but Arms " , our action programme against AIDS and the initiatives by Messrs Jospin and Schröder concerning the Tobin tax .
Would the Commission and Council be prepared at least to have such initiatives seriously looked at and to back them ?
I would also like to mention our weaker points : the refusal to reform agriculture in the short term .
I also have in mind the fact that , while the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , has earmarked EUR 120 million for our Global Health Fund , this is money taken from our own pocket .
That is similar to helping ourselves to one of our own cigars .
Moreover , when can we expect Parliament ' s proposals , for this measure will surely require formal approval .
We are here in Parliament to ask for extra funding , and not for one of our own cigars .
I am also thinking of the Member States which do not spend 0.7 % of their GNP on development and cooperation .
If Europe wants to be a friend to those who wish globalisation to have a human dimension , if it wants to listen seriously and be an example to all those who take to the streets out of concern , it will have to make it happen by taking action of its own and adopting appropriate policy .
This is , in my opinion , the cornerstone of a partnership with developing countries .
This is also the basis of success for a fresh WTO round .
However , this is a different Europe from the Europe which sides with the few who are out to seek personal gain .
If we really want the law to apply to everyone , then we have here in Europe a brilliant opportunity to make it happen , and the Social Democrats are happy to take this road .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the denial of democracy and a social dimension in European integration is creating conflicts .
What is our response ?
Countless young people have waited all summer for this first session of the European Parliament .
In Genoa , they encountered a state and a Europe which have deeply traumatised them .
Their trauma is heightened every day that we fail to give them a satisfactory response .
What is this Parliament ' s response ?
On the first day , Mr Poettering congratulated Mr Berlusconi .
The Christian Democrats and right-wingers in this House have rejected the resolution and made it clear that they will also reject a committee of enquiry .
Let me make it clear what they are identifying themselves with : police violence , systematic brutality and even torture in the prisons or at the time of arrest , hundreds of arbitrary arrests , sexual harassment , and Nazi slogans in the police stations .
I was in Genoa for a week .
I visited the prisons .
I spoke to the people in charge , and I took notes for ten hours with people who had been systematically abused and mistreated , in some cases for up to thirty hours .
Yet you want to sweep everything under the table !
The Christian Democrats are allowing the Italian right to dictate the course of today ' s debate .
One of them even had the gall to say that there is no evidence .
Ladies and gentlemen , please vote for an enquiry . We will provide bags full of evidence of hundreds of cases of torture , abuse , brutality and excesses by the police .
This is not merely a matter for the Italian police , for these young people all over Europe have waited for this first session , hopeful that the guardians of fundamental rights sit here in this House and that this House will not remain silent or make common cause with Italy ' s rightist government .
Let me say a few bitter words as an Austrian .
What would have happened if these appalling events at a summit had taken place in Austria a year ago ?
One dead , 500 injured , 470 arrested and imprisoned , with 90 % of them having to be released later due to lack of evidence because the police had picked them up at random as much as 50 km outside Genoa and trumped up evidence against them .
This has a European dimension , and this House must address the issue ....
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , the political results of the G8 summit , let us be frank about it , were virtually nil or even negative , and yet everything was clouded , as we all know , by the violent clashes .
We register here the strongest possible protest against the Italian government and police forces , who were tolerant and permissive with the violent , but savage against the innocent .
Europe has been able to judge , and it has judged with dismay and indignation the atrocious images of acts carried out in the developing world , persecutions as seen in Chile , as have been perpetrated by a Member State of the Union .
We also here express our utter condemnation of the mindless violence by some groups of demonstrators and our severe criticism of those organisers who reject violence in words but who were unable or unwilling , in fact , to break off all relations with those in the movement who preached or advocated violence .
Any tolerance in this respect plays into the hands of the enemies of the people ' s cause .
Any naivety by those who believe that it is enough to be right for right to prevail and who do not take the trouble to oppose , isolate and exclude the violent of all kinds is not a virtue but bears a poisonous fruit . It is a real boomerang that will hit back against the need to extend and expand the great movement against neo-free trade globalisation .
Madam President , the European Parliament should take a very balanced view when its debate covers the responsibilities of national parliaments , so as not to give the impression of interfering in the various countries ' affairs in one way or another .
On the G8 I share the opinion of the Council and Commission on the good and bad sides of it , but I also wonder why , every time an international summit is organised , from Seattle to Gothenburg to Genoa , conflicts break out that threaten public order , as if people were trying to fight an invisible tyrant .
We should reflect on this paradox and initiate a dialogue with the young people , giving politics back its role .
Violence is rejected without equivocation . Violence is incompatible with democracy , and extremism is often the cradle of violence .
The violence in Genoa is being investigated by the Italian magistracy , in whom we should have every faith .
There is , however , a political issue : there are various ways of defending institutions .
We should not confuse the Black Block that was looking for violence with those who were exercising their right to demonstrate in the streets .
That confusion leads to a spiral that produces more violence and sows the seeds of terrorism .
In these situations it is very difficult to enforce the law without using force , but that is the responsibility of governments .
To isolate the extremist movements we must start with the moral authority of national and European institutions and the ability to show every respect for the rights of the citizenry .
Madam President , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs is going to make a recommendation on the proposal presented to us by the Justice and Home Affairs Council with a view to ensuring public order during meetings .
We are going to place value on the need to defend the freedom and fundamental rights of citizens .
Since the Treaty of Nice , the European Parliament has had the duty to exercise the right to monitor respect for these rights and that is conferred on us by the Treaty .
We must also exercise democratic control of the security measures proposed by the Council , of their proportionality and effectiveness .
I am not going to throw accusations at the Italian police , but I believe that to suspend the right to movement of certain citizens while allowing the entry of the people who did what they did in Genoa could be described at the very least as ineffective and inefficient .
We are going to do all of this .
But I believe that today , Madam President , what we must demand of the European institutions above all is a political reaction to a situation which is not a natural catastrophe , for which a civil protection plan can be presented , as Minister Duquesne appeared to do a few days ago in our committee , but a political phenomenon which we must react to .
And that reaction must also , and above all , come from this European Parliament .
We in this Parliament have the obligation to create fora for political mediation given a demand which is becoming stronger and stronger , and we must do so above all because the European Union has this democratically elected institution .
It is the only international organisation which has one and , given the widespread feeling that there is a lack of opportunity to exercise political demand in an international forum , we must be able to take a step forward and to offer this forum as soon as possible , in the hope that the other institutions will do the same .
Madam President , in spite of what was said earlier on the other side of this House , it is clear that the police exercised systematic physical and psychological torture in Genoa .
Like others , I regret that we do not have a resolution in front of us in which we could have expressed our complete condemnation of police brutality and of the violence of the Black Block at Genoa , our conviction that those responsible must be brought to justice , our commitment to uphold the right to protest peacefully , and our determination to clarify the growing evidence that much of the violence and damage to property which occurred in Genoa was the work of agents provocateurs .
But we have another task before us and that is to address the reasons fully why 300 000 people chose - in their own time , and at their own expense - to go to Genoa , just as hundreds of thousands have gone to Seattle , to Gothenburg and elsewhere to demonstrate about the continuing debt burden of the poor , about the increasing and grotesque inequalities between rich and poor and about the growing corporate control of many aspects of our lives .
That means that we need to confront the reality that the neo-liberal economic policies of the European Union are currently part of the problem , not the solution .
For example , it is the EU which is ruthlessly driving forward the agenda for a new , ambitious , comprehensive round of trade talks at Doha in November in the face of opposition from the majority of developing countries and of social movements around the world .
Commissioner Vitorino said that there was agreement in Mexico last weekend .
Well , there might have been agreement between the Quad countries , but it certainly was not endorsed by the African countries , the LDCs , India , Malaysia , Indonesia , the list goes on .
Moreover , in most EU Member States , the level of official development assistance remains far below the UN target and , contrary to the Gothenburg declaration , the Council is proposing for its 2002 budget a further 3.2 % cut in commitments on foreign aid compared to last year ' s budget .
As Members of the European Parliament , we have a responsibility to ensure that the citizens of the European Union continue to enjoy the right to protest peacefully .
We also have a responsibility to listen to what they are demonstrating about and to respond because , if we do not , we cannot be surprised if the reputation of the EU institutions as remote and out of touch continues to grow .
Madam President , I went to Genoa at the invitation of the Genoa Social Forum and I was surprised because I had never seen such police conduct , and I say that having fought for democracy and freedom in Spain since 1966 .
Not even under the Franco dictatorship did the police behave as I witnessed in Genoa .
It was more similar to the situation which I experienced on 11 September 1973 in Santiago , Chile , when Pinochet ' s coup d ' état took place .
This raises a serious problem for the European Union : to guarantee that , just as the G8 can meet , all people , young people who want a different world , can also meet in a democratic fashion .
That is the responsibility of the European Union , of the European Parliament .
I therefore believe that we will have to ensure that progress is made in terms of democracy and freedom for all .
Mr President , although we do not yet know the full story of the police violence inflicted on the anti-globalisation protestors at the recent G8 summit in Genoa , there is enough evidence to suggest that the death of the young protestor Carlo Giuliani was not just caused by a police blunder .
Similarly , the methods used by the Italian authorities do not seem to be just the result of the police being unable to cope with the rioting , which we of course condemn .
After all , the private Italian network Sette broadcast scenes of people dressed like Black Blocks calmly chatting with the anti-riot police and then going away .
Even if it does not suit those who have a narrow conception of the sovereignty of states , we must make it clear that the events of Genoa do not come only under the heading of Italy ' s domestic affairs but directly concern the European institutions , and chiefly among them the European Parliament because it is directly elected .
First of all , Europe is concerned because the Union must not simply be a stepping stone of liberal globalisation , but also an area of freedom in which the citizens have the rights guaranteed under the European Convention on Human Rights and , more recently , the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Furthermore , when citizens of all nationalities come together to exercise their collective freedom , their freedom of opinion and their right to demonstrate , it is the duty of the European Community to guarantee that they can effectively exercise these rights .
Secondly , Europe must not remain inert in face of such disturbing manipulative operations .
Europe cannot allow a government in its midst to use methods that are so incompatible with the values of democracy and freedom in which it believes .
Lastly , as responsible democrats we cannot allow the violent actions of a minority of activists to be lumped together with the pacifist beliefs of thousands of people protesting against liberal globalisation , for the Union must , in its turn , become the motive force of democratic globalisation based on solidarity .
I deplore the rejection of the proposal to table a European Parliament resolution on the subject .
I would have liked to see a committee of inquiry set up .
Like some of my socialist comrades and other colleagues , I will play an active part in the monitoring group referred to by Francis Wurtz and we will carefully examine the conclusions of the Italian committee of inquiry .
Mr President , the efforts of big business to rule the world , now that the Socialist camp no longer ranks as a formidable adversary , the anti-grass roots policy punishing workers in developed countries and plundering the riches of the developing world are obviously - please do not laugh , Sir - going to provoke a reaction on the streets .
Despite attempts to lead and mislead , such as we have heard here from the Council and the Commission about involvement in dialogue with civil society , we are certain that this movement is set to become even more radical and to turn even more resolutely against the capitalist system .
And at the same time , unbridled police violence is being used , such as that seen in Gothenburg and , even more so , in Genoa .
Without wishing to play down the responsibility of the Italian government , we would point out that the suppressive measures taken in Genoa originate in the European Union with the Schengen Agreement , police collaboration , the decisions taken by the Council on 13 July and the preparations to crush demonstrations in Belgium .
No matter , history teaches us that , however strong the oppressors , however much violence they use , the oppressed eventually come out on top .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , several among you have called for a dialogue with civil society in general and for a dialogue with this Parliament and the national parliaments , in particular .
It is precisely because the presidency - not only myself , but also the Belgian Prime Minister - takes this dialogue so seriously that the Prime Minister has sent me to represent the presidency here today and naturally the intention is not to limit myself to a brief explanation , but to follow attentively everything you have to say and to remain calm in the process , even if I completely disagree with some of the speakers . But that is part and parcel of it .
I have thus carefully listened to all the speeches from the left , the right and the centre in this debate , and you can be certain that a number of elements will definitely inspire us .
Even if it is correct that the Belgian Prime Minister , following Gothenburg , said that the law enforcers and armed forces in my country have extensive experience of all kinds of disturbances . Given the fact that the capital of my country sometimes deals with more than 2 000 of these annually , we do not want to give anyone the impression that we are not taking the situation seriously .
As a personal comment , obviously , I said that , in my opinion , the spectacle of a totally secluded zone for a summit meeting , as was the case in June or a number of weeks ago , is a very brutal spectacle .
But at the same time , it was tragic to have to witness the extent of the street violence .
It is absolutely awful if situations escalate to such a degree that , as we have personally witnessed , young demonstrators are killed during these disturbances .
This is not acceptable , this must be prevented .
There are very few , extremely few causes worth dying for .
One should obviously have the right to demonstrate , protest and say whatever it may be in whatever way , but it is not acceptable that some are killed in the process , or are physically or mentally injured .
You can therefore count on us to do whatever is necessary during all council meetings of the next couple of days and weeks .
My baptism - and I hope it will not be a baptism of fire - will take place tomorrow evening .
The informal meeting of Foreign Trade Ministers in Bruges starts tomorrow evening and will be followed by a whole series of meetings .
We will make every effort to ensure that the right balance is struck between openness and accessibility whilst ensuring that safety is maintained and that escalations of recent weeks are avoided .
I wish to make that very clear to you .
For the rest , Mr President , I am also convinced that the debate on globalisation has only just got off the ground and that we will be discussing it for the foreseeable future .
Needless to say , we will not always agree on everything , as I have already said , but that does not matter .
For the debate to be fruitful , it is of the utmost importance not only to hear what the other person has to say , but also to try to understand what the other person is saying .
For example , I have said that law enforcement and the way in which the law is enforced falls within the exclusive remit of the Member State .
That is correct , but I also said at the beginning of my speech that in the Justice and Home Affairs Council , within the remit of the Union and by means of existing instruments , we will do whatever is necessary to prevent as much as possible the escalation of violence .
We will return to this topic during Question Time , when I will have the opportunity to give you more detail in my answers .
We welcome dialogue , certainly constructive dialogue , but not only do we need to listen to each other , we must also try to understand one another , particularly if we do not share the same views .
Ladies and gentlemen , first of all I believe that this debate is leaning towards recognition of the need to structure the political debate on how to regulate globalisation .
In this regard , I believe that the Commission has put forward several suggestions here on ' how to structure this debate ' .
We acknowledge , and I want to say this quite clearly , that the European Parliament , the elected representative of European citizens have a key role to play in structuring this debate .
For we need to embark on it with a degree of humility ; we are all looking for answers , but nobody can say with any conviction that they have all the answers to the complex issues facing us all .
That is why I want to point out , in reply to Mr Barón Crespo , that President Prodi genuinely wanted to attend this debate today .
He had intended to take part in the debate had it remained on the agenda as originally scheduled , i.e. this morning .
However , Parliament changed its agenda and Mr Prodi had to return to Brussels for the summit with the People ' s Republic of China , so that he was unable to be present here today . I therefore have the honour and pleasure of taking part in this debate with you .
My second point relates to the issue in question .
I believe the Commission has worked well with Parliament on the substance of the Genoa decisions .
I can tell you that we too believe in the global approach .
In our view , some progress has been made and some positive decisions were taken at the G8 summit .
Of course they do not go far enough .
There is no doubt that the financing of the global health fund to combat disease is inadequate , as we agree , but at least we can say we played our part in funding it .
Along the same lines , let me tell you quite frankly that I do not understand how , in relation to the negotiations on a new World Trade Organisation , we can be reproached for favouring a purely pro-free trade vision of world trade .
We work together very closely with Parliament and what we are trying to do is to establish areas of negotiation that also take direct account of issues such as the environmental balance , the social agenda and the interests of the less-developed countries .
I therefore believe that the Mexico conclusions are entirely consistent with the policy advocated by the Commission for regulating globalisation .
Lastly , in reply to Mrs Frassoni , let me emphasise that you must take my words in their strictest sense .
What I said , and in fact that is what Article 33 of the Treaty also provides for , is that the maintenance of law and order is primarily the responsibility of the Member States .
I acknowledge , however , that the question of law and order also has a European dimension .
In 1997 , the Council approved a joint action on the maintenance of law and order .
It may be that few people paid attention to the contents of that decision at the time , but it exists and the conclusions of the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 13 July are based on this joint action dating from 1997 .
The joint action provides for cooperation between law enforcement and judicial authorities in order to safeguard public order at European-level meetings and places it within the framework of the Europol Convention .
That means we have a legislative text that regulates European cooperation on the maintenance of law and order .
We also have the Schengen Agreements .
In this regard , I must tell you that in the case of the Genoa meeting what we saw was joint action by what one might call the ' two Italian governments ' .
The idea was first put forward by the previous government and then put into practice by the new government .
So it is quite clear that the Commission ' s neutrality is beyond all suspicion in the debate within Italy .
The truth is that the Italian government respected its obligations under the Schengen Agreements by reintroducing border checks at the time of the G8 summit in Genoa .
Obviously , when it comes to monitoring the implementation of the Schengen Agreements , both the Commission and the European Parliament have certain responsibilities .
They are limited responsibilities but that , Mrs Frassoni , is another matter entirely .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Data protection in electronic communications
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A5-0270 / 2001 ) by Mr Cappato , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector [ COM ( 2000 ) 385 - C5-0439 / 2000 - 2000 / 0189 ( COD ) ] ;
( A5-0284 / 2001 ) by Mrs Cederschiöld , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the strategy aiming at creating a safer information society by improving the security of information infrastructures and through the fight against cybercrime .
Mr President , it is a pity that , after a whole day during which Parliament has debated matters in which it has no legislative competence , only in the afternoon and then the evening will we actually be talking about areas in which we do have legislative power .
It is rather a bad Parliamentary habit , and we should try to resist these headline-grabbing temptations .
Having said that , the European Commission ' s proposal for a directive is an important document and will help to protect rights and also freedoms on line , not only as regards the electronic communications of citizens within Europe , and thus we congratulate the Commission on the work that has been done .
I must start , however , by saying that the Commission itself should , I believe , take greater account of the fact that the difficulties and delays in implementing directives in the Member States mean that we are in danger of having European laws that are increasingly specific and detailed , which attempt to keep up with technological progress , but then we find ourselves updating a 1997 directive , now four years old , when this directive has still not been implemented by all the Member States : it is a specific directive relating to a general directive from 1995 which itself has not yet been adopted by the Member States .
It is therefore this legislative method that should probably be debated !
Having said that , however , I genuinely believe that important measures for protecting European citizens ' privacy are guaranteed and specified , measures that the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights and its rapporteur fully upheld in committee and which were adopted .
I would now like to focus on two points that are , perhaps , more politically controversial : the power of public and state authorities to have access to European Union citizens ' personal data , and unsolicited commercial e-mail .
On the first point , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights accepted the European Commission ' s desire not to grant the kind of carte blanche or blank cheque that some countries in the Union would have liked , to be able to intercept and access European Union citizens ' personal data , for instance by accessing data collected by telephone companies .
The Commission is right to insist on and uphold this point .
We hope that it will also follow us in a further request expressed by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , of placing a precise obligation on all derogations from the directive or European regulations that are not completely exceptional , based on a specific law accessible to the public , and limited in time ; this will have the consequence , which we have written into the report , of prohibiting generalised surveillance .
I think it is important that the Commission should uphold this , because I believe the greatest threat to citizens ' privacy is the omnipotence of the state in accessing personal data .
On the other point - unsolicited commercial e-mails - I have preferred , and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights has followed me , not to accept the Commission proposal of imposing a harmonised Europe-wide opt-in system , but to leave each Member State the choice of opting in or opting out .
I believe , in fact , that both systems are ineffective at stopping so-called spamming : true spammers who block up electronic mail boxes are people who do so fraudulently , hiding their addresses , and so have no interest in respecting either opting-in or opting-out .
In the absolute ban of opt-in , I see a threat to the freedom of expression of those who conduct e-commerce correctly : for freedom of expression it is not so easy to separate commercial messages from non-commercial messages , and there may be journalistic or political texts that are sponsored and as such could be treated as commercial messages .
I also believe that today there are instruments for self-regulation , filters and technologies that can solve the problem much more flexibly and effectively than the courts can .
Furthermore , the costs that the consumer has to bear are set to fall with the liberalisation of telecommunications that the Commission is pressing for in the other directives in the package .
Therefore , with flat rates and broad band connections , even the cost problem of connecting for a few seconds is becoming less important .
That is why , faced with the possible risks of the opt-in system , we are opposed to a single , harmonised European system .
Mr President , we are all of us affected on a daily basis by the risks presented by the new computer-related crimes .
It happens every time we shop using credit cards , use a telephone , open our e-mail or travel by plane .
We are concerned here with traditional crimes which affect us partly due to information technology : child pornography , counterfeiting , xenophobia and the trades in drugs , human beings , human organs , weapons etc .
However , we are also concerned here with new types of crime directed against the way in which society operates : the spreading of viruses , unauthorised access , hacking , denial of service etc .
Traditional methods of combating these crimes are inadequate , even if on-line crime is just as criminal as off-line crime .
The underworld is threatening society with new methods from a digital platform .
Criminals exploit the differences in legislation between one Member State and another , and so the EU must maintain a united front .
The Commission has tabled proposals to which the Committee is giving impetus and which it is developing .
We seek common definitions for solving conflicts of competence , as well as the closer harmonisation of criminal law and the law of procedure and the mutual recognition of preliminary investigation procedures .
We want to make Europol and Eurojust more effective but , at the same time , set clear limits .
Now , controversial demands are also being made for the interception , registration and storage of our communications .
Where these are concerned , the Committee demands respect for fundamental rights , such as the secrecy of correspondence and telephone calls , and strict requirements for the whole area .
The Committee also demands a ban on such invasions of privacy , except in those cases in which the measure fulfils all the following requirements : it is necessary , has proper justification , is the only possible solution , is proportionate to the crime , is limited in time and has been decided upon in the courts .
No one wants a big brother society .
We in the European Union must comply with the demand we ourselves have made for cheap Internet access for all citizens , which means that we cannot transfer the costs of this to companies .
We want to encourage voluntary cooperation and have therefore proposed the setting up of an open forum to which a variety of players can contribute their experiences and pool these for the benefit of all , a forum in which understanding can increase , awareness of these problems be developed and best practice be promoted .
In this forum , industry and legal authorities , together with consumers , will be able to create a code of conduct and develop early warning and crisis management systems , and it will be possible to develop preventive technology and protective measures and to make these more widely available .
Coordination within the EU is also required so that our measures are not rendered ineffective at a global level .
Member States and candidate countries should be invited to develop common tactics and a cohesive EU policy within international bodies such as the UN , the OECD , the Council of Europe and the G8 .
The committee was unanimous and gave its support to the message of the report , which is about improving respect for personal privacy now that evermore effective measures to combat computer-related crime have to be developed .
Finally , a big and heartfelt thank you to everyone who has assisted in the preparation of this report .
There are a lot of you , since there are many conflicting interests that have been reconciled .
A brief word about the two amendments that have been introduced to the report .
They can be seen as technical in nature .
The first is aimed at adding the word ' terrorism ' , since the committee unanimously adopted this as an oral amendment which has since in some way been lost from the text submitted to plenary .
The word ' terrorism ' must , of course , be present in a report on cyber crime .
We also want to change the term ' labelling ' .
This change is proposed because ' labelling ' obviously does not cover what we intend as effectively as ' certification ' , which is the term we wish to introduce .
The term we use in Swedish , ' märkning ' , is tricky to translate .
This is mainly a translation issue , then .
I now turn to the Cappato report .
Because I do not have very much time , I shall concentrate entirely on the opt-in / opt-out debate .
It is too early at this stage to abolish subsidiarity and force everyone to give up the status quo with its freedom of choice and instead to introduce an opt-in clause .
There would then be a risk of being criticised for over-regulation .
We should be in danger of having a new ' cucumber debate ' , with the EU being criticised for its passion for detailed regulation .
Through being contrary to two important directives in the area of information technology , such a move could damage future legislation in this area and render our existing legislation inconsistent .
The debate on constitutional issues could also be harmed because such action could lead to a loss of confidence in the EU .
This would apply especially to the European Parliament if we were to adopt inconsistent positions .
We are in the middle of a process of technical development , involving filtering and broad band , which may mean that this opt-in / opt-out debate will be out of date and a thing of the past in three years ' time .
I do not think that we should become bogged down in an outmoded position and , at the same time , abolish the possibility of choice without obtaining any added value , for a European opt-in solution would not put an end to spamming , a lot of which originates outside the EU .
The United States itself has not harmonised its legislation , for example .
An opt-in system involves problems in drawing the line between commercial information , on the one hand , and information about society and voluntary organisations , on the other .
It could also prevent the development of newspapers on the Net and create difficulties for small companies which have to store their information in case they are prosecuted . How , moreover , would the punishment be meted out ?
Finally , we politicians must not legislate as soon as we see a phenomenon we do not like .
As politicians , we do not always know what is best for each individual person and company in each particular case .
Our job is to speed up the development and distribution of the technical products which will make spamming a thing of the past and to press for supervision , something which Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ' s amendment in fact does .
Finally , we must , as politicians , defend freedom of expression and not restrict it unnecessarily and without due care .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to speak about the issue of electronic data protection , which has already been mentioned . To come back to the points made by Mrs Cederschiöld , I have heard in many forums and many other communications media in the Internet and e-mail that there has been a great deal of annoyance among users .
This is logical , for if we examine the principles of opt-in and opt-out using the example of letter mail , opt-out simply means that e-mails are paid on delivery , i.e. by the addressee .
After all , it is the users who pay the Internet access fees .
I would get very annoyed about this too .
This is not to say that this is a bad intervention , but I would vote for an opt-in system for e-mails .
Otherwise , I think that the directive ' s major shortcoming is what is not regulated , namely monitoring by the state , which is explicitly excluded .
I think that this poses the greatest threat to fundamental rights in the European Union - and fundamental rights are there to protect citizens from the state .
This is excluded here , which means that the directive is inadequate .
The rest offers quite a good level of protection .
However , if we draw together the opinion on cybercrime and Parliament ' s opinion on terrorism , it is quite striking that a great many things are thrown together and criminalised : for example , " everything which is illegal offline should be illegal online " .
This is the case anyway , so we do not need any directives on cybercrime .
No one has yet given me a plausible explanation of why we actually need this , and which new laws will be adopted and crimes defined which are not already covered elsewhere .
In my view , this whole cybercrime issue is primarily intended to legitimise intervention in fundamental rights .
Finally , I should like to remind you of an anniversary which took place two days ago .
A hundred years ago , the typewriter was banned in Turkey .
Why ?
Because it was feared that it would enable people to communicate anonymously ; they could no longer be identified by their handwriting , and this would open the door to crime .
Banning the typewriter was intended to prevent this .
Perhaps this would be appropriate once again today ? !
Mr President , I welcome the Commission ' s strategy on cybercrime .
This is , as Mrs Cederschiöld said , a very controversial and difficult area which raises issues of how to regulate the Internet and yet not stifle its development ; and also significant issues regarding crime surveillance and privacy , data protection and retention , yet we need to be aware the cybercriminals do not respect our personal integrity .

We now have a growing phenomenon of so-called data streaming - hacking into computer systems and stealing credit card details in bulk .
The total cost loss to the UK last year was GBP300 million , an increase of 55 % on 1999 .
We need more secure systems if we are to boost consumer confidence in using the Internet .
Commissioner , in your strategy I want you to prioritise tackling the very disturbing growth in child pornography on the Internet .
We need to clamp down on sexual exploitation of children .
Again , there has been a very massive growth in cross-border child pornography .
In the UK , members of the so-called " Wonderland Club " , an Internet paedophilia ring , were arrested and found to have sites in 12 different European countries .
In my own region , the Greater Manchester Obscene Publications Unit has had success in cracking down on paedophilia with new Internet tracing software .
That is why , with the backing of many of the children ' s organisations across the European Union , we are calling for a number of actions .
We want you to look at the possibility of involving credit card companies and Internet service providers in supporting the blacklisting of sites trading in illegal pornographic content .
We want to see the expansion of 24-hour hotlines and electronic watchtowers .
We want to see the creation of a European rating system for child-friendly Internet providers and the display of child safety messages .
We want child pornography on news groups blocked .
We want closer involvement by Europol in prosecuting cyber paedophiles and better cooperation between European law enforcement agencies .
The European Union must act to ensure that there are no safe havens in Europe for cyber paedophiles .
Our message , therefore , is that we are stepping up our action and closing down these sites .
We want you , Commissioner , to take action in this area .
Mr President , may I say that both the committee and the rapporteur have taken a very balanced and level-headed approach to this issue .
Unfortunately , virtual reality , while it has a great deal going for it , engenders not virtual but very real crimes which we need to deal with without making bogeymen of ourselves .
We must be ready to prevent and punish these crimes as and when they appear .
Secure infrastructures and crime prevention need to go hand in glove with respect for freedoms and personal data protection .
This is something which we should never forget and which needs to be kept in a state of equilibrium .
Obviously we need coordination at international level and obviously the role of the Member States and of the European Union is to operate in international organisations with an appropriate strategy because we cannot resolve the problem alone .
The Internet is international and needs to be addressed internationally .
Obviously we need better definitions of the various types of crimes .
We cannot talk in general terms and what appear to be the most important issues today , i.e. pornography , hackers and racism , will not necessarily be the most important issues tomorrow .
Commercial crime is also very important and I think that we need to work with industry and the banks here if we are to be sure that the solutions found are indeed the most suitable .
One particular aspect , which colours all the rest , is intellectual property , which is in huge danger and could end up disadvantaging authors and artists .
I think that we need working protection rather than excessive measures which will stop the Internet from operating .
The debate is now suspended and will resume at 9 p.m.

Presentation by the Council of the draft general budget for 2002
The next item is the presentation by the Council of the draft general budget for 2002 .
Mr President , with this speech , I should like to resume the dialogue between the two arms of the budgetary authority , namely the European Parliament and the Council .
This dialogue was started in the framework of the Interinstitutional Agreement by means of various trilogues and a consultation meeting in July , on the very day that the Council adopted the draft budget for 2002 .
I know that during the most recent discussions of your Committee on Budgets , quite a few members expressed their regret about the outcome of this consultation . As this outcome cannot be seen as an actual result , people have started to call the validity of this exercise into question .
I should like to make two observations in this connection .
First of all , we must see this consultation between the members of the Council and Parliament as an initiation of the dialogue between the two arms of the budgetary authority .
Even if this consultation does not reap any immediate benefits , the discussions at the Council will still be affected by this during the coming months until the end of the budgetary procedure in December .
In addition , it is true that , at the time of the consultation , the Council ' s preparatory activities for July ' s sitting had already reached an advanced stage , and that compromise solutions had already been found in order to remove various obstacles which had emerged between the Member States themselves .
But it is also true , as I am sure you are aware , that the package which contains the compromise of the draft budget has already been influenced by the positions adopted by the European Parliament and which were known to us on account of the many contacts we have with this institution .
Those contacts , which start out in February and March , coincide with the informal trilogue in the capital of the presidency , and will be developed at different levels until the Council in July .
I can assure you that , without this permanent dialogue , the draft budget which is now before you could have taken on a completely different format .
Today , I should like to make you aware of the fact that the Belgian Presidency sets great store by sound cooperation with Parliament .
I should therefore like to explain to you directly the Council activities which have led to the draft budget for 2002 which is now before you and on the basis of which you will be preparing your first reading in the next two months .
First of all , I should like to outline the guidelines which have helped the Council compile this draft budget .
To start with , the draft budget is completely consistent with the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 on budgetary discipline and the improvement guidelines for the budgetary procedure .
The Council deems it of particular importance to keep to each of the annual maximum amounts for expenditure , as laid down in the financial perspectives and based on the recent EP and Council decision to adjust the financial perspectives with regard to budget implementation , and on the technical adjustment to GNP and price development , implemented by the Commission .
The Council has ensured , insofar as is possible , that sufficiently wide margins will be maintained in respect of the maximum amounts for the different categories , with the exception of categories 2 and 7 .
Secondly , the Council has taken into consideration the budgetary guidelines for 2002 which it adopted in March of this year .
You have undoubtedly noticed that the Council has adopted decisions of this kind for the first time .
I am of the opinion that it is a sound approach . It constitutes a move towards greater transparency and hence an improvement in the budgetary debate .
You have for some time now adopted budgetary guidelines yourselves which are used throughout your debates .
The same applies to the Commission which establishes its priorities every year .
The Council has therefore ascertained that the different EU measures are appropriately funded from the financial resources available within the maximum amounts set according to the financial perspectives .
For this purpose , the Council has , with regard to commitment appropriations , taken account of the evaluation of the options to implement the appropriations .
Finally , the Council has devoted special attention to the development of appropriations for payments by curbing their growth compared to 2001 , taking particular account of the implementation options and the expected rate of payments in connection with outstanding amounts and national budgetary requirements .
I should like to underline that these efforts to moderate are spread across the compulsory and non-compulsory expenses .
I should also like to take the opportunity to remind you that the Council deems it desirable that the Commission once again , as it did last year , submit a letter of amendments with the proposal to include in the final budget for 2002 an estimate of the surplus available from 2001 .
Based on the above , the draft budget for 2002 provides for commitment appropriations the sum of EUR 99 009 million , i.e. an increase of 2 % , and for payment appropriations EUR 95 598 million , which is also a 2 % increase .
The draft budget submitted to you is a compromise by means of which all policy areas and priorities of the European Union can be financed without placing too heavy a burden on the Member States who try to keep their public finances under control , and where room is given , especially under the maximum amount of category 3 of the financial perspectives and category 4 , for fresh priorities .
With regard to structural campaigns , the Council has allocated a high level of commitment appropriations , taking into consideration the pledges made in the framework of the conclusions of the European Council of Berlin of March 1999 and the Interinstitutional Agreement of May 1999 .
The pledges in this draft budget and the programmes which have been adopted within the framework of codecision between the European Parliament and the Council are in line with the jointly agreed scheduling .
Administrative expenditure has been discussed in great detail by the Council .
An attempt has been made , where possible , to meet the needs of the different institutions and to take account of the specific characteristics and the general objective of a moderate increase in administrative expenditure .
I remain convinced that Parliament will follow the same path in the future budgetary procedure .
In this connection , the Agreement reached between the European Parliament and the Council during the consultation of 20 July pertaining to a joint declaration is a good omen .
Indeed , both our institutions have agreed to ask the Secretary-Generals of the institutions to draft a report for the budgetary authority , which includes a multi-annual analysis of category 5 , and which is set for discussion in the Council for budgets in November .
This report must set out the proportionate benefits achieved through strengthened interinstitutional cooperation , as well as the economic proposals required so as not to exceed the maximum in category 5 . Both aspects have a bearing on preparations for the forthcoming enlargement .
I will not close off this general presentation of the draft budget for 2002 without mentioning two major issues in respect of which the Council has adopted a wait-and-see approach , because a number of elements , which were not to become apparent until later on in the budgetary procedure , have been missing .
These issues are the BSE and foot and mouth crises on the one hand , and the fisheries agreement with Morocco on the other .
As far as funding the effects of the BSE and foot and mouth crises is concerned , during the consultation of 20 July between the European Parliament and the Council , we concluded an agreement on a joint declaration in which the two arms of the budgetary authority were informed that , under the maximum of sub-category 1A of the financial perspectives , as laid down in the draft budget , a sufficient margin should be maintained to meet the needs in connection with the BSE and foot and mouth crises .
We would ask the Commission to submit a detailed analysis of the needs and to meet those needs , first of all by using the appropriations still left from 2001 , and secondly , by including the required appropriations for 2002 in its letter of amendments this coming autumn .
With regard to the financial implications of the absence of a fisheries agreement with Morocco , and the funding requirements to restructure the fishing fleet in question , the Council has stated that it would reconsider the situation in the framework of this year ' s letter of amendments , which is required under the Interinstitutional Agreement .
For all those reasons , the Council has maintained the preliminary draft budget submitted by the Commission for the international fisheries agreement , and has asked the Commission only to earmark these appropriations for other fisheries agreements .
I would take this opportunity to remind you of the fact that the appropriations for the international fisheries agreements , in accordance with the Interinstitutional Agreement , come under compulsory expenditure , irrespective of where that is : on the budget heading , in reserve or on a BA budget heading .
I do not intend to give a complete outline of the draft budget .
That can be found in the exhaustive explanation which has been sent to you .
What I would like to do is to go into more detail , that is to say per category of expenditure , of what the Council has laid down in its draft budget for 2002 .
Concerning category 1 of the financial perspectives for agricultural expenditure , the draft budget has taken into consideration the implications of the decisions taken by the European Council of Berlin in March 1999 concerning the reorganisation of the common agricultural policy .
Despite this , with regard to sub-category 1A of the financial perspectives , which covers the common agricultural policy , the Council has specified amounts which are generally EUR 200 million lower than the amounts which the Commission had proposed in its preliminary draft budget .
This reduction does not provide for the discussion of the letter of amendments , which the Interinstitutional Agreement prescribes , and which requests that particular account be taken of the development of the markets and the state of negotiations on the different common market organisations .
This reduction is mainly linear and particularly discounts the budget headings pertaining to the effects of BSE and foot and mouth , as well as the headings pertaining to the common market organisations , which form the subject of current negotiations .
Moreover , as I explained a moment ago , the Council failed to adopt the principle of a reserve of EUR one billion , which the Commission had proposed in order to cover the effects of the BSE and FMD crises , and increase the margin in the process .
The Council prefers to wait for the letter of amendments which is due this autumn .
At first reading by the Council , this leads to an increase in expenditure of the common agricultural policy by 2.3 % compared to 2001 .
With regard to expenditure for agricultural development , the Council has adopted the proposed appropriations of the preliminary draft budget and has , consequently , incorporated the entire sub-category 1B of the financial perspectives .
The Council has included in the budget the whole of category 2 of the financial perspectives , which is dedicated to structural measures , as commitment appropriations , in line with the conclusions reached by the European Council of Berlin in March 1999 .
In addition , the Council has accepted nearly all payment appropriations from the preliminary draft budget and only reduced the Community initiative programmes by EUR 375 million , in view of the expected delay in the implementation thereof .
In respect of category 3 of the financial perspectives , which is dedicated to the financing of internal policy , the Council is committed to funding the multi-annual programmes in an appropriate manner .
That is why it has accepted the amounts which the Commission had requested in its preliminary draft budget , especially for the framework programme for research and development of the trans-European networks .
However , based on the anticipated price development , the Council has curtailed the commitment and payment appropriations , which are not accompanied by multi-annual programmes , together with appropriations for agencies .
In the context of this category , I should like to point out that at first reading , the Council increased appropriations in its draft budget , namely on the budget headings which were intended for this purpose in the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget , in order to launch Eurojust and the SIS2 system for Schengen .
As you can see , the Council has ensured that its draft budget adequately covers the priorities within the internal policy of category 3 of the financial perspectives .
Consequently , the Council has created a precautionary margin of EUR 110 million , which is more generous than the margin provided for in the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget .
This margin should be sufficient to cover your priorities , a number of which were listed by your rapporteur , including e-learning and immigration .
I should now like to turn to the financing of the EU ' s external action , included in category 4 of the financial perspectives .
The Council has , to a very large extent , followed the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget .
Indeed , the Council has maintained major appropriations and carried out only minor reductions to the commitment and payment appropriations , geographically divided across a limited number of budget headings .
In addition , as already mentioned , the Council has maintained the appropriations for international fisheries agreements in their entirety .
Finally , I regret that during the consultation meeting of 20 July , no agreement was reached concerning the amount of appropriations that need to be earmarked for the common foreign and security policy .
That is why the Council has adopted in its draft budget the amounts which the Commission had proposed in its preliminary draft .
I must confess that I do not entirely understand the requests to reduce the amounts to be allocated to common foreign and security policy .
You will agree with me that these amounts , which are already lower than in 2001 , are very modest and are really the minimum required to ensure that Europe can play a prominent role on the world stage , especially in those regions which are being plagued by the crises with which we are all familiar .
The wish to reduce those amounts could , more than anything , affect the European Union ' s credibility , and I do not believe that that was your intention .
I therefore hope that it will become apparent as the budgetary procedure further unfolds , and especially from the outcome of your first reading , that you have been open to my reasoning , which is the Council ' s reasoning , and that you will reach the same conclusion as I have with regard to the justification of the amounts proposed in the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget .
As you can see , the Council has attempted to allocate adequate resources to the different priorities concerning the EU ' s external action .
Nevertheless , the Council has added a margin of EUR 100 million under the maximum of category 4 of the financial perspectives , which will enable you to confirm your priorities in this sector .
When the Council compiled its draft budget for administrative expenditure which falls within the scope of category 5 of the financial perspectives , as already stated , it followed an approach which aims to meet the needs of the institution as far as possible , taking into account their specific features .
With regard to the Commission ' s staffing requests , the Council continues to support the reforms and voted in favour of 78 new posts at first reading .
As for the other 239 posts , the Council had not adopted a position on this matter on 20 July .
I would like to do this in light of the decision on the Regulation on the final termination of service by Commission officials .
The draft budget provides for a margin of EUR 53 million under the maximum of category 5 of the financial perspectives . This is to enable accommodation of fresh needs in the field of administrative expenditure , and the European data protection monitor , in particular .
I should like to finish the overview of the different expenditure categories with the expenditure on pre-accession aid .
The Council has , in this respect , maintained the amount that the Commission had earmarked in its preliminary draft budget for commitment appropriations .
As for payment appropriations , a sharp increase by 20.9 % compared to last year is provided for , following an adjustment in the form of a reduction by EUR 380 million of the amount which the Commission had included in the preliminary draft .
This increase reflects the priority which the Council , backed by the European Parliament and the Commission , affords this expenditure .
I would not wish to close off this presentation of the draft budget , compiled by the Council on 20 July last , without underlining my intention to bring this budgetary procedure to a successful conclusion and , like last year , to reach agreement at the consultation which precedes the Council in November .
It is , therefore , my wish that the budgetary talks be continued in the same spirit , so that for the budget year 2002 , a budget of European Communities can be set up which affords us the means to meet the priorities and challenges which the European Union is set to face shortly .
I would like to finish off by thanking the two rapporteurs , Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg , for their positive contributions .
, chairman of the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , President-in-Office and Commissioner Liikanen - nice to see you .
Commissioner Schreyer did say that she would be unavailable and that you would be standing in .
It is like old times .
I bet you are really glad to be here .
Thank you , President-in-Office , for your kind words , but to be honest with you , I was extremely disappointed with the outcome of your first reading and especially with the way the conciliation went .
Maybe we were spoiled last year during the French Presidency , which at least made some concessions , but this year it was back to normal .
For 12 years I have made the same speech - I did not do it last year - saying that this is a budget for the Council ' s first reading made by Coreper and the politicians have no input into it .
We try to get you to make political decisions , we put forward all our arguments and spend hours doing it ( we have a very nice lunch in the meantime ) and we get absolutely nowhere .
It is a dialogue with the deaf .
We talk and talk and we change absolutely nothing when it comes to the Council ' s position .
The difference between our two institutions is that we act as a Parliament should act .
A Parliament should have a budget that reflects its political priorities .
We do not spend money for the sake of spending money .
We look at political priorities and then decide what should be allocated to them .
What the Council wants to do is just keep expenditure to a bare minimum , no matter what the consequences or what it costs .
We try to discuss issues like school milk .
We made our point .
Nothing happened .
We spoke about the problems with the Structural Funds .
Nothing happened .
On the internal policies , the medicines ' agency and orphan medicines were one of the issues mentioned .
At the SAB last year we had an agreement with the Council to increase the funding for orphan medicines and what do you do this year ?
You take 1.9 million off it .
It just does not make sense .
When we talk about trying to take Cyprus and Malta out of category 4 and put them where they should belong , you are not interested .
And then when we talk about the compensation for not having a Morocco fisheries agreement , here is where we get into really serious discussion , because again nothing happened .
We were trying to make the point that if you want to create some monies in category 2 , you need our agreement , unless you want to take it from existing Structural Funds .
Let us be clear about the money that is in category 4 for the Morocco fisheries agreement .
It is in reserve .
The only things we did agree at that conciliation were two bland statements , one on agriculture , one on category 5 , but Parliament made a unilateral statement concerning the fisheries .
I am going to remind you about one part , because when you spoke about looking at the letter of amendment and deciding what to do , in accordance with Annex IV of the IIA only the amounts entered in the budget for agreements , which have already been concluded by the Community , can be considered compulsory expenditure .
Consequently , amounts entered in reserve - and that whacking big sum of EUR 125 million is in reserve - for agreements which have not been concluded , are considered to be non-compulsory .
The Council might want to argue about that , but we do not see any argument .
We will have the final say on what happens and rest assured it will not be a trade-off as to whether we keep that in or take it out to create the same amount of money in category 2 .
That is something that we need to be talking about .
We need to be serious about this budget , to look at expenditure , especially in category 5 .
What are we going to do about administrative expenditure , especially in relation to enlargement ?
The statement about getting the secretaries-general to look at how the institutions can work together is all very well but there is a much greater issue .
We actually suggested that the budgetary authority should have a value for money exercise looking at every European Union institution .
You did not even respond to that .
I just hope between now and our first reading , and indeed between now and your second reading , we can have some serious discussions and serious conciliation and at the end of it some serious agreements to get a budget that we can all be satisfied with .
The one thing we will not stand accused of - I am not saying that you said this but many of your colleagues in the Council seem to think this - is that we just want to increase expenditure to the maximum so that we can finance the projects that we see as our favourites , while you want to be extremely prudent .
We are extremely prudent .
We are sensible in the way we handle things , but we want to do it as a team .
We want to act as a budgetary authority , not going back to the old days where you voted on compulsory expenditure , we voted on non-compulsory and sometime in December we ended up with a budget .
Let us hope that this year we can improve from what I consider to be not a good start to a far better understanding between our two institutions .
If this Belgian Presidency is anything like the last Belgian Presidency when I did the 1994 budget , I will be extremely happy .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , in the months between now and December , we have a great deal of work to do in order to reach the necessary agreement on the next budget .
The positions of the European institutions are currently quite far removed from one another on very important issues .
As far as the European Parliament is concerned , there are prior conditions that must be met : the first is to ensure rigour and transparency in the budget and in its implementation ; secondly , to only adopt a position if and provided that the necessary information is available to us .
In this context , I must once again make my continuing objections perfectly clear .
Where agriculture is concerned , we need information on the results that have already been achieved by the last reform of the common agricultural policy ; with regard to the medium-term budgetary impact of the BSE and foot-and-mouth crises and also with regard to the obstacles holding up the rapid establishment of the new food safety authority and even with regard to the prospects for the short and medium-term development of these issues .
As for the structural funds , we want to be sure that the budget will have the necessary means to undertake speedy payment of the commitments it has taken on .
Under the terms of the proposals that have been tabled , just over 1 % of the commitments taken on in 2002 will be paid within the same year .
In the field of internal policy - category 3 - we can see that new expenditure on new actions and bodies is increasing yet the overall sum remains the same . The margin is , of course , decreasing .
With regard to the European Union ' s external action - category 4 - new needs are clear and cannot be met by previous reductions in commitments , either through cuts in appropriations committed or through delaying payments , as is happening now .
Nevertheless , appropriations have been earmarked for the fisheries agreement with Morocco , which we all know will not be concluded , in an attempt to thereby freeze EUR 125 million in a category that is clearly experiencing difficulties .
Since this is non-mandatory expenditure , I feel sure that Parliament will also shoulder its responsibilities in this area .
In category 5 , administrative expenditure , on the one hand the content and pace of the Commission reform is limited and on the other , expenditure is duplicated in the field of security and defence and there is an attempt to confront enlargement without spending additional appropriations , the opposite of what the interinstitutional agreement lays down .
With regard to pre-accession expenditure , payments are being delayed and it is hard to see how this proposal can improve the situation .
The implementation of previous budgets does not give any grounds for being sanguine about the future .
Given the well-documented difficulties in meeting certain longstanding and more recent commitments , how can we accept the fact that in 2001 , Member States have been given back almost EUR 10 billion , which remain unused ?
On the one hand , there are discussions about whether the euro is a good or a bad thing and on the other , 12 % of the 2000 budget remains unused , which alone indicates how important it is for Parliament to take increasingly effective control of the budget ' s implementation .
We will only take decisions on agricultural issues if we have a full understanding of the present situation and an idea of how things are going to change .
We cannot accept the level of payments that has been proposed , all the more so because we want to make good past delays without undermining the current situation .
We want a clear and objective definition of priorities and targets for the entire budget .
We do not agree with the earmarking of appropriations which we know from the outset will not be used .
Specifically , we need to identify current expenditure resulting from enlargement .
We are hoping to see a real reform of the Commission and a corresponding increase in efficiency .
To sum up , we want to fully shoulder the responsibilities we have as a budgetary authority which stem from our very raison d ' être , which is to represent those who elect us .
This is what we shall do , whilst stating once more our complete willingness to cooperate in finding the best solutions for outstanding issues .
Mr President , some things are quickly learnt .
It does not take an expert on budgets to work out that the Council is submitting a proposal to cut down on posts .
The Council is being self-congratulatory while ably wielding the axe .
The Dutch Finance Minister , your colleague , recently claimed in public that the European Parliament is the big spender of the two arms of the budgetary authority .
If one considers the struggles one faces in the course of the budgetary procedure , he appears to be right .
It is true that Parliament often adds a little extra to the proposals of the Council .
This is not because it is eager to fleece the taxpayer , but precisely because it wants to be a reliable authority , because it feels obliged to guarantee that the European tasks and responsibilities are actually carried out .
Fine words and promises must , however , be translated into action , and that often costs money .
I am already anticipating Minister Zalm ' s criticism that another parliament building is surely a pure waste of money .
I would therefore like to say to the Council that it should not come and cry on our shoulder now that many of these money-wasting decisions are taken at European summits . Allow me to quote the summit in Nice as an example .
During that summit , the participants burnt the midnight oil in meetings to decide whether the Council should have one vote more or less .
In order to ease the pain for the losers , Parliament chairs were being handed out lavishly .
That , of course , is also telling of how much the Council values Parliament .
It is better to have more votes behind closed doors than to have people ' s representatives in parliament .
This cattle auction will yield us 32 new colleagues , whether we like it or not , and our total number could temporarily even increase to as many as 800 .
Those members will need assistants and offices , and that was not , of course , taken into account when we first set out to build the current buildings .
Do these summits ever stop and consider these issues ?
For we are left dealing with the implications .
I would therefore suggest that at the end of European summits , the political conclusions should be published , alongside a rough estimate of the financial implications .
And I would invite the President of the Council to act on this straight away .
My second observation concerns the costs of the Council itself .
Within category 5 , administrative expenditure , the Council is the fastest growing institution , and that creates added tension within this category .
To the Council , the financial perspectives are sacred , and that is why they aim to solve the problem by transferring certain expenses , which they would have gladly included in their own budget , to category 3 , such as 3.5 million for Eurojust , and nearly 1 million for Schengen .
That limits the scope of the European Parliament to determine its own priorities in this category .
But I am an optimist : this situation also has benefits . For in this way , we gain a little more insight and we can indirectly increase democratic control .
It does , of course , show where the priority of the governments lies if we are only given this control for the purposes of salvaging the Interinstitutional Agreement and saving some money .
The reallocation of Eurojust to category 3 , however , is not such a clever move .
Do not get me wrong , I do not want to include Eurojust in the Council ' s budget , but I would incorporate it under the administrative expenditure heading .
This , given the nature of expenses , would also be the most logical solution , as the Council also tacitly recognised during the trilogue .
I hope that we can at least agree on the principle , namely that operational expenditure belongs in category 3 and administrative expenditure in category 5 .
Or is the Council perhaps losing its nerve after all , given the increasing number of operational activities in its own budget ?
As already stated , the Council often has a knee-jerk reaction when it comes to deciding to lower the proposed expenditure .
What Terry Wynn said is true : we have , after all , suggested a radical overhaul of expenditure , and consideration of what expenditure is still necessary , whether things should be done differently , whether a number of institutions are overlapping in terms of responsibilities , whether there are bureaux that duplicate the work .
That has led to a guarded reaction from the Council , which surprises me greatly , for if we want to economise , then surely these are the areas where it can be done .
We will also therefore take fresh initiatives to consider radical cutbacks nevertheless .
But the Council does like to haggle , and it does not always take the actual needs into consideration in the process .
Given the time constraints , I shall only mention one example , namely the Commission ' s reform process .
That is a priority for us both .
Despite this , the Council only approved 89 of the 317 requested posts .
You are quite welcome to be critical of the reform process and you need not approve all plans blindly .
The repercussions of the schedule for advance resignation now await you .
Given the above , I wonder now whether the Council is not simply waiting for us to take responsibility , for then it would , in the final analysis , be Parliament again which is calling for extra funding .
Thrift is something to be welcomed , but one does need to enable the institutions to carry out their tasks . If not , the citizens of the Union , the taxpayers , will have something to be really disappointed about .
That concludes this item .
Question Time ( Council )
Question No 1 by ( H-0594 / 01 ) :
Subject : Investigation of irregularities at Europol On Tuesday 12 June the Council announced that the operation of Europol was being investigated .
One of the central questions concerns the origins of the information technology on which Europol ' s Eurint and Europolis systems are based .
Europol may well be using pirated information technology .
Can the Council confirm that the patented Polygon technology from the Munich-based Polygenesys company provides the IT base for Europol ' s Eurint and Europolis systems or has been incorporated into them ?
If so , since when has Europol been using that technology , and how did it acquire it and / or the user rights to it ?
I should like to answer the question of the honourable Member Bart Staes as follows . Firstly , the Council acknowledges that it bears responsibility for Europol in a general sense .
The execution of contracts , however , is a matter which , in the first instance , falls under the competent services of Europol .
The question is therefore being dealt with at the moment by the director of Europol , under the supervision of the board of management .
However , the Council has information that all contracts entered into by Europol at the time are now being examined by an independent external bureau as a result of a decision by Europol ' s board of management .
The inquiry into the supposed theft of software and its possible use has been forwarded for further investigation to the public prosecutor in The Hague .
A parallel judicial inquiry has opened in Germany .
We must therefore await the results of the judicial inquiry before we can provide further details .
I should like to point out to the honourable Member that the discovery of fraudulent practices was the result of the nonetheless efficient operation of the existing present monitoring structures , since this is how they were brought to light .
I should like to thank Mrs Neyts for her full answer , a very concrete answer to a very concrete question .
I should , however , also like to approach the matter from a political perspective .
Mrs Neyts may say that the present cases of fraud were discovered through internal monitoring .
Nevertheless there is a perception on the part of the public and by a large part of the political world that there is insufficient democratic control of Europol , and various avenues are being explored to intensify that control .
Among other things under consideration are a modification of the OLAF Regulation and in the Belgian parliament the idea is circulating of setting up a Committee P and a Committee I on the Belgian model for the supervision of police forces and intelligence services for Europol too .
Does the Minister see any chance of a debate on this subject being held within the Council and within European institutions , so that we can reassure citizens regarding democratic monitoring of what is , after all , an important police service , although still in an embryonic state ?
. ( NL ) I would say in reply to the honourable Member - and he will understand this - that we want to wait and see what concrete shape may be taken by the interesting ideas that are crystallising at present .
Question No 2 by ( H-0595 / 01 ) :
Subject : Discrimination in the way in which the catch reduction decided upon by the Council of Ministers has been distributed amongst the fishing fleets of the various Member States On 18 June 2001 the Council of Ministers decided on the way in which the catch reduction would be distributed amongst the fishing fleets of the various Member States . The outcome was a serious case of discrimination affecting , in particular , the Spanish ( and especially the Galician ) fleet , which would be required to withdraw hundreds of vessels from service whilst hundreds of French and Irish vessels would be exempted .
What justifies the fact that the Spanish ( including the Galician ) fleet is constantly subject to measures which restrict its activity on a pretext of resource conservation which does not apply to other countries ?
I can say to the honourable Member that on 18 June this year the Fisheries Council took no decision in respect of hake fishing .
However , on the basis of the critical state of the cod and hake stocks outlined in the Commission ' s communication of 12 June and on the rebuilding of cod and hake stocks which was presented to the Council , and I quote : " The Commission adopted an emergency regulation on 14 June establishing measures for the recovery of the northern hake stock .
Article 2 ( 2 ) of the Commission Regulation provides for a derogation for vessels of less than 12 metres overall length using a mesh size of less than 100 mm from a maximum share of 20 % of hake in the retained catch , provided that the vessels - not the catch - return to port within 24 hours . "
On 22 June Spain asked the Council to amend this provision .
On 20 July the Council noted that there was no majority for amending it in the way proposed by Spain .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , only the discrimination suffered by the fleets of southern Europe , from Portugal and Spain - particularly Galicia - can explain the tangible discrimination we are now discussing .
The European Union ' s institutions still consider these fleets to be intruders in seas that belong to all of us . This discrimination manifests itself in the application of the principle of relative stability which , for example , grants a country from northern Europe 40 % of catches taken in Community waters , whilst Spain and Galicia receive only 6 % .
As a result , we must ask once again : what is the Council ' s position on the necessary communitisation of fishing rights in European Union waters in accordance with the principles laid down in the Treaties ?
Mr President , I can only say that I suppose that the state that tabled the amendment will come back to the subject and the Council will then debate it again .
That is all that I can say at this moment .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity , in the presence of the Presidency-in-Office , which says it is going to study this issue again , to say that the excuse of conserving a resource such as hake , without sufficient or confirmed scientific reports , is at the origin of the discrimination against the Spanish fleet , which we are discussing here .
The Commission has told us in the Committee on Fisheries that this discrimination is for social reasons in favour of Great Britain and France , and that that is the reason for the exception .
Madam President , my question is why does the Commission , and in this case the Council , by a majority and for social reasons , not defend Spain , and specifically a region such as Galicia , which is an Objective One region and is therefore more needy , and whose fishermen traditionally fished in those waters which are now common .
These fishermen , for social reasons , do not sleep at home , owing to the enormous distance they have to travel .
If the reasons are social , I would ask you please to take account of the protection of Spanish fishermen .
I can only say after the five very pleasant and most interesting years which I spent in this august assembly that I am perfectly aware of the seriousness and the sensitivity of the subject .
I take that into account .
We do not doubt that these five years you have been with us in Parliament will help you to communicate this very serious problem to the European Council .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 3 , 4 , 5 and 6 will be taken together .
Question No 3 by ( H-0599 / 01 ) :
Subject : The EU ' s rapid reaction force in Sweden In response to the chaotic situation which arose in Göteborg during the EU summit in June , when police and demonstrators clashed , it has been suggested in various Member States that it ought to be possible for the EU ' s rapid reaction force to be deployed to control riots and civil disturbances .
Anders Mellbourn , the head of the Swedish Foreign Policy Institute , for example , wrote in Dagens Nyheter on 24 June :
' This probably means that the police will have to be supplemented by some kind of riot police units which possess a combination of police and military training .
This is hardly the kind of task to entrust to conscripts : it calls for professional soldiers or else police with military training .
Operational cooperation between the police forces and the military of several EU countries is required [ ... ]
It is not easy for the EU to bring together a standing force of 5 000 police officers for civil crisis management .
Dialogue to prevent conflict needs to be supplemented by increased intelligence activity .
All this is also needed in order to be able to contribute to effective conflict- and crisis-management in the Balkans or the Middle East .
But it is also needed - albeit , one hopes , rarely - to cope with certain domestic crises in Sweden or neighbouring EU countries . '
Does the Council agree that in future it ought to be possible for the EU ' s rapid reaction force to be deployed within the Union itself when situations such as that in Göteborg arise ?
Question No 4 by ( H-0676 / 01 ) :
Subject : The G8 meeting and security at summit meetings and other conferences of equivalent importance A few days before the deplorable events which unfolded in Genoa during the G8 meeting , the 15 Foreign Ministers unanimously endorsed the decisions by the Interior Ministers on security at EU summit meetings and other conferences of equivalent importance .
Will the Council say : did the Italian authorities call for the setting-up of a team of police officers or intelligence service officials to act as liaison officers who could be seconded from the Member States from which groups of troublemakers originate ( Article 1 ( b ) ) and for all the legal technical means to be deployed to achieve a more structured exchange of information concerning troublemakers on the basis of files held in the various Member States ? ( Article 2 ( d ) ) .
If so , which governments of the 15 Member States have responded ?
Question No 6 by ( H-0687 / 01 ) :
Subject : Future of EU Council summits following the events in Göteborg and Genoa Following the disturbances which marked the EU ' s Göteborg Summit and the G8 summit in Genoa , and taking particular account of the moves to have EU summits held exclusively in Belgium in the future , what implications does the Council foresee for summit meetings of this kind ?
What conclusions should be drawn regarding the organisation of , and the scale of , the agendas for such meetings ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , these issues have a very close bearing on the debate we held this afternoon on the G8 summit in Genoa and all the events surrounding that meeting .
I would like to remind Members of the unanimous position taken by the Council and the representatives of Member State governments on the question of security at European Council meetings and at other events that are likely to have a similar impact .
The Council reiterated that one of the European Union ' s objectives is to maintain and develop the Union as an area of freedom , security and justice .
In such an area , citizens must enjoy the right to freely express their opinions and to assemble in a peaceful manner .
They must do so , however , in conditions where there is not a threat to their own security or to that of other citizens or properties .
On 13 July this year , the Council and the representatives of the Member State governments therefore deplored the actions of those who abuse these democratic rights by initiating , planning and carrying out acts of violence to coincide with public demonstrations .
For the purpose of ensuring that these principles can also be applied in the context of important meetings , the Council and the representatives emphasised the need to establish a dialogue with non-governmental organisations , social partners and civil society , and also that we must build on and we shall build on the possibilities offered by existing legal instruments and bodies set up within the European Union .
Like Mr Vitorino before me , let me lay particular emphasis on the provisions of the Convention applying the Schengen Agreement and the joint action of 26 May 1997 on cooperation on law and order and security .
The idea is that the task force of European Union chiefs of police should make a significant contribution to the practical implementation of cooperation between the law enforcement authorities of the Member States .
Incidentally , this task force has absolutely nothing to do with what the author of one question described as a joint police unit in the context of an EU-led crisis-management action .

In reply to the two questions put , respectively , by Mr Krarup and Mr Korakas , during Question Time at Parliament ' s last part session in July 2001 , I had an opportunity , speaking on behalf of the Council , to detail the measures taken by the Swedish government during the Gothenburg Summit .
In the same way , by letter of 11 July 2001 , the Italian government informed us , under the procedures in force , of the measures it had taken under the second sentence of Article 2 ( 2 ) of the Convention applying the Schengen Agreement .
At the Council meeting of 16 July 2001 , the ministers declared themselves in favour of closer international cooperation to safeguard the exercise of freedom of expression on the one hand and , on the other , to ensure that public demonstrations of this kind can and do take place in a peaceful manner .
Nonetheless , we must admit that responsibility for the maintenance of law and order on the territory of the EU Member States falls within the remit of their own national authorities .
The Council is not authorised to comment on a matter that does not fall within the area of competence conferred on it by the Treaties .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for such a detailed reply .
However , my specific question perhaps got lost in the detail , because the Council does not appear to be quite as unanimous as she would have us believe .
For example , the Greek government protested to the Italian government that dozens of Greek nationals were unable to enter Italy and were sent back on the same boat prior to the meeting in Genoa .
My question , which I would like the President-in-Office to answer , is this : were the plans to set up teams of policemen or intelligence service officers to operate as links between the Fifteen and were the plans to exchange information in files on people classified as troublemakers implemented before Genoa or not ?
Did the Fifteen cooperate in this regard ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I believe I said , although perhaps in rather diplomatic terms , that the Council cannot comment on the way in which a member country , a Member State , organises the maintenance of public order on its own territory , because it does not have the authority to do so .
Obviously that does not mean that a Member State cannot make known its position in regard to another Member State , which is , in effect , what has happened .
But that does not fall within the Council ' s remit .
In regard to your second question , I will have to check this and obtain information before I can reply .
All I know is that in the fight against what is called ' hooliganism ' at major sporting events , the police authorities have clearly begun to cooperate on exchanging information on individuals who have repeatedly been proven responsible for disturbances or worse at major sporting events .
That is something I know .
In answer to the question whether there was any cooperation of the kind to anticipate or prevent possible trouble during the meetings of European Union bodies : I do not think so , but I will have to check this and will do so .
The minister said that she needs to make inquiries before giving an answer .
Does that mean she will be giving me a written reply once she has this information ?
The Council replies according to its true knowledge and understanding .
You can ask the question again if you wish .
Mr Patakis , do you wish to ask your question again ?
The President-in-Office has not replied to the question which I submitted and I should like to repeat it , although I would say that , following the police raid on offices of organisations in Liège and from the position taken by the Belgian Minister of the Interior in the European Parliament Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , it would appear that the Belgian Presidency does not have virtuous intentions towards the demonstrations planned in Laeken .
My question is : can the President-in-Office assure us that there will be no police violence and suppression such as we saw in Gothenburg and Genoa ?
Once again , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have to draw a distinction between my replies as President-in-Office of the Council , which cannot go beyond the presidency ' s remit - as you must realise - and the replies I might wish to give as a member of the Belgian government .
First of all , it is traditional , and not just traditional , I believe it is the duty of any member of government not to comment on on-going judicial investigations .
Secondly , when I described the presidency ' s position on the G8 meeting this afternoon and discussed means of ensuring that both these meetings and the demonstrations outside proceeded peacefully , I stated and reiterated the Belgian government ' s concern and firm resolve to reconcile the right to demonstrate with the maintenance of public order , as also to prevent the kind of violence we saw both in Gothenburg and in Italy .
We are doing all we can to achieve this .
I hope everyone will want to make their personal contribution and use all available means .
Mr President , I have listened to your comments with interest , but I would like to refer back to my question , Question No 6 : What conclusions should now be drawn for European Council meetings in future , not only as regards policing but also in organisational and policy terms ?
In particular , I should like to know whether you are considering reducing the number of participants and the agenda , as has happened with the G8 summits .
If the European Council meetings are only to take place in Belgium in future , has the idea of its own designated location been considered ?
Are there any thoughts on this issue and if so , what are they ?
First of all , the Prime Minister of my government has already indicated that he is reflecting on and will make proposals for a review of the way the G8 summit is organised .
Secondly , Prime Minister Verhofstadt has sent a letter to his colleagues in the 14 other governments asking them to reduce the size of the delegations that would be sent to or would participate in the Laeken Council .
Let me remind you that in the case of the Ghent European Council he opted for a very restricted meeting .
We fully intend to proceed along the same lines precisely because we are trying to learn as much as we can from what we ourselves witnessed in Gothenburg and in Genoa , i.e. at both meetings .
We have a degree of understanding for the panic which has gripped the representatives , for want of a better expression , of big business , including the current presidency , in the face of increasing reaction on the part of the workers in our countries to anti-grass roots policies and the new imperialist order .
I should like to point out to the President-in-Office that it was not the " bloc noir " that was attacked in Genoa , it was the peaceful demonstrators .
It is clear from the attack on the offices of Social Forum , which organised the demonstrations , that the target was not the agents provocateurs talking to the forces of suppression , but those organising the people ' s fight against the prevailing policy of the G8 and the European Union .
The statement made by the Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs to the European Parliament Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs gives us cause for concern , Madam President-in-Office .
The attack on the offices in Liège , which you already know about , gives us cause for concern and we fear that the reaction in Laeken will be even more savage .
We want you to promise that there will no such reaction to the workers ' right of demonstration and expression in our countries .
We shall be turning out en masse .
We will be going to Laeken en masse to protest against the European Union ' s policy .
Will you look after us as well as you did in Genoa ?
Let me say first of all that I most emphatically reject the honourable - and I continue to say honourable - Member ' s attacks on the Belgian Presidency and the Belgian government .
These attacks are totally unfounded and I would ask him to withdraw what he has just said because he is quite simply putting words into our mouth .
I have replied calmly throughout the day and we have discussed these questions at great length .
I can only repeat what I have already said .
Furthermore , I am taking careful note of your expressed resolve to demonstrate - peacefully , I hope - what you think of the workings of the Union ' s institutions .
If it is peaceful , there will be no problem .
Let me also reassure everyone that there is no question of panic ; we have to prepare as carefully as possible in order to avoid a repetition of what we saw but also because - need I remind you - my country has unfortunately witnessed tragedies that were sparked off or took place during major sporting events . They now date back more than 15 years and we want to ensure at all costs that they never happen again .
Let me also tell you that during the championship held last summer - Euro 2000 - we proved that we had learned the lessons of the tragedy to which I have just referred and we showed that we were certainly fully capable of organising events of the kind , which involve huge crowd movements .
There is no question of panic ; it is a question of very careful preparation .
Question No 7 by ( H-0601 / 01 ) :
Subject : Shannon as EU headquarters for natural or environmental emergencies response At its meeting of 28-29 May 2001 , the Council agreed to improve and coordinate EU civil protection intervention in the event of major natural , technological , radiological or environmental emergencies by setting up a common emergency communications system , common training and fast mobilisation of assessment / coordination teams and intervention teams .
Would the Council consider locating an operational headquarters for this civil protection plan in Shannon which , among its many relevant facilities , includes a major international airport which could be used for transporting resources and provisions for interventions in third countries and could handle the pooling of information on serums and vaccines to which the Council Decision also refers ?
On 29 May 2001 , the Council decided upon a common approach with regard to the draft decision to establish a Community mechanism to facilitate increased cooperation in aid intervention in the context of civil defence , subject to the treatment of the recommendation of the European Parliament of 14 June 2001 and provided that the Parliament withdraws a number of its reservations .
Since then the Council agencies have reached complete agreement on the draft , subject to the legal and linguistic amendment of the text and , as I have already said , the withdrawal of parliamentary reservations .
The text of the draft decision , doc .
10483 / 01 , is , by the way , on the Council ' s website .
That draft provides for the setting up of an observation and information centre that can collate requests for aid and centralise the aid offered and that will be linked with contact points specified by the Member States .
That centre can alert evaluation and / or coordination as well as intervention teams , which have been specified beforehand and hence assigned the necessary personnel in advance .
The draft also provides for training programmes , the pooling of information on serums and vaccines and the promotion of the use of new technologies .
Contrary to what the honourable Member believes , there are no plans for collecting the aid material in one place , since that will be delivered directly by the Member States .
The implementation of this mechanism will be entrusted to the Commission , supported by a committee .
It is therefore up to the Commission to decide where the observation and information centre and the other services necessary for the implementation of the mechanism will be located .
This question will therefore have to be put to the Committee at the appropriate time .
Question No 9 by ( H-0605 / 01 ) :
Subject : Handling business failure As part of the Commission ' s programme for Enterprise and Entrepreneurship a seminar was organised by the Commission on ' Daring to risk going bust ' and handling business failure .
It was also a response to the requirements of the Charter for Small Enterprises which was welcomed by the Feira European Council .
What are the Council ' s views on the impact of legislation on business failure , the need for support measures for entrepreneurs facing a risk of business failure and allowing for a fresh start after business failure , which were the key topics for the parallel workshops ?
. ( NL ) I would remind the honourable Member that at its meeting in Santa Maria da Feira on 19 and 20 June , the European Council emphasised that small businesses were unmistakably the backbone of the European economy .
They are an important source of employment and a breeding ground for new business concepts .
To support the recommendations it had made , the Council highlighted a number of points , including the idea that a well-considered initiative involves a risk , or a measure of failure , which must be seen mainly as an opportunity to learn .
In general the Council has taken a positive position with regard to the simplification of the regulatory framework for industry .
The seminar to which the honourable Member refers was organised jointly by the Minister for Economic Affairs and the European Commission on 10 and 11 May 2001 .
The Council has not taken any position on the results of the seminar and I would therefore request the honourable Member to turn directly to the organisers for information .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office for her answer , if you could call it that .
The specific point that I raised in my question , which I thought would be self-evident , was that because of sudden downturns in the economy in America and other parts of the world , there is increasing pressure being put on small and medium-sized enterprises in a very strict and rigorously competitive market .
Therefore , I was somewhat heartened by the daring-to-risk-going-bust attitude of the conference because that would give us experience to know the main reasons why small and medium-size enterprises fail , whilst at the same time recognising that they are the biggest engine of growth within the overall European Union economy , creating something like 82 % of employment and representing 74 % of all manufacturing .
Hence my question to the President-in-Office about the Council ' s position : what actions can be taken to ensure the continuance of this very strong sector ?
In particular how can entrepreneurs learn from mistakes and failures , and if they fail once , be encouraged to continue and learn from those mistakes ?
As the honourable Member has repeated the question which was addressed to us earlier , I can only repeat the answer I gave .
I am sorry .
The thinking is developing and this is shown by the conclusions to which I refer .
The seminar is a further initiative .
I expect that eventually you or some of your colleagues might invite the Commission to take a number of measures .
I know that the Council attaches great importance to small and medium-sized enterprises and recognises that these constitute the backbone of our individual economies and of our European economy in general .
Question No 10 by ( H-0607 / 01 ) :
Subject : Priorities in the fisheries sector during the Belgian Presidency Will the Council under the Belgian Presidency outline its priorities for the fisheries sector , taking into account the particular and unique requirements of peripheral countries such as Ireland , which has 11 % of Community waters in its jurisdiction but only 4 % of Community quotas ?
The Belgian Presidency will endeavour to bring the debate within the Council on the Commission ' s Green Paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy to a successful conclusion .
Other priorities are the extension of the multiannual guidance programmes and rebuilding the stocks at risk .
It was apparent even from the first questions that this is a far from easy task .
Special attention will be devoted to the issue of discards into the sea .
The specialists know what this is about ; if you like and if you put the question , I will explain it to you .
As regards , and I quote , Ireland ' s ' particular and unique requirements ' , it is worth repeating that fishing quotas are distributed among the nations that practise fishing according to the principle of relative stability and that the size of a Member State ' s fishing zone is not , in itself , a criterion for the distribution of these quotas .
However , Ireland does receive preferential treatment as regards financial support from the Community for carrying out control , inspection and monitoring measures .
I note that the President-in-Office has referred to the discussions which she hopes will come to a fruitful and successful conclusion .
I would add that I hope it will also be a fair conclusion .
In addition , I am pleased that she has referred to discards .
This has to be top priority because too many fish that are taken aboard vessels are discards - and then it is much too late .
I would ask the President-in-Office whether she would take into consideration the initiative taken by both Ireland and the UK in relation to technical conservation measures and see that some effort is made by all countries to try to ensure that the smaller fish are not taken on board .
You referred to the point that relative stability and special unique circumstances cannot be taken into consideration .
We are now 20 years on and if we continue with the same principle as we had in 1983 then small countries like Ireland will be worse off .
We have to be pragmatic about this .
The Council , the Council of Ministers , the presidency have to take into consideration that in Ireland the coastal regions have no alternative source of employment .
It is a peripheral area , an Objective 1 area .
Those regions must be taken into consideration .
I would ask the President-in-Office to keep an open mind .
Mr President , I can assure the honourable Member that - if I can say this - I will take on board the points he has made .
Mr President , as a supplementary , is the presidency concerned about the fact that there are so many power stations , particularly around the North Sea and in the north of Europe , where , when water is sucked in to cool the power station , vast numbers , literally billions , of tiny floating creatures that would turn into fish are destroyed .
Would the President-in-Office undertake to investigate this and try to conserve the stocks of fish , many of which are destroyed in their infancy ?
I hope the honourable Member does not expect me to investigate this personally and physically .
Again , it is a consideration that we will take on board .
It was not exactly a direct question on fisheries policy , but I am sure the President-in-Office of the Council is kind enough to take very good note and that this problem will also be addressed in Council .
As the author is not present , Question No 11 lapses .
Question No 12 by ( H-0611 / 01 )
Subject : Using hydrogen energy in urban / rural transport Earlier this year the Commission announced its support for the launching of a demonstration project involving the use of hydrogen energy in buses in Iceland , a non EU Member State but a country which is paving the way for sustainable urban transport .
Given the EU ' s welcome commitment to stand by the Kyoto Protocol and its continued support for sustainable development , will the Council ensure that the EU ' s welcome support for this project , which is the first in a series of fuel bus demonstrations taking place in Europe in the years to come , will be given top priority as hydrogen energy is a true zero emission technology , and will it ensure that this demonstration project is extended to rural transport and not just urban transport projects ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 6 June 2001 the Council gave its political agreement to a common position on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision on the Sixth Environmental Action Programme .
The final version of this text has been officially adopted and will be forwarded to Parliament at the end of this month or the beginning of next month for second reading . It makes it clear that the Council will firmly support renewable energy sources .
As for the particular project to which the honourable Member referred , it is up to the Commission , in the framework of its competences , to organise pilot or demonstration projects and , if necessary , to put appropriate proposals before the Council .
I thank the President-in-Office for her positive response and for outlining the present position with regard to my question .
Alternative fuels have been a live agenda item in this Parliament for a number of years but we do not seem to be any closer to a practical outcome .
It is obvious that hydrogen energy represents an alternative to fossil fuels , but there are other possible alternatives , such as bio-energy , which is relevant to sustainable land use .
Can the President-in-Office give the House an update on research in these areas and how soon we can expect a positive breakthrough in the area of alternative fuels ?
I have to confess to the honourable Member that for the life of me , I cannot answer your question .
The only thing I can do is to refer you to the Commission that has , within its remit , the obligation to follow this up very closely and monitor whatever is going on .
The Commission is much better placed to give you a full answer to your question .
Question No 13 by ( H-0619 / 01 ) :
Subject : European tax The Belgian Presidency has not made clear what it means by the possible introduction of a European tax .
What plans does the presidency have , and what legal basis does it have for its plans , for the introduction of a European tax as a source of EU own resources ?
At the Ecofin Council of 10 July 2001 , the Belgian Presidency put forward the idea of financing the European Union directly .
To be honest , I must add that the reactions to this were not all enthusiastic .
Having said that , in the presidency ' s view , and looking to the future of the Union , we must first consider and then , in the longer term , provide for the possibility of directly financing part of the Community budget without , however , increasing the pressure of taxes in general .
The financing of the Union , both the indirect financing system we all know , and the possibility of direct financing , is one of the options we are examining with regard to the future of the Union .
Mr President , I would like to ask the President-in-Office whether she has noted that in a vote taken in July the European Parliament did not support the proposal regarding the enactment of a European tax .
The presidency has noted that , thank you .
Question No 14 by ( H-0621 / 01 ) :
Subject : Withdrawal of olive residue oil As a precautionary measure , all sales of olive residue oil have been stopped in Spain and it has been withdrawn from shops as a matter of urgency .
Does this oil comply with European rules on olive residue oil ?
Has there been accidental contamination or is the problem a consequence of the normal manufacturing process ?
Was it the return of a shipment of oil exported to the Czech Republic which revealed the excessive level of benzopyrene ?
What other shipments have been exported and to which countries ?
Was the existence of this shipment known of in May of this year ?
Will compensation be provided for the damage caused ?
What will be done with the oil which has been withdrawn ?
According to information given to the Commission and its competent services and also received by the Council , olive oil made from olive waste has been taken off the market in Spain after the Spanish government had activated the system for the rapid exchange of information in emergencies on 4 July 2001 on account of the fact that polycyclic aromatic compounds ( PACs ) had been found in this oil .
It is stated that the contamination arose during a normal manufacturing process , a process that also includes the refining of the oil .
During the burning process caused by the drying of the olive residue , benzopyrene is released .
At present Community legislation does not contain an upper limit for the PAC content in foodstuffs .
The Scientific Committee on Human Nutrition , which falls under the remit of the Commission , is , however , at present evaluating the impact of PACs on health , in order to determine the maximum admissible level of the intake of those substances via human food .
Since the competent services are still heavily involved in the research , the honourable Member will undoubtedly agree that the Council is not the appropriate body to deal with this question .
I would therefore request her to turn to the Commission for additional information .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I am grateful for your technically rigorous reply to this question , which I have also put to the Commission .
But does the Council realise that it has been the rashness and incompetence of the Minister that has led to the loss of more than ESP 14 000 million , with disastrous economic consequences ?
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , when it is Ministers themselves who provoke the crisis through their improvisation and inefficiency , is it they who will have to meet the cost ?
If the Spanish government has known about a toxic shipment since May , why did they keep it under wraps for a month and why did they only raise the alarm after a month ?
Why has it been communicated to the European Union so late and so badly ?
Has there been coordination with the European Union ?
Does the Council realise that , having raised the alarm in the management of this food crisis , this unpopular Peoples ' Party Minister has caused real chaos ?
Which countries had this been exported to ?
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo is well aware that the presidency of the Council has to remain above the Member States and also above any political or ideological disputes .
She will therefore understand that for these reasons I cannot answer the questions she has just asked .
I would just like to make a general remark , in a personal capacity .
If the members of any government whatsoever do not react quickly enough to problems with food or other consumer products , they are taken to task .
If they act as soon as they believe there are sufficient grounds for doing something , they are accused of causing chaos and financial losses .
It is not easy to be a minister these days !
We understand that Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck is not now an MEP , but a Minister ; it is therefore understandable that she should talk of Ministers ' problems .
Mrs Ayuso González has the floor for a supplementary question .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I can share the concern of the Member who asked the question , but having said that , I would like to clarify that olive residue oil is a by-product of the olive , which is produced after obtaining the olive oil and , furthermore , from every 100 kilos of olives , 20 litres of olive oil and 1.6 litres of olive residue oil are obtained .
We are therefore talking about 8 % of production and a product which is consumed very little .
As you rightly said , Madam President , the problem has arisen as a result of the method of extracting olive residue oil , and therefore traces of benzopyrene were found in the olive residue oil and , given the lack , as you also said , of a European regulation setting the limits , the Spanish Ministry of Health proceeded , applying the precautionary principle , to withdraw this oil from circulation .
Today the extraction techniques have been modified and oil can be obtained which is free of benzopyrene .
At the moment they are having the same problem in Italy , for the same reasons .
Therefore , I would like to ask the Council whether it is in any way going to promote the filling of this loophole in the law , so that there may be permissible limits in human food , because , as the saying goes , ' the poison is the dose , not the substance in itself ' and that is the basic principle of toxicology .
I have two things to say in response to the comments and questions we have just heard .
To avoid any misunderstanding , let me begin by pointing out that the spokesman for Mr Byrne , the Commissioner responsible for health , stated that there was no question of Member States taking measures against virgin olive oil from Spain , because the problem does not even arise there ; that oil is not contaminated by benzopyrene because it is manufactured by an entirely different process .
Secondly , as I pointed out , the Scientific Council attached to the Commission is currently carrying out studies to determine the maximum admissible rates of what are known as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons .
So this study is under way and the Commission will no doubt make proposals to the Council , which will then consider those proposals .
Question No 15 by ( H-0623 / 01 ) :
Subject : Information of Greek citizens about the euro A mere few months before the official introduction of the euro , a survey carried out by Eurobarometer in Greece in late March and early April 2001 revealed that 47.8 % of Greeks felt that they knew ' very little or little ' about the euro , while 25.5 % said that they knew nothing about the subject .
The lowest figures were among people aged over 55 , 36 % of whom know nothing about the new currency , and only 16 % saying they were adequately informed .
It is also notable that 42 % of Greeks on low incomes appear to be completely uninformed about the euro , while 4 out of 10 Greeks are unaware that Greece is a member of the euro zone .
What is the Council ' s assessment of the results of this survey ?
What are the corresponding figures for the other countries in the euro zone ?
What conclusions can be drawn about the effectiveness of the information campaign on the new currency conducted by the Greek government and the other 11 governments ?
What are the negative effects ensuing from such apparently inadequate preparation for the acceptance of the euro in the public ' s mind , and how are cohesion and monetary stability put at risk by the lack of practical information and organisational preparation , particularly in the case of small and medium-sized businesses ?
This is a very broad question and I trust that the President-in-Office of the Council will be able to summarise .
Ladies and gentlemen , the euro group meets once a month at ministerial level to take stock of preparations for the changeover to the euro .
At the meeting held on 4 June , the ministers , the Presidents of the European Central Bank and the Commissioner responsible considered the preparations being made for the introduction of euro notes and coins on 1 January 2002 .
They welcomed the encouraging progress made in this area , and particularly the fact that consumer awareness is increasing .
They also recalled their intention to step up information campaigns during the second half of the year to help smooth the currency changeover .
Against this background , the ministers reiterated their desire to ensure that the conversion of all prices , tariffs and charges coming under their governments ' authority would not have any effect on prices or would have only a minimum impact on consumers .
The ministers called on retailers to implement their commitment to respect the good practice that they had included in the joint declaration of European consumer and business associations adopted on 2 April 2001 , and to do everything in their power to guarantee the overall stability of their prices when converting to the euro and to give a clear signal of this commitment to their customers .
The ministers also noted that several Member States had stepped up their price monitoring and that the relevant agencies had been vigilant about price conversion issues .
The ministers considered that dual pricing throughout the entire dual circulation period was vital to allow consumers to check prices both in euros and in their national currency .
They also encouraged consumers to familiarise themselves more with prices labelled in euros and to continue to carefully compare competitors ' prices , particularly between now and the end of the year and during the dual circulation period .
I thank the Minister for her general reply , but my question was specifically about Greece .
I wanted to say that the statistics in my question were compiled a long time before her answer and that things are changing for the better .
However , according to the latest EUROSTAT figures , there is a growing fear that a lot of people will use this opportunity to increase the prices of goods and services and that this will mainly hit the most vulnerable groups of consumers such as the elderly , the young , the poorly educated , immigrants and the mentally handicapped .
Especially as , in Greece at least , 1 euro is worth 340.75 drachmas , meaning that it is very hard to make the sort of quick calculation needed every hour of every day .
That is why I want to know if , even at the eleventh hour , the Council is giving any thought to the easiest solution all round , i.e. for each Member State to order and distribute cheap pocket calculators which convert each country ' s currency into euros , so that even the most poorly informed or disabled citizen can immediately calculate what they are paying , what they are being paid and who is trying to rob them .
This is not a question , Mr Marinos .
We have listened very attentively to your statement on the problems which may arise in Greece , in your judgement ; but there cannot be a reply .
Mr Marinos , if the President-in-Office of the Council wishes to reply to you in some way , I have no objection .
Naturally she shall have the floor .
But I do not believe , as President , that there has been a supplementary question , but rather a statement by you .
Mr President , I asked if the Council intended to introduce this ready reckoner system .
It is a question and it does not apply to Greece , it applies to every country , not just Greece .
Consumers in every country will face the same problem .
I did not notice that question in your statement .
In any event , the President now has the floor if she believes , following that clarification , that she can reply to the question very briefly .
I do not recall having read that question in the text of Mr Marinos ' s oral question .
All that I know is that those ministers that are members of Ecofin , and especially those that belong to the euro group , decided to launch a very intensive campaign which is to be stepped up with effect from now , because they decided that if they had started during the summer there was a risk of the impact being lost during that period so that it would have been necessary to start all over again .
A campaign is therefore to be launched .
I also believe that it will be a two-level campaign , that is an EU-level campaign that will be backed up by campaigns run by the Member States and the various national governments .
I am not sure if the pocket calculators are part of the campaign at euro group level .
They form part of a number of national campaigns , but perhaps you should try to do something along these lines in your own country if they have not been provided for .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , you yourselves are familiar with the hundred franc note in Belgium , which is worth about 2 euro .
In Greece , there is the thousand drachma note , which is only worth 0.5 cents .
In other words , we are quite used to having a largely paper-based currency , so my question is this : do you think it is likely that we will ultimately have one or two euro notes as well , given that the five euro note is currently the smallest denomination ?
In the southern countries in particular , notes are far more popular than coins .
All these issues were debated at length in the relevant committees of this Parliament , in plenary and by the Council responsible for this .
The decisions have been taken , confirmed and confirmed again , and they will be implemented as agreed and in the form which this House has had an opportunity to consider and to give its opinion on .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , usually , when I get back to Bergamo from Brussels , I arrive late in the evening and I go and have a pizza .
In conversation , the pizza man , knowing that I was an MEP , said to me , ' Now that the euro is coming in , I ' ll put the price in euro and round it up so that it is higher than the current price in Italian lire . '
Would it not have been better to issue a regulation which stipulated that , when changing over , there should not be any rises in the price of goods compared with the price over the last three months , for instance , before the euro came into force ?
My reply to Mr Fatuzzo is that , as far as I am aware , that is the case .
And if certain persons in certain countries or certain regions do not respect these provisions , it is up to the appropriate price inspection and control agencies to take the necessary steps .
That is the situation in my country .
I presume that is the case , and it should be the case , in all the countries changing over to the euro on 1 January 2001 .
I could of course be cheeky , Mr Fatuzzo , and ask what your reply to your pizza seller was !
I told him I would ask the President-in-Office of the Council , mentioning what he had told me , and that then I would give him the answer .
Mr Fatuzzo , you must wait until the President of Parliament gives you the floor .
Your statement has cheered us all up this evening .
Question No 16 by ( H-0624 / 01 ) :
Subject : Legislation on ' sects ' and its impact on respect for religious freedom in Europe One of the Member States , France , has a much criticised law on religion in which the term ' sect ' , as applied to smaller churches and religious groups , plays a key role .
By leaving broad scope for the courts ' free interpretation and discretion , the law has proved to be a blunt instrument and created legal uncertainty .
The Catholic and Protestant Churches in France together with the European Commission of Human Rights have criticised the law as restricting very fundamental freedoms and rights such as religious freedom and freedom of association .
In the light of the Nice Charter of Fundamental Rights , what is the Council ' s view of the French legislation , particularly in a situation where several applicant countries , the Czech Republic for example , are using this law as a model for drafting their own laws on religion ?
Are we not at risk of diminishing respect for the public ' s choice of life philosophy and religious faith , with greater intolerance as a result , if an increasing number of Member States adopt legislation which outlaws or actively oversees some forms of church and religious groups , and should not the good work and idealism which are characteristic of those organisations be held up as examples rather than banned ?
I would reply to Mr Sacrédeus that the Council is not really qualified in any way to express an opinion on the question he has posed .
I should , though , like to remind him of Declaration No 11 in the Final Document of Amsterdam , a declaration regarding the status of churches and non-confessional organisations .
That declaration reads as follows : " The European Union respects and does not detract from the status enjoyed by churches and religious associations in accordance with the national law of the Member States .
The European Union also respects the status of philosophical and non-confessional organisations . "
I wish to thank the Belgian Presidency for its answer .
The European Union is a union of common values .
It is these which bind us together , not Mammon or money but the common culture and view of human life that unites us as Europeans .
I am referring , in this case , to the French legislation and its disparaging concept , sectaire , for this is no edifying concept .
I refer to the arbitrariness and lack of clarity in the term itself and to the fact that the legislation is not specific but says that when people are forced into positions of humiliation or exposed to repeated pressure or other techniques designed to alter their powers of judgment , the punishment may be one of up to five years in prison or a fine of FRF 5 million .
I wish to repeat that the Catholic Church and many churches in France are very sceptical about this legislation .
Is this not an issue concerning human dignity and democracy ?
Question No 17 by ( H-0626 / 01 ) :
Subject : Torture of people on grounds of sexual orientation Instances of torture and abusive treatment of people who develop relations with those of the same sex have increased sharply and matters are made worse by the widespread tolerance of such violations and the reluctance of the victims to have their identities revealed .
The recent Amnesty International report describes the suffering of thousands of people who are tortured , abused , sexually assaulted and coerced into medical or psychiatric treatment .
The report includes documented cases from some 30 countries , while in more than 70 countries , relations between people of the same sex are considered a criminal offence .
What will the Council do to put an end to such occurrences in a democratic Europe which stresses the importance of respect for human diversity and sexual identity ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Article 6 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on European Union says that the Union is founded on the principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The second paragraph of the same article says the Union shall respect fundamental rights as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and , as they result from the constitutional traditions common to the Member States , as general principles of Community law .
In this respect , Article 3 of that European Convention says that " No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment " , whilst Article 14 of the Convention stipulates that the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in the Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any grounds , and in particular on the grounds of sex .
Article 13 of the Treaty establishing the European Union says that within the limits of the powers conferred by it upon the Community , the Council , acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament , may take appropriate action to combat any discrimination , particularly discrimination based on sex or sexual orientation .
With a view to ensuring more vigorous and concerted action at national , regional and international level , in April of this year the European Union adopted guidelines for its policy towards third countries on torture and other cruel , inhuman or degrading punishments or treatment , thus confirming the central role of this issue in its human rights policy .
These guidelines give the Union an instrument for intervening in cases involving torture and a means of stepping up its efforts to secure greater respect for international rules .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for her most satisfactory reply .
We all know that the European Union is very sensitive about respect for human rights and that this sensitivity is expressed in the Treaties and in the European Convention on Human Rights .
However , Madam President-in-Office , anyone who reads the recent Amnesty International report on the torture suffered by thousands of people throughout the world because of their sexual orientation will feel that what we are doing in the European Union is not enough .
The UN Commission on Human Rights recently took an initiative to encourage people to file charges if they are tortured or their human rights are violated because of their sexual identity .
Are you perhaps planning to take a similar initiative at European Union level ?
Question No 18 by ( H-0628 / 01 ) :
Subject : Access by the public to Council documents On 30 May this year the Council , having enacted the legislation to open its documents to the public , set itself a deadline of six months , until 3 December 2001 , to complete its preparatory measures .
Now we have reached early September so we are halfway through the Council ' s self-given six-month period .
Is the Council ' on schedule ' with its preparations ?
If not , would it like any help from the Parliament , which has been open to the public for so many years already ?
Question No 19 by ( H-0630 / 01 ) :
Subject : Increased openness The legislative act governing public access to EU documents was adopted in May 2001 .
The new rules are to enter into force within six months .
Can the Council state what types of previously confidential or secret documents are now going to be accessible to members of the public under the new rules on openness ?
. ( NL ) As was said earlier with reference to oral question H-0545 / 01 of the honourable Member , Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 of the European Parliament and the Council of 30 May 2001 relating to public access to documents of the European Parliament will come into force as of 3 December of this year .
Until that date , requests from citizens for Council documents will be dealt with as previously on the basis of Decision 93 / 731 / EC regarding public access to Council documents .
Each of the three institutions involved is at present taking measures to ensure that the new Regulation is actually applied from 3 December next .
According to Article 15 of the Regulation , they are required to set up an interinstitutional committee , which will investigate the best practice , deal with any disputes and discuss future developments relating to public access to documents .
As regards the Council , the competent services are at present holding discussions on the measures to be taken and on the timeframe for their introduction , in order to facilitate citizens ' exercising of the rights that they have now been assigned more clearly on the basis of the new Regulation .
The necessary measures will be taken to be able to meet the deadline of 3 December .
As regards the various types of documents that may be consulted by the public , I can inform the honourable Member that at present , on the basis of Decision 93 / 731 / EC of 20 December 1993 relating to public access to Council documents , all Council documents can be requested by the public .
Depending on their content and in particularly in the light of the exceptional regulations - that is , Article 4 of the Decision - a decision is taken as to whether or not they can be released to the applicant , after a full case-by-case investigation .
However , Article 1 , paragraph 1 of Decision 93 / 731 / EC , amended by Council Decision 2000 / 527 / EC of 14 August last year , stipulated that if a request for access relates to a document marked highly secret , secret or confidential in the sense of the decision of the Secretary-General of the Council of 27 July 2000 , that in addition refers to the security and defence affairs of the Union or of one or more of its Member States or to military or non-military crisis management , the applicant shall be informed that the document concerned does not fall within the scope of Decision 93 / 731 / EC .
I would draw your attention to the fact that this provision was not included in the previously mentioned Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 that comes into effect on 3 December next .
However , Article 9 of the Regulation stipulates that requests for access to the sensitive documents described in it will be dealt with separately .
For example , people may only deal with such requests where they themselves are authorised to take cognisance of these documents .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 is based on the same general principle as the Decision of 1993 , namely that every document request is definitely looked at separately .
Access can only be possibly denied in the light of the exceptional regulation provided for in Article 4 .
In addition , the Council decided in its Decision of 9 April this year on the classification of certain categories of Council documents , to place a whole series of documents , especially documents that fall under legislative activities , directly in the public domain via the Internet .
In this , the Council anticipated the coming into force of the Regulation as regards Article 12 , paragraph 3 .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the President-in-Office on getting through so many answers in this Question Time .
You may have beaten the record .
I do not know what the record is , but you have been very good .
Secondly , I note your statement that this procedure will start on time on 3 December .
Everyone in Parliament and the public is delighted to hear that and thank you for your very full reply .
Can I just ask : is the next step to open up Council meetings to the public when you are legislating so we can see what you are doing ?
Then we would have real democracy in the Council .
Will you do that next ?
I am afraid that in order to do that we first need an IGC so you will have to wait for some time .
But as you heard from my answer , there is a lot of progress and we will see .
I will not quote the former Prime Minister of Belgium when I had the temerity to formulate this suggestion in my own national parliament but I can tell you in private afterwards .
Things are progressing and going forward and now let us wait and hope .
I too wish to thank the Council of Ministers for its comprehensive answer , but I should nonetheless like the Council to be more specific .
Is it possible to provide some examples - practical examples - of documents which previously were secret but which will now be made public under the new rules ?
I am referring to certain types of document which you now hope it might be possible to make public .
It is only when it is known which types of document are really to be made public that there can be talk of genuine success and increased openness .
I see that I have failed in my attempt to convince you that some progress has indeed been made .
I suggest that early next year or during the course of December you again ask questions on this .
We will probably be able to give you a more detailed answer then than we can now because the new rulings are not yet applicable .
Progress has been made .
I have tried to convince you of this .
Mr President , I really must protest at the way in which you are directing this debate .
You have written off all our supplementary questions as statements and you have not allowed the President-in-Office to reply .
You did the same to Mr Marinos , to Mr Sacrédeus and to me .
It seems to me that specific questions were asked and you should at least have allowed the President-in-Office to reply .
If she had no reply to our questions , she could simply have told us she had no reply .
It is the first time I have seen the President intervene as you did earlier and comment on our questions and positions as you have done .
I thank you for your observation , I take good note of it ; but the Rules of Procedure explicitly state that only supplementary questions may be asked , not statements .
In any event , I will not prevent the President-in-Office from replying as she believes appropriate , although no question has been asked .
She always has the opportunity .
But you and the interpretation of Mr Marinos ' s intervention - at least the interpretation into various languages , because I have consulted it - did not include any question but rather a broad statement .
This presidency has violated neither the letter nor the spirit of Question Time , the aim of which is to ask specific questions and receive the most specific possible replies .
I invite you to read the Rules of Procedure relating to Question Time .
Although we are out of time , we are going to ask two questions to the President , so that you are aware : Questions Nos 20 and 21 ; the rest will be replied to in writing .

Question No 20 by ( H-0635 / 01 ) :
Subject : Elections in Kosovo What support is the Council giving for the holding of the first general elections in Kosovo , and what prospects for that region does it see ?
The elections on 17 November will certainly be a key event for the future of Kosovo and will facilitate a greater level of direct participation by the population and by local political leaders in the operation of the provisional constitutional framework established by UNMIK .
Against this background , the Council considers it vital that these elections should take place in a proper manner in accordance with European norms and with the participation of the entire population , in particular the Serbian minority in Kosovo .
Nevertheless , the Council of the European Union is not playing any part in the direct preparations for these elections .
This organisational task has in fact been given to the OSCE , to the Council of Europe and to the third pillar of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo , better known by the abbreviation UNMIK .
However , all the Member States are making an important contribution to the budget established for this purpose via the OSCE and the Council of Europe and they are also involved in preparing for observers to be sent , once again under the aegis of the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
Mr President , firstly , I should like to ask whether the European Union is at least doing what it does everywhere else , namely working actively to fund the independent media , train politicians , support the democratic parties and promote institution building .
In essence , this is what we are doing everywhere , and I would find it incomprehensible if this were not the case in Kosovo .
Secondly , I should like to ask whether the Council plans to initiate direct contacts with the newly elected politicians in Kosovo after the forthcoming elections , so that the moderate forces which I believe will win are genuinely able to achieve success and there is no renewed upsurge in support for the radical forces later on ?
As regards the organisation of the elections , I think I have given you all the facts and information available to me .
With regard to establishing a presence and maintaining frequent contacts with the authorities , leaders and personalities that play a role in Kosovo , you are well aware that that always has been and will remain the objective of the European Union .
On a personal note , I would like to say that it is perhaps advisable not to state a position before the elections which would make it all too clear who one wishes to emerge victorious in these elections .
In fact I believe that we have had several bitter disappointments in this region of Europe and that we need to have faith in the democratic process in Kosovo , whilst following events there very closely , including those after the elections , which we all hope will be conducted in a proper manner .
Mr President , I have my question written here and I shall send you a photocopy of the text and the translation so that you can see what I asked the Minister at a glance .
I assure you that I would not wish anyone to think that I am arguing with you .
I admire and respect you , especially when you are in the chair .
I have repeatedly attended sessions during which you have chaired question time and I have no complaints .
But may I add , just to prove that I did ask a question , that the Minister said that my supplementary question was not included in the text of my question .
So I should like , first , to say that I clearly asked a question and , secondly , to ask you , as President , if supplementary questions should be repeated by the person who asked the initial question or if they should supplement the first question in different words but - naturally - on the same subject ?
I should like you to clarify this point given that you are far more experienced in procedural matters than I.
You are absolutely right , Mr Marinos .
The supplementary question is not the same , as its name suggests .
It is a supplementary question .
What has happened is that we did not realise it was a question from the interpretation , but you have asked it , we have all understood very well and we thank you for your cooperation and assessment .
Thank you very much .
Question No 21 by ( H-0637 / 01 ) :
Subject : Adoption of the regulation on designs and models When is the regulation on designs and models scheduled to be adopted ?
There is unanimous agreement in the Council on virtually all aspects of the draft Regulation .
Only one Gordian knot remains to be cut , and the presidency is organising bilateral contacts with some delegations with this in mind .
On this basis , we hope that this last obstacle can soon be cleared .
You will understand that I am unable to give further information on the subject at this delicate stage .
Mr President , I shall speak in the form of a question , so that the presidency will not object , with good reason , as it always does .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , the truth is that I do not understand the reasons why you do not clarify this point which is still outstanding , because I do not actually understand what that point may be .
At the time , in the regulation on designs and models , when it came to the directive , certain points were controversial , for example the reparation clause , but once , with the very direct participation of the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council , a compromise was reached on that clause , which has been reflected in the Commission ' s proposal and accepted as such by the European Parliament I do not understand what the controversial point can be .
Neither do I understand , as has been said , why there may be other controversial points which , at the time , delayed the approval of the Regulation on markings , such as those relating to language , procedure or the location of the office for the harmonisation of the internal market , because that was resolved with the Regulation on markings .
And now , as regards this proposed regulation on design , the procedure rules , the procedure languages and the competence of the office for harmonisation of the internal markets are issues which have already been resolved .
I therefore do not understand what that point is and , despite your invitation , I would be grateful if you could clarify it .
I can only repeat what I have just said .
It is not always necessary to understand or share the argument underpinning the reservations that a Member State may have on a particular point to realise that these reservations have nevertheless been expressed , that they have been maintained and that it is difficult to withdraw them .
The presidency will do what it can by the end of this year to have them lifted .
That is all I can say about the situation at this stage .
Thank you very much , Madam President-in-Office .
That reply ends this debate .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 22 to 36 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.13 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Statement by the President
Pursuant to Rule 74 of the Rules of Procedure , the presidency must make the following announcement :
The Council has delivered the following joint positions , which will appear in today ' s Minutes , as well as the reasons for adopting them .
The period of three months available to Parliament to give its opinion will begin from tomorrow 6 September 2001 .
Data protection in electronic communications ( continuation )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0270 / 2001 , by Mr Cappato , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector [ COM ( 2000 ) 385 - C5-0439 / 2000 - 2000 / 0189 ( COD ) ]
A5-0284 / 2001 , by Mrs Cederschiöld , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the strategy for creating a safer information society by improving the security of information infrastructures and combating computer-related crime
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to address all the issues raised in the Commission ' s proposal for a directive on data protection in electronic communications .
Most of the proposals are well-founded and necessary , and have our support .
This also applies to the work of the rapporteur , Mr Cappato , whom I would like to congratulate on his work .
There is one highly controversial issue , however .
What is our position on direct advertising by e-mail ?
At present , there are four Member States in Europe which have opt-in systems , which means that commercial e-mails are banned if they are unsolicited , and are permitted only with the prior consent of the recipient .
Most other Member States have an opt-out solution , with individuals having to register on Robinson lists if they do not wish to receive commercial e-mails .
We therefore have two options : Amendments Nos 42 , 43 and 44 proposed by the Committee and the rapporteur call for an opt-out solution as a minimum standard , supplemented by Amendment No 61 , which provides for review after three years .
Countries which have an existing opt-in system can continue with this as an " add-on " to the minimum standard .
Amendments Nos 53 , 60 and 62 call for an immediate introduction of the opt-in system which would then be compulsory for all Member States .
There are good arguments for both opt-in and opt-out and we will hear many more of them in this debate , undoubtedly presented with passion .
I confess that I tend to favour an opt-in solution .
Nonetheless , there is a serious decision before us today , and that is whether to adopt option 1 , i.e. opt-out as the minimum standard , thus maintaining the status quo in the Member States .
Why do we have this situation ?
Firstly , we chose the opt-out solution as a minimum standard in the e-Commerce Directive a year ago , although this will also be reviewed in three years .
It would be absurd , incoherent and contradictory to adopt a conclusive solution in this directive , whether it be opt-in or opt-out , just a year later .
Secondly , no one can predict the precise course of events .
No one can say with certainty what the advantages and disadvantages of the two options will be in the next two years .
Trade practices , citizens ' information requirements , but also their security needs are undergoing rapid change .
It is quite impossible to predict how the commercial sector will respond to the new opportunities afforded by direct advertising by e-mail .
It may be tempting to make comparisons with conventional mailshots , but this is inappropriate .
Let us remain faithful to our original approach , without drawing any hasty conclusions , and wait for the outcomes of this House ' s wise decision - which was adopted with an overwhelming majority - on the e-Commerce Directive : opt-out as a minimum standard , and the option of opt-in for Member States , with monitoring of the two approaches .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , freedom of expression and freedom of choice are a precious right for liberals , but not at any price .
The receipt of e-mail is considerably less free of strings for the receiver than the receipt of paper leaflets and brochures .
The costs may total EUR 10 billion annually for receivers , not to mention the cost in time .
We therefore need , just as with paper leaflets , " No thank you " stickers .
Personally , I would gladly opt for self-regulation by industry , but in practice it is clear that " opt-out " is not sustainable .
For this reason , the Liberal group will support the Commission ' s proposal for " opt-in " .
Meanwhile there is a bill before the US congress for an " opt-in " that paves the way for sound agreements worldwide , which is necessary in an age of unlimited communication .
Unwanted post will not be limited to the Internet .
The mobile telephone sector will play an increasing role in the period ahead , so that companies and consumers will be saddled with high costs , while the infrastructure becomes very vulnerable .
My second remark concerns the storage of traffic data .
I refer to the ECHELON debate of this morning .
In my view it is an invasion of privacy if traffic data are stored for longer than necessary .
As a result consumers will never gain the necessary trust in e-commerce .
In conclusion , the rules within the Union should be harmonised .
After all , our telecom companies work in a pan-European way and therefore need uniform rules so that legal uncertainty is ruled out .
For this reason , subsidiarity in this field is not an option .
Mr President , the right of freedom of expression entitles companies to display their wares on the Internet .
But that does not mean that they can force people to read what is there .
I regularly receive unwanted advertising on my e-mail .
I have often had to struggle through English language forms in order to fill in at the very end that I wish to be removed from the mailing list . Still , I am regularly unsuccessful .
An " opt-out " arrangement is bad for the consumer .
The latter is dependent on the goodwill of the company in actually deleting his or her name .
Deletion itself is time consuming and at the consumer ' s expense .
It is often claimed that good companies only mail in a targeted way .
But first of all , in that case , supporters of the system are already assuming that there are a substantial number of bad companies that make a mess of things , and secondly , it may be well targeted from a marketing point of view if I receive information about baby clothes , but I do not want to download romper suits or nappies to my screen at my own expense .
Well targeted from a marketing point of view does not necessarily mean either welcome or limited .
If unsolicited advertising eventually really does take off , I foresee a situation where many people will turn away from the open Internet and e-mail .
In that case freedom of expression will have suffered a great setback .
Mr President , I should like to join in congratulating the rapporteurs on their work .
Obviously the whole area of new technologies is one that has presented us with many problems as well as boundless opportunities .
Unfortunately , however , as with most new opportunities , these have been hijacked to a huge extent by people of criminal intent who use them for illicit means .
Therefore the onus is on us to ensure that we can put in place proper controls and measures , not with regard to access , but ensuring that parents can make certain their children will not be endangered by these new technologies and also that there is cooperation amongst the law enforcement agencies across the Member States .
I welcome the fact that in the reports there is a role for Europol and Eurojust as well as between the Member States .
I also welcome the establishment of the forum on cybercrime .
This is an important area where we can bring all the actors together , including the manufacturers of equipment who can put in place certain things that can help us .
Finally , it is a forward looking plan when we look at cooperation with the United States of America and other countries throughout the world , to ensure that this new technology can be used for the benefit of all of mankind and not for those who want to avoid our legal structures .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the first place I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report , but on behalf of Mr Westendorp , the Chairman of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I must lodge a serious objection to the procedure followed .
It had been agreed that use would be made of a strengthened Hughes procedure , but little has come of that .
I will not go into detail .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has not wanted to hold up this debate because of the urgency , but we nevertheless wish to make a serious protest .
We are ultimately concerned here with two important political questions .
In the first place whether we choose " opt-in " or " opt-out " or a mixed system for a certain amount of time .
The second question concerns the nature and storage of traffic data .
I myself am a supporter of " opt-in " and would like to mention a few arguments .
Mrs Plooij has already pointed to the study by the European Commission which shows that European citizens alone spend some ten billion on junk e-mail .
I consider it a much more important point that public support for the knowledge society is waning .
People are already sick of the fact that , for every two e-mails you are happy to receive because of whom they come from , there are 74 others that you do not want at all . Then you must actually pay for them .
Mr President , that causes immense irritation , which in the United States has led to the new term ' permission-based marketing ' .
One is asked in advance if one wants something .
This is a form of self-regulation that we in Europe must also move towards .
We are still lagging behind and we must establish a semblance of order .
For that reason , Mrs De Palacio ' s amendment is apposite , although it talks of 2006 .
It is true that in 2006 we can indeed move towards self-regulation , but we need " opt-in " for now .
Mr President , my third objection is that almost everyone talks about e-mails and , fortunately , a number of fellow MEPs have spoken on this issue .
Just imagine , we now receive all kinds of welcome messages when we cross the French or Luxembourg frontier .
We do not know what is behind them , because we do not have the impression that there is any further message behind them .
So we have to call an end to this and that costs money .
Imagine getting a message every two minutes in this Chamber from well-intentioned medium-sized and small companies about a new product .
Who is going to foot the bill , Mr President ?
That is the question before us and we must give it further consideration .
The fourth , reason , Mr President , why I am in favour is that the majority of states - they no longer number four but actually seven - have chosen the " opt-in " system .
Mr President , this concerns a fundamental question and I am requesting the Commission to give an answer .
Why are two systems acceptable in e-commerce and not here ?
Have I understood correctly that the fundamental reason is that in the case of e-commerce , the harmonising articles were sidelined , not included and hence placed in parentheses ?
The core of this directive is that it deals expressly with harmonisation .
The second problem is , of course , what happens in practice if one Member State chooses " opt-in " and the other " opt-out " , since e-mails make no distinction between borders .
I believe that the Commission will have to say something about both the costs and the question whether the two judicial systems can exist alongside one other .
My last comment concerns the possibilities of tracing .
Of course we do not see the providers as tracing services and for that reason the restriction of the nature of traffic data and the term for storing traffic data are of essential importance .
Therefore it is possible with the amendments in this field to prevent citizens from feeling that via e-mail and via our mobile phones a disguised ECHELON system is again being introduced .
Mr President , with regard to the procedure followed in the approval of my report , Mr Van Velzen has made reference to a possible violation of procedure .
I ask the presidency to clarify this point for tomorrow ' s debate , because I do not want there to be this ambiguity .
If the procedure has been violated , the work in violation of the procedure should be cancelled ; if the procedure has been respected , it has been respected .
I believe this is the least we owe to the House .
Personally , as rapporteur of the committee with competence in the matter , I have never been consulted by any of the other committees ; had it been an ' enhanced Hughes procedure ' - which it is not - I would have had to be consulted .
However it may be - I am not an expert on procedure - and I ask that a check be made as to whether the procedures were violated .
Results in violation of the procedures should be cancelled .
Mr Cappato , the presidency takes note of what you have just said .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I want to thank Mrs Cederschiöld and Mr Cappato for the sound work they have done .
I am in no doubt that the forum supported by the Commission and Mrs Cederschiöld will highlight new issues and new problems .
Moreover , the political front lines will probably not be the usual ones .
This was also abundantly clear in today ' s debate on electronic communications .
I want to point out that the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party does not support Amendment No 55 , for I think that the Committee ' s proposal is clearer on the issue of storing communications data .
A minority of the ELDR Group believes that we should wait and see how these systems work and that we should apply the principle of subsidiarity .
We support Amendment No 61 concerning the supervision clause .
Our approach is characterised by humility , for we do not believe that any of these proposals is the decisive factor . Rather , it is enlightened citizens who decide .
I believe that many of those who will be making decisions in the House tomorrow are really not aware that the issue of spamming is , in large part , also regulated through the general data protection directive .
We have a situation , for example in Great Britain , in which 44 per cent of all e-traders do not know that they are contravening this directive .
Moreover , people do not know what service they can obtain .
I believe that responsible and aware behaviour on the part of consumers is the most important thing of all .
I come from a country in which we have an opt-in arrangement , but we still cannot do anything regarding , for example , people who make use of changed addresses .
We are constantly seeing different forms of spamming .
I wonder if we shall begin to be required to have some form of register of addresses in the future .
I want to ask the Commission whether it has considered addressing the issue in the transatlantic or global dialogue .
What truth is there in what is said about America ' s attitude ?
We have received different information about this .
Many say that the Bush administration does not yet intend to do anything , that it is too soon and that there is a wish to monitor technical developments .
I also wonder which rules apply if a European company spams outside the EU .
Is it the e-commerce directive or this directive which applies in that case ?
Mr President , I would like to focus my remarks this evening on Mrs Cederschiöld ' s report .
That is why I am here , having shadowed it in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
I would like to commend Mrs Cederschiöld on the way that she has incorporated so many of the opinions of different committees into a very comprehensive report and also to congratulate the Commission on this initiative .
I feel this is a very worthwhile and challenging document .
One of the problems with the report is that it contains a huge amount of material and potential actions and priorities will therefore have to be set .
So this evening I should just like to address what I believe is a crucial problem that needs to be looked at in the short term : the whole question of how we encourage the development of electronic commerce to use these tools , to address the sort of business issues that some colleagues are already trying to frustrate , in my view , by moving prematurely to the sort of rigid opt-in arrangement that they are talking about .
The e-commerce market is at a very early stage and is still underdeveloped .
We do not want to choke it off by some of the things that we are talking about .
But we do need to address the security issues .
A very important report produced by the British business association , the CBI , last week clearly showed that both businesses and consumers are discouraged from moving into the electronic commerce market place because of concerns about security .
Businesses , particularly small and medium-sized businesses , are worried about the vulnerability of their enterprises to fraud and fraudulent transactions .
I suggest to you that one of the things that we must work on is to ensure that small and medium sized enterprises get the benefits of this revolution .
Consumers are worried about getting involved in transactions because they are worried about the security of their payments .
Those are the critical issues we have to tackle .
We have to combine that with a regime that allows SMEs to use e-commerce in a targeted and effective way .
So I will combine my remarks on both reports by saying that I believe we are taking the right course with Mrs Cederschiöld and the right course with Mr Cappato .
Mr President , the new information and communication technologies have a fundamental impact on the daily lives of our citizens and on the very economy of our societies .
It is , therefore , becoming crucial to ensure that there is rigorous protection against potential abuses or even criminal acts .
We talk of cybercrime , both in terms of fundamental rights and privacy and also in the context of services of general interest , bank transfers , investments , credit card fraud amongst others .
Mrs Cederschiöld is therefore right to call for a coherent European strategy which , on the one hand , ensures the freedom of the market and improves the security of information services and infrastructures and , on the other , fights against criminal activities that affect not only the interests of individual citizens but also public interest itself .
We are also discussing the report by Mr Cappato , whom I should like to congratulate on his work on the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector .
This is a report that warranted a lengthy debate and which seeks to find a balance between the protection of private life , the legal aspects and the interests of industry .
Apart from the issues concerning intervention by Member States when carrying out criminal investigations , the main issue concerns spamming .
I agree with the position put forward by Mr von Boetticher on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , but I must also add my own personal view : in terms of protecting the interests of consumers , I incline more towards the Commission ' s proposal than to that tabled by Mr Cappato , more towards the opt-in solution than towards opting out .
The question is whether it is effective , especially if it is only adopted by the European Union .
This is an issue that concerns the Union ' s relationship with its partners , something that has already been mentioned in this debate .
I am sure that none of us wishes to see an e-mail system becoming increasingly unusable because it is swamped and blocked up by countless messages of this type , unsolicited and often of dubious taste .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are talking about e-mails , spamming and a wide range of other subjects .
I think that we should distinguish between three main areas , i.e. from business to business , from business to customer and from customer to customer .
Then we should start thinking about principles .
I do not believe that a separate solution is necessarily required for each type of technical communication .
We are all familiar with the idea that you can attach a sticker to a mailbox .
We have all learned to use the telephone , mobiles , sms , and e-mail .
I think that the real challenge now is to think about how we want to use this technology and this range of information and advertising opportunities in future .
Of course , it is important to take values into account here .
I know people who say : I want to receive as much information as possible in a wide range of areas .
I want to be able to decide for myself what I keep and what I throw away .
There are others who say : I only want to receive the information which I have requested myself .
We are also familiar with this concept with regard to debt payable to , and debt collectible by , the creditor .
I think we should discuss this point in detail as well .
As regards cyber war and cybercrime , we should focus on three main points .
We should step up research and development in this area , especially in Ispra near Milan .
I think there is a great deal of work to be done in this area , especially as regards security in the Commission and the Parliament .
We should think about the type of education and training we can offer in this field , e.g. at colleges of higher education and through university departments .
I think that action is needed here .
We must also think about the type of security infrastructure which should be available in the hardware and software fields in future .
Finally , I should like to say that a separation of powers is also important .
The prosecution services , the courts and the operators must work together to ensure that these systems are not abused .

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Cappato and also Mrs Thors , Mr Bakopoulos and Mrs Schröder of the various contributing committees of the European Parliament for this report .
I will start with the Cappato report .
I am pleased that Parliament is now debating this important directive which forms an essential element of the electronic communications regulatory reform package .
This will enable us to try and minimise the procedural delay which the data protection directive has incurred , as compared with the rest of the package .
I would also like to concentrate on two issues which have been discussed by so many .
First , opt-in for unsolicited commercial e-mails and the question of traffic data retention for law enforcement purposes .
It appears from the debate that the proposed opt-in for unsolicited commercial e-mails divides opinions in this House .
This is understandable , since this is a complex issue and arguments on both sides of the debate have some merit .
However , I am convinced that the Commission proposal for opt-in is best , for essentially two reasons .
First , the internal market needs a harmonised solution , a simple and clear rule throughout the EU .
It is particularly important in an economic sector which is so profoundly without frontiers as electronic commerce over the Internet is .
Mr van Velzen asked me a question about the applicability of subsidiarity in this field .
I want to be crystal clear .
It is legally impossible for opt-in countries to enforce their system with regard to mail coming from opt-out countries .
These two systems cannot exist because the opt-out regime will override any opt-in systems .
We can discuss subsidiarity but in practice it cannot work with the two systems .
The opt-out system , especially , will override the opt-in system .
The second reason is the cost issue which has been mentioned by many .
It is very difficult to justify that the recipients of unsolicited commercial e-mail will have to pay for messages which they do not want to receive .
Receiving paper advertising material in your traditional mail box is annoying , but at least you do not pay for it .
You do not pay for the printing , you do not pay for the transport .
E-mail marketing may well be the only form of marketing where the recipient carries most of the cost .
In addition , removing unsolicited e-mails from mail servers entails a substantial cost for Internet service providers .
For that reason , Internet service providers strongly favour opt-in solutions .
Finally , we must remember that the Internet is going mobile .
This is starting now with SMS messages .
But this legislation will concern all e-mails which will go in future to mobile terminals .
That will be more disruptive than receiving such messages on your PC .
Imagine the mobile device in your pocket beeping all the time to announce the arrival of yet another commercial offer you cannot refuse and you want to keep your mobile phone on because you want to be connected with the people close to you .
Moreover , messages to mobile terminals may also entail an even bigger cost , if the subscriber is roaming like most of us gathered here tonight .
We are roaming practically all the time .
With the advent of the Mobile Internet , the costs and nuisance of unsolicited communications will therefore increase significantly .
Mrs Thors raised two questions .
Firstly the situation in the United States .
I had the privilege to participate in many discussions with the Members of the Senate and the US Congress in this field .
Today , there are about 60 proposals in Congress on that issue .
In general , it is agreed that the present opt-out system has a lot of problems , but the solutions vary .
There are some who go for opt-in solutions , there are others who present different schemes to make strict rules such as that there should be a penalty for a company that does not take your name away as soon as you ask .
I cannot say that there is one simple solution , there is criticism of the present opt-out practice .
There are powerful Members of Senate and the Congress who advocate opt-in solutions .
You will be able to contact these people especially when the Internet caucus of Congress visits Europe in the next few weeks .
As far as the applicability of an opt-in regime outside Europe is concerned , the GATT agreement allows its members to take measures to enforce their data protection legislation within their territory .
On this basis , the EU can require non-EU based companies to comply with its opt-in legislation .
Mr Coelho asked whether it is difficult to control .
In this kind of world it is very difficult to draft legislation which is 100 % waterproof .
But I am sure that opt-out will be much more difficult to control than opt-in .
There is no harmonised system .
There are hundreds of thousands of databases , practices , private operations and if anybody is optimistic I invite you to try .
You could , for example , start by sending a letter to all those companies whose material you no longer wish to receive and then check how many will remove your name during the following days and how many respond to your request .
It is something anybody can try .
I have done it myself .
I am not optimistic .
The opt-in regime is one uniform legal solution .
We have difficulties there but I am sure that they are less than with the present opt-out regime .
For these reasons the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 19 , 41 and 42 .
However , knowing how difficult this issue is , and how divided opinions have been in this House , we should also look for compromise solutions and I want to be open and constructive on this issue .
We therefore welcome the constructive compromise amendments 53 and 62 which have been presented .
The Commission is willing to look for solutions along the lines of these amendments , but subject to some redrafting and streamlining within the existing legal framework .
The second important issue I would like to mention is general traffic retention for law enforcement purposes .
On this one , I have the impression that the Commission and the European Parliament are on the same line .
The existing telecommunications data protection directive states that traffic data must be erased when they are no longer needed for the provision of the service and for billing .
In addition , there is a clause referring to the reasons for which Member States may adopt specific legal measures in derogation of this principle in exceptional cases .
These reasons include , inter alia , national security , defence , and the investigation and prosecution of crimes .
We discussed these issues earlier today in this House .
Since the rights protected in this existing and proposed directive are based on Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights - under the protection of privacy of home , family life and correspondence - any exception must remain within the rules established by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
As we discussed this morning during the Echelon debate , it is important that the rules for both citizens and for the State are very clear and precise regarding the rights and obligations in this sensitive area .
Therefore , the Commission can support Amendment No 4 which strengthens the recital text on this point .
However , the Commission is not in favour of copying the same text into Article 15 , as proposed by Amendment 50 , as it may overstep the legal basis of the directive .
In summary , out of the 62 amendments submitted to plenary , 35 can be fully supported by the Commission .
These are Amendments Nos 1 to 4 , 7 to 10 , 12 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 21 to 29 , 31 to 35 , 37 , 39 , 45 , 49 , 51 , 52 , 56 and 57 .
Another seven amendments which can be supported in part or in principle subject to certain drafting changes are 5 , 46 to 48 , 53 , 60 and 62 .
I mentioned two of these earlier .
But there are 20 amendments which the Commission cannot support : 6 , 11 , 13 , 16 , 19 , 20 , 30 , 36 , 38 , 40 to 44 , 50 , 54 , 55 , 58 and 59 .
As regards the Cederschiöld report , I would like to thank the honourable Members of the European Parliament for the constructive approach to the Commission communication on cybercrime and cybersecurity .
I would particularly like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Cederschiöld , and also Mrs McCarthy and Mrs Zorba , the draftspersons of the contributing committees .
The report identifies key issues for further consideration .
Many of the recommendations in the report are in line with the current view of the Commission on policy development to combat cybercrime and improve security .
There is one recommendation , however , of which I have to say that it is not acceptable to the Commission , that is Recommendation No 5 concerning the transfer of responsibilities for data protection within the Commission and to concentrating responsibility for certain other tasks in single units .
This is a matter of internal organisation of the Commission which should be left entirely to the discretion of the President of the Commission .
Concerning the other recommendations , in as far as they are not already parts of plans for policy development , the Commission will give them full consideration , and will see how far they can be incorporated in upcoming or new initiatives .
As you know , this communication was issued in January this year .
It has been sponsored jointly by Commissioner Vitorino and myself .
This has been the first comprehensive policy statement of the European Commission on the issue of cybercrime .
In March , the Commission organised a public hearing .
Over 400 people came to Brussels to attend this event , which shows the strong interest of the public in participating in this discussion .
Next the Commission will shortly issue a proposal for a framework decision on combating serious attacks against information systems .
This initiative addresses acts like hacking , denial-of-service attacks , and the spread of viruses .
In June , the Commission issued a communication on network and information security , which I presented this morning in this House in detail .
This communication deals with preventive organisational and technical measures , and is complementary to the framework decision , which deals with ex-post criminal investigations .
At the technical level , as part of the Information Society Technologies Programme , the Commission is promoting research and development to understand and reduce vulnerabilities and stimulate the dissemination of know-how .
IST projects focus in particular on the development of confidence-building technologies .
The first legislative initiative announced in the communication has already been issued : a proposal for a framework decision that includes measures to combat child pornography .
I fully share the strong opinions expressed on this issue in this House tonight .
The communication has announced a forum in which the relevant parties will have the opportunity to discuss various issues to find an appropriate balance between network security , law enforcement powers , privacy protection and economic priority .
An open debate is vital to achieve an effective , coherent and balanced policy approach and to assure confidence and trust among European citizens .
Confidence and trust of the users is directly related to the take-up of electronic commerce and to the success of the Information Society .
The report of the European Parliament is an important milestone in this policy debate .
Mr President , the Commissioner made clear why , in his opinion , an opt-in and an opt-out system cannot operate in parallel in this directive .
But I have to ask him another question .
It is of vital importance for my group to know why it is possible in the electronic commerce directive .
Perhaps the Commissioner can give us an answer to that .
The reason was that the electronic commerce directive excluded all issues relating to data protection .
That was the reason they were dealt with in a different context in the data protection directive and in this directive .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Implementation of competition rules
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0229 / 2001 ) by Mr Evans , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the implementation of rules on competition .



Mr President , of all the issues debated this week there is none that can have a greater impact on the economic wealth of Europe than the reform of competition policy .
Fair and open competition is the bedrock on which the single European market is built and on which the growth of European economies depends .
That is why we must maintain our determination to root out monopolists and those who engage in shady anti-competitive price fixing or market sharing deals .
These actions not only undermine the interests of commercial competitors , they rip off consumers and undermine the dynamic competitive economy on which our future economic interests rely .
But we must also recognise that Commissioner Monti ' s weapons for tackling such abuses are sadly out of date .
The Commission ' s White Paper on competition policy reform highlighted the difficulties .
The 40 year old procedure under Regulation 17 had become a bureaucratic paper-pushing exercise .
The Commission wants radical change , devolving the application of EU competition law to national authorities in order to refocus its efforts in rooting out cartels and the abuse of market power .
Parliament agreed with these objectives .
But we strongly spelt out our concern on important issues like the need for legal certainty .
We also pointed to the possible danger of the reform leading to inconsistent application or even the renationalisation of competition policy , thereby destroying the single market .
These were real concerns voiced by many Members of the House as well as significant sectors of the business community throughout Europe .
I recognised and shared those worries and some colleagues and representatives of European business still share them today .
Nevertheless I believe that Commissioner Monti has genuinely taken account of our concerns and the Commission ' s proposal reflects this .
Above all I want to draw attention to Article 3 of the regulation , which unambiguously states that in cases affecting trade between Member States it is European competition law that takes precedence .
This is a core requirement of the single market and strongly supported by all sides in our committee debates .
For us , the preservation of Article 3 is an essential part of this reform .
We recognise that there may well be some Member States that will try to dilute its impact .
We consider that Article 3 is such a central element of the reform that we will wish to be consulted again if the Council obliges the Commission to make any significant change to this article .
We have proposed a number of amendments in order to improve the operation of this radical reform .
We found , for instance , little support outside the Bundeskartellamt for the new registration scheme under Article 4 , which we consider to be time-wasting and valueless .
We want it scrapped .
We have proposed a range of amendments to improve legal certainty for business , including the widening of Article 10 - changes which have received widespread business support .
We have urged proper safeguards on Commission powers in relation to the application of structural remedies .
We have suggested that penalties imposed under EU law by national authorities should be those provided for in EU law .
We have also proposed changes in the transitional arrangements and in undertaking a timely review .
We have also wrestled with the issue of the appropriate treatment of communications from in-house legal advisers .
I am deeply indebted to my colleague , Mr Rovsing , for the attention that he has given to this issue .
There are different rules in operation in different parts of the European Union .
We have tried to ensure that the professional status of in-house lawyers is acknowledged , whilst not impeding the Commission in the thorough investigation of possible infringements .
In the committee vote I indicated that this situation could possibly be resolved by a Commission declaration clarifying the treatment of such evidence in the application of Commission penalties .
Mr Rovsing and I now understand that Commissioner Monti may have it in mind to make some such declaration , in which event our group will no longer consider it appropriate to retain Amendment No 10 .
This debate has also highlighted other important but wider issues of competition policy reform .
We welcome the dynamism which Commissioner Monti has brought to his brief .
" Supermario " , as he has been labelled in the media , has taken the lead and not only in pressing for radical reform in Europe .
He has been at the centre of moves towards the worldwide coordination of competition policy and enforcement .
We are sure that in an increasingly global economy such radical reform will be necessary .
But we also believe in checks and balances and we want the Commission ' s actions to be fully reviewable by the Court of Justice .
Our committee thanks Commissioner Monti for his commitment to real and meaningful dialogue .
But we reiterate our objective of Parliament moving towards full codecision in respect of these matters .
The interest of my parliamentary colleagues in competition policy issues is not just some academic exercise for commercial lawyers .
In an increasingly global world we recognise that effective competition is the essential motor for the growth of European economies and the welfare of the people we have been sent here to represent depends on fair and open competition in order to drive that growth forward .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in a similar position to Mr von Boetticher in the previous debate .
I do not want to go into details on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
We think that Mr Evans has produced a good , well-rounded report , and congratulate him on doing so .
The amendments proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and adopted by the committee responsible are intended to enhance the rapporteur ' s report .
Let me give you an example .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has called for the new text to state that decisions must be made public , not ' may be published ' , as the old text might imply , although confidential information is obviously excluded .
However , I would like to draw attention to one point which the rapporteur has also just mentioned , and highlight it to the Commissioner and the qualified minority of expert colleagues who are still assembled here .
I am referring to Amendment No 10 proposed by the committee responsible .
Many Member States provide for confidentiality , i.e. legal privilege , between client and counsel .
This is part of established legal reality in the majority of Member States .
Whenever an individual wants to bare his soul completely , he needs a confidant ; this may be a doctor , a solicitor or , in a religious situation , a priest .
Amendment No 10 safeguards this traditional relationship between legal counsel and client and extends it to in-house lawyers as well .
The Commissioner may assure us that disclosures from the documents held by such legal counsel will not result in stiffer sentences .
However , it is not very helpful , in my view , to set an upper limit on sentencing and say : Even your legal counsel told you not to do this .
Since you chose to do it anyway , your sentence will be increased .
This is sensible , but I would point out that such a declaration would not be sufficient , for the disclosures to legal counsel would , of course , almost certainly constitute significant evidence of guilt .
This violates professional independence and the principle of confidentiality between client and counsel .
In my view , we have to decide one way or the other .
" A bit pregnant " cannot exist here .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur once again for presenting his very good report in response to the Commission ' s proposals , as well as the amendments put forward by the committee .
Thank you very much .
We all know that the competition rules go back to 1957 , that Regulation 17 dates back to 1962 , and that virtually all the framework conditions have changed since then .
On the one hand , we are confronted with globalisation ; on the other hand , the European Union , originally a Community of six , will expand to a Community of 25 in future , and I personally think it is a good thing that the centralised system which reserved the right of application of Articles 81 and 82 exclusively to the Commission is now being restructured as a decentralised system .
However , this must not lead to the renationalisation of competition policy .
In reality , this is prevented by the fact that European law takes precedence over national law , and I anticipate that the current proposal will create fair competition and equal competition conditions .
It will also ensure legal certainty for all enterprises and the uniform application of competition policy , and will simplify procedures in line with the one-stop-shop principle .
It will coordinate the activities of the national - in my view , independent - competition authorities and enable the national authorities and courts to cooperate closely with the Commission . It will establish a clear division of responsibilities between the national authorities and courts in the application of European competition and cartel law , and ensure that the Commission continues to be the guardian of the treaties and thus has more time to devote to real problems , i.e. controlling mergers and cartels .
Many congratulations on having the courage to take these initiatives .
I wish we could see more of this in other areas too .
Mr President , since another member of my Group has given up his speaking time , I believe that I have accumulated additional time .
In any event , I will not use it up .
Mr President , Mr Evans - whom I congratulate on his report - was absolutely right when he said that this is a very important issue , although it is also true that questions relating to the reform procedure in the field of competition do not inspire interest amongst the citizens , despite their importance for the economic world .
However , personally , I must confess that , for me , to participate in the reform of the rules on the procedure in the field of competition gives me particular personal satisfaction .
Because to participate , although in a very modest way , in the process of repealing Regulation 17 of 1962 , against which I have fought a long-standing battle and on which I have written repeatedly in a very critical manner , is , I must confess , hugely gratifying .
But at the burial of this regulation , and may it be well buried , which I have always seen as wretched , perhaps at this time , with due respect for the dead , we should a pay slightly fairer tribute by recognising what has been good about it historically .
Regulation 17 made some sense at the time it was approved , that is , in 1962 , when the application of Community competition law was being born , which could justify a centralisation of the powers of the Commission , in a Community of seven countries with less than 200 million inhabitants .
But the problem with Regulation 17 was not its creation or the rules it established at the time of its creation .
The problem has been its maintenance for almost forty years , during which conditions had changed radically .
Anybody who had contact with the Commission ' s procedures in the field of competition was aware of the dissatisfaction caused by its application .
Finally - and fortunately - the Commission has opted to yield to the evidence and promote the derogation of this Regulation , replacing it with a more up-to-date regulation , in line with the views of the White Paper on the modernisation of the Community rules in the field of competition .
In the report produced on the White Paper , this Parliament had the opportunity to express its favourable opinion , although with some fine-tuning in certain cases .
This fine-tuning was perhaps related to the reticence of certain members of certain countries which had had a decisive influence on the creation of their national system and a fundamental influence on the Regulation of the procedure .
Of course , I did not feel this reticence .
I believe that the new approaches in the field of Community competition law not only constitute an enormous effort to modernise that Community law but also an effort in the right direction .
Today we are being presented with a legislative text which , to a large extent , responds to what had been anticipated in the White Paper .
And it also , to a certain extent , takes up some of the observations made at the time by this Parliament .
It is the case that in some respects the proposed regulation has surprised us with extremes which had not been laid out in the White Paper .
I am referring specifically to the provision of Article 7 on the possibility of adopting structural measures as a result of a decision on a case of prohibited conduct .
This consists , no more and no less , of adopting measures such as the splitting up of companies , particularly of those which have abused their dominant position .
As you know , these measures are normal in United States law .
Hence the Microsoft case and the famous case of the seven sisters , the splitting up of the Rockefeller oil company , possibilities which are enormously innovative within European law .
I personally support this measure unreservedly ; and the fine-tuning which has been introduced by means of amendments in this Parliament are simply a demonstration of a desire that this power be used prudently , as I am sure the Commission is going to do .
Perhaps it is the case that in other respects the Commission ' s proposal is not fully in line with what was approved at the time by the European Parliament .
Specifically , at the time this Parliament favoured a genuine procedural regulation which would regulate the logical principles of any judicial regulation , even if it was simply by incorporating the customs which the Directorate-General for Competition had introduced over almost forty years .
In this regard , the Commission ' s proposal has been more timid than in other respects , but , in any event , if the amendments contained in the Evans report are adopted , or those still maintained by this parliamentary Group , this shortcoming may be corrected .
There are other points on which perhaps our satisfaction is not complete .
It is true that there is no single standard in the field of the guarantees of process or rights to defence .
But those of us who come from a country where the same principles are applied to administrative penalty procedures , with a constitutional guarantee , as to the criminal procedure , and the same rights are granted to physical persons as to legal persons , would have liked this standard , this level of guarantees , to have been raised in accordance with the amendments approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs , which have not been incorporated into the text .
However , at the end of the day , in my country we say that ' the best is the enemy of the good ' and there is absolutely no doubt that this is a good regulation which we are supporting .
You had indeed accumulated Mrs Randzio-Plath ' s time , a total of six minutes , which you have received .
Mr President , first of all , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Evans , very much for what has been sound and constructive cooperation that has led to a good report .
It has been a great pleasure to cooperate with you .
The continuation of sound competition policy is the main aim of the review being undertaken by legislation in the area of competition .
In Denmark this very summer , we have seen the importance of effective competition policy .
In that connection , I should like to commend and thank you , Commissioner Monti , for your active contribution regarding the great SAS / Maersk aviation issue which has enlivened our summer recess and which involved the discovery of an illegal cartel and the imposition of a large fine .
Without your and the Commission ' s efforts , such progress would never have been made on this issue and consumers would never have received help .
I am therefore satisfied with Article 3 of the Commission ' s proposal , which clearly states that it is the Community ' s and not the Member States ' competition law that is applied when it comes to transnational issues of competition .
For the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , it is vital that there be no renationalisation of the EU ' s competition policy .
It is , of course , no secret that there are many of us who are concerned that the Commission ' s proposal might lead to renationalisation and thus to an undermining of the internal market , something which would hit small and medium-sized companies hardest and be to the disadvantage of consumers .
You must therefore promise us , Commissioner , to keep a very careful eye on the national competition authorities , and I can assure you that I shall keep an eye on you and make sure you live up to our expectations , something which you have , of course , done so far .
I should therefore also like to strike a blow for the Commission ' s competition authority being given more resources so that we do not run the risk of competition policy being watered down and taken over by the Member States .
If , as is rumoured , the Council rejects Article 3 , I would strongly urge you , Mr Monti , to withdraw your entire proposal and start afresh .
Without Article 3 , the proposal is unacceptable to the ELDR Group .
The Council ' s hesitation concerning Article 3 makes it abundantly clear how crucial it is for Parliament to be given the right of codecision making on competition policy .
This is something that Parliament has demanded for many years now and , with the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference , the time must now be ripe for action .
Mr President , like those fellow Members who have spoken before me , I approve the principle of competition policy reform proposed by the Commission .
I welcome decentralisation .
The present centralised method , which means that there is a backlog of cases , is inevitably somewhat arbitrary .
It cannot guarantee legal certainty .
However , I believe that reform will inevitably lead to an extremely interesting raising of the stakes as regards the clarification and development of the rules .
And it is on that point that I differ somewhat .
Article 3 is clearly vital .
It establishes the principle that Community law overrides national law in cases where practices are likely to affect trade between Member States .
But this principle is not acceptable without some clarification .
For example , in the case of services of general interest or other services that are essential for the Member States and the regions , I am convinced that there is a need for derogating provisions .
At the very least , the Commission should , as proposed by the Economic and Social Committee , present an interpretative communication on this subject .
Article 10 is another important article .
It rightly provides that the Commission can make observations to the Member States for reasons of Community public interest .
Some clarification is essential here too .
Jonathan Evans highlights the example of major investments .
Services of general interest also need to be mentioned in this particular respect .
Two final remarks .
The rapporteur is right to stress that it is contradictory to replace prior notification by a register .
I think that we should do away with the register .
He is right to call for convergence in national law .
That is the heart of the problem .
It supposes that other countries ' cultures are respected and that a certain balance is achieved between competition , social and environmental standards , including standards for general interest services .
So take a look at the Langen report and other reports .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Italian Radicals will vote for the report by Mr Evans , who has done an excellent job .

I believe that the measures we are discussing represent a serious attempt to face up to an unavoidable problem - the risk that the Commission will end up overwhelmed by notifications - and I think it was both right and courageous to choose to base this reform on decentralisation to national authorities and courts .
The alternative would have been to create a mammoth , over-bureaucratised structure in its directorate general , all the more so , of course , with the prospect of enlargement .
Of course , only experience will tell us if we are heading into an incomprehensible mosaic or a situation that guarantees legal certainty and , I might say , unity of law within the single European market .
I believe , however , that the attempt should be sustained , just as I believe there will be a very warm welcome for the abolition of mandatory notification and authorisation and the introduction of the exception rule , which seems to me a rather more liberal principle , especially in a sector - that of regulating authorities and competition - which is always running the risk of being a different , new instrument for state interference in market dynamics .
This is certainly not the case of the Commission , but a number of authorities - I am thinking of certain central banks , for instance , which in fact preserve anti-trust powers over the credit market - run this risk in my opinion , and sometimes go even further .
In conclusion , I believe , however , that strengthening the sanctioning and investigative powers of the Commission , which are in fact contained in the provision , Commissioner , requires suitable procedural and legal guarantees - this point is raised in Mr Evans ' s justification - especially in a situation like Europe ' s , in which the Commission accumulates the functions of both the investigator , one might say , and the judge , since we are not in a system in which the judge is a third party .
Of course , there are appeals , decisions can be appealed against , but I believe that in this , in the guarantees for the parties involved in the proceedings , the greatest guarantees must be assured .
Mr President , yesterday I was in this House addressing the issue of the European Aviation Safety Agency when I noted that the means by which it was being achieved was through the gradual integration of the national systems .
Naturally , as you would expect from me as a leader of a party that puts national sovereignty above the integrationalist tendencies of the EU , I strongly object to this process of gradual integration .
Today , under the different heading of reform of competition policy I find that I am confronted with exactly the same thing - yet another attempt by the Commission to achieve the gradual integration of national systems .
But what makes this attempt particularly sinister is that it is being sold under the beguiling and wholly misleading claim that the reform is - I quote from the session ' s news briefing - " to free hard-pressed Commission staff in the Competition Policy Department from routine matters to enable them to concentrate on major cases of non-competitive behaviour " .
Although giving Commission officials an easier life might be one effect of this proposal , the way this is being done is to give national competition authorities limited powers to enforce the competition rules hitherto the monopoly of the Commission .
But these authorities are neither independent , as it is claimed , nor free to act .
They are being granted licenses to act for the Commission in accordance with Community rules , under the supervision of the Commission and responsible to it .
The Commission wants the competition authorities to form a network at the centre of which is the Commission .
In other words , the Commission wants civil servants in the different Member States , paid salaries by the Member States , in government buildings paid for by the Member States , using facilities provided by and paid for by Member State governments , to work not for the Member States which finance them , but for the Commission implementing Community law .
Amazingly - and it is a reflection of how superficial is the view and understanding of so many commentators - this is seen and presented as subsidiarity and decentralisation .
It is anything but decentralisation .
It is the opposite , absorbing the civil servants of many countries into one vast centralised nexus .
That is what the network is : everyone working for the one central authority - the Commission .
As for subsidiarity , this is not a matter of Member States being able to make their own decisions and run their own affairs at local level .
This is the Commission running Member States ' affairs , using the resources and the facilities of those Member States as if they were its own .
That state of affairs , it seems , also applies to the courts which will hear the cases in Member States .
Although they may nominally be the courts of the Member States and their running costs are paid for by the Member States , they are - as the draftsman so clearly reminded us - courts of Community law underlying the whole Community judicial system .
In other words , not only are Member States ' civil servants being absorbed into the maw of the Community , but the courts are too .
All this is being done in the name of efficiency .
It should be remembered that the most efficient form of government is the centralised dictatorship .
The least efficient is the democracy .
In important ways , therefore , efficiency is the enemy of democracy .
I fear that in the supposed interests of efficiency we are surrendering something much more valuable - the very democracy at the heart of all our nations - to the centralised technocracy which is the Commission .
This is not so much integration as assimilation .
It will all end in tears .
Mr President , there is a general agreement that we clearly need some reform in some competition rules , and especially in their practical implementation .
Regulation 1017 has been applied with only little modification since the 1960s .
It is therefore understandable that the continued application of this regulation in its current form is no longer consistent with effective supervision of competition .
We have to serve our consumers and our companies better with up-to-date rules of application .
In my view , in a period of 30 years of implementation , EC competition law has reached a level where decentralising is not only possible , but almost necessary .
We are all aware of the workload of the DG for competition and we understand that we have to do something to reduce it , or drastically increase the resources in Brussels .
At the same time , we hear our voters reminding us how we should respect the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality and that we should avoid centralising all decision making to Brussels bureaucrats .
In that question , I totally disagree with Mr Titford .
With the reform at hand we are able to achieve many of our objectives .
Ending the current system of prior notification should benefit business and make more resources available to the Commission to concentrate on more serious infringements .
Ex ante notification should not be replaced with a burdensome registration system .
However , the shift to the new regime will not be an easy task .
It is of the utmost importance to ensure that competition issues within the EU are treated similarly in all Member States .
There are many detailed situations where legal certainty might be a danger .
Personally I , and many of my colleagues from smaller Member States , are worried about the definitions of dominant position in the market .
Companies from Member States - especially from the smaller Member States - should have equal possibilities to grow in the single market and to achieve a strategic position to compete with the global rivals .
The Commission decision to say no to the Volvo / Scania merger was an example of the situation where the relevant market definition was maybe too narrow .
The Commission should not declare that the market is national or regional if there is clear evidence that is not the case .
Mr President , I can tell you that it is a long time since the Danish people have heard so much about the EU as they have in the last few weeks , and that is something for which we can thank Commissioner Monti His work opposing cartels has been front page news for a couple of weeks .
It has been thoroughly debated on television and radio , and it has led to debates within the population and in the Danish parliament . That is something for which I would thank the Commissioner , and I have observed that there has been support in all quarters for what the Commissioner has done .
We can therefore say that competition law has been accorded an important place in the Danish consciousness . That is something for which I would thank you .
In connection with Amendment No 10 , there have been discussions between the Commissioner and his employees and , especially , between myself and my own employees .
We have observed the need for the Commission to be given access to all papers if the Commission is effectively to be able to make use of its powers and go after those cartels which do not comply with the laws .
I agree that that is necessary , but company managements and boards need their experts to be able to give them proper , independent advice without those experts having to fear that , if something subsequently goes wrong because either board or management acts against their advice , this will entail an increased penalty .
I have understood from Commissioner Monti and his colleagues that this is a view he shares and , as Mr Evans has said , the Group of the European People ' s Party will therefore vote against Amendment No 10 if the Commissioner submits such an opinion .
I would thank the Commissioner for his sound cooperation and for the fine work which he can be relied upon to carry out and which is of enormous importance , especially for small countries .
Mr President , I am glad that , in the report drawn up by Mr Evans , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs emphasises the importance of reform as a means of ensuring effective implementation of the rules on competition in an enlarged Community .
I would like to thank Mr Evans personally for his consideration for the Commission , his commitment in dealing with this issue and the high quality of his report .
Next I would like to thank the European Parliament as a whole and all those who have spoken this evening for the support and encouragement Parliament has given the Commission during the debates on the White Paper and ever since .
I must say our proposal for a regulation has greatly benefited from the comments , criticism and encouragement emanating from the committees and from this House .
The central purpose of the reform is to create a more effective system of implementation , to the benefit of consumers , businesses and the European economy in general .
Abolishing the current system of notification and authorisation and the exclusive power of the Commission under Article 81 ( 3 ) means the Commission and the national competition authorities will be able to concentrate their efforts on combating the worst infringements .
The establishment of a network of authorities for the protection of competition will allow us to coordinate our efforts and use our respective resources to best effect .
The essential premise for the success of such cooperation is for all the competition authorities to apply the Community rules more widely , otherwise the planned network would just be an empty framework .
This is essential if we want to create uniform competitive conditions for common market businesses and prevent renationalisation of Community competition policy .
I keenly appreciate , therefore , the fact that Mr Evans fully and firmly supports the Commission ' s proposal contained in Article 3 , aimed at making Community competition law the only set of rules to be applied in cases where trade between Member States might be prejudiced .
This proposal has very wide implications and is meeting with resistance on the part of various Member States within the Council ' s working group .
However , I remain convinced of the solid logical foundation of the proposal and I can assure you that the Commission is determined to establish uniform conditions for agreements that might prejudice trade between Member States .
Mr President , I would now like to touch on some of the specific issues that have emerged , starting with professional secrecy .
Effective implementation of the rules on competition is closely linked to the capacity of the Commission to obtain evidence on infringements .
Our powers are closely linked to documentary evidence .
We base a great deal of our work on on-site inspections , looking for documents which demonstrate the existence of cartels .
Any change likely to reduce the effectiveness of our inspections would therefore have grave consequences on the possibility of implementing the rules on competition and on their effectiveness .
That makes me extremely worried about the amendment to extend duty of secrecy to in-house lawyers .
I want to avoid any misunderstanding on one point , however : the Commission is perfectly aware of the positive role that in-house lawyers can play by counselling companies about observing the rules on competition .
That role will assume greater importance under the new system , where companies will have to carry out more systematic self-assessment of their agreements in particular to establish compliance with the exemption conditions laid down by Article 81 ( 3 ) .
However , the question of duty of secrecy for in-house lawyers essentially arises in the context of inspections attempting to establish the existence of serious restrictions which fail to comply with the provisions of Article 81 ( 3 ) .
In this context , the reform proposed by the Commission does not change the current situation at all .
We have to recognise that , unlike external lawyers , in-house lawyers are employees of the company and take their orders from it .
They are in a position of occupational dependence and may face a conflict of interest between loyalty towards their employers and respect for ethical standards .
Furthermore , internal communications between a company lawyer and his employer are so numerous and indistinguishable from purely company advice - which differs from legal advice - that duty of secrecy for in-house lawyers could create conditions ripe for concealing documentary evidence .
If the communications between in-house lawyers and other employees became confidential , the Commission ' s powers to apply the standards would be seriously compromised .


On this specific problem I have taken note of the information Mr Evans and Mr Rovsing gave just now , designed to promote a compromise solution .
For my part , I can assure you that if Amendment No 10 is rejected , the Commission will cease to regard evidence contained in such documents as an aggravating circumstance in determining financial sanctions .
In that eventuality , I can give an assurance to propose the following form of words to the Commission : ' in determining what financial sanction to impose on a company in future cases , the Commission will not regard as an aggravating circumstance , under the guidelines for calculating fines imposed in implementation of Article 15 ( 2 ) of Regulation 17 and Article 65 ( 5 ) of the ECSC Treaty , the existence of texts demonstrating that the company ' s in-house lawyers have alerted the directors to the unlawfulness of conduct covered by the Commission ' s decision ' .
I hope that this assurance can represent common ground between the Commission and those seeking to extend the duty of secrecy to in-house lawyers .
The Evans report rightly stresses the importance of legal certainty for companies .
The rules and their scope must be sufficiently predictable .
A wider application of Community competition rules by the relevant authorities in the context of a network of close cooperation will , in itself , represent a great step forward in ensuring predictability as compared with the present situation , in which sixteen competition authorities apply different rules .
The Commission recognises that under certain circumstances there may be a legitimate requirement for clarification in relation to an individual case , and that the guidelines , guiding principles and existing case law do not always provide answers .
However , it is essential to avoid any rules that might lead to the reintroduction of the notification system .
The amendment proposed to Article 10 raises concerns in this respect .
By way of supplement and clarification , it states that the Commission can decide that there is no violation of Articles 81 and 82 , in particular whenever the agreements involve financial risk or considerable investment of capital .
This amendment would only be acceptable if the Commission was not in practice compelled to decide that there was no violation in all cases involving substantial investment .
The Commission believes the best way to ensure predictability in individual cases is to introduce a new instrument : the adoption of opinions .
The Commission has already undertaken to introduce such a system , whereby it can issue reasoned written opinions in cases where there are gaps in the existing rules and decision-making procedures .
The level of investment will also be one of the relevant criteria in deciding whether to issue an opinion or not .
My impression is that the proposed system for formulating opinions would be favourably received by the business world .
On harmonisation of the procedures and sanctions , the Commission ' s proposal is based on the traditional approach , which leaves the Member States able to determine the procedures and sanctions for implementing Community law .
I agree with the Evans report that it is desirable to have common procedures and sanctions but , like Rome , the Community was not built in a day .
Our approach is to introduce a substantial framework first , leaving the possible introduction of common procedures and sanctions to a later stage .
Once experience of operating the system has been acquired , it will be easier to identify the areas that give rise to practical problems and draw up rules to deal with them effectively .
The last point I want to mention , Mr President , relates to the national courts .
I am persuaded that they will be fully capable of applying Community competition rules in their entirety , because they already play a fundamental role in implementing Community law .
Nor should we forget that , to guarantee consistent implementation of the rules , the proposal provides , in particular , for the Commission , together with the national competition authorities , to be entitled to comment as amicus curiae on proceedings pending before the courts .
The proposed powers will allow the Commission to protect the public interest in the effective and consistent implementation of the rules , by drawing the attention of the courts to important points relating to their interpretation and implementation .
As regards the independence of the courts , of course they will not be bound by the comments of the amicus curiae and they will , in any case , be free to submit preliminary questions to the Court of Justice .
We are aware of the fact that the proposed reform may mean the courts have to acquire new powers .
The implementation of the competition rules can indeed be a complex matter .
I therefore agree entirely with Mr Evans that the question of training judges requires careful consideration .
The Commission can contribute in substance , providing material and human resources .
We are also looking at the possibility of cooperating with the national authorities in this matter and providing finance from existing training programmes .
I conclude , Mr President , by expressing sincere and heartfelt thanks to the European Parliament for travelling a common road with us through this very complicated terrain , which is , however , as various speakers this evening have sought to highlight , of such vital interest to the economy and indeed to our individual citizens whom you represent .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0269 / 2001 ) , by Mr Andria , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the establishment of a facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report I am presenting to you arises from Council Regulation 1969 / 88 , which established a facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments .
Article 119 of the Treaty provides that where a Member State is in difficulties or is seriously threatened with difficulties as regards its balance of payments , the Council shall grant ' mutual assistance ' so that the functioning of the common market is not jeopardised .
That mechanism can be activated by the Council following an initiative from the Member State which is in difficulty or following an initiative from the Commission .
At least in its intended form , the mechanism should be distinguished above all by rapidity of intervention and , in response to the loan received , by the adoption of all appropriate economic measures for re-establishing a sustainable balance of payments position .
Since it came into force - on 25 June 1988 - the facility has not been activated much .
It has only been used twice , in 1991 for the grant of a EUR 2.2 billion loan , of which only one billion was released , and in 1993 for the sum of EUR 8 billion , of which only the first tranches were released .
It immediately seems clear that many European facilities offered to the Member States are not fully taken up ; the failure on the part of some Member States to make use of the Structural Funds also comes to mind .
Perhaps there ought to be superior delivery of information to encourage the members to make better use of the opportunities available .
Coming back to the report , I should mention that , as a result of the conclusions adopted by the Economic and Financial Committee on 13 October 1997 and pursuant to Article 12 of the regulation in force , the Commission submitted a report to the Council and Parliament advocating retention of the facility .
That position can be ascribed to the fact that , while only countries with derogations can use the facility , with enlargement the eventuality could arise repeatedly .
To be on the safe side , it was decided to reduce the ceiling from EUR 16 billion to EUR 12 billion - Amendment No 2 , Recital 8 ; the Council shall adopt the decisions after consulting the European Parliament - Amendment No 3 , Article 9 ; and shall examine whether the facility is adequate every two years , not three - Amendment No 4 , Article 11 .
Subsequent amendment , including altering the ceiling , is therefore still possible .
We also support the Committee on Budget ' s amendment - Amendment 1 , Recital 6a ( new ) - on the establishment of a mechanism to protect the Community budget from any potential risks of default and corresponding call on the guarantee .
We actually think that possibility is rather remote .
With enlargement the new countries joining have made significant efforts to put their accounts and balances of payments in order .
The Community budget is protected as regards loans granted to third countries by the Guarantee Fund Mechanism .
An analogous system could be considered , though with a smaller financial commitment , in the case of finance for countries with derogations .



In conclusion : first , the loans are directly guaranteed 100 percent from the Community budget ; second , the risk of default , which can never be ruled out , is covered by an adequate protection mechanism ; third , the instrument is likely to be better and more widely used at the stage of European enlargement ; fourth and last , the management of the loans is entrusted to the ECB , replacing the Commission which was previously responsible for this .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Party of European Socialists supports the current Commission proposal because it seeks to simplify and modernise the sole mechanism of financial support for the balances of payments of the European Union ' s Member States which are not part of the eurozone .
The fact that only three countries , Great Britain , Sweden and Denmark , should benefit from this mechanism , in addition to the fact that this instrument has only been used twice since its entry into force in June 1988 , justify a reduction in the overall sums earmarked for loans from EUR 16 to 12 billion .
Other proposals also warrant our support , such as the possibility of the Commission undertaking swap operations , the recognition of the role of the Economic and Financial Committee and the need to make the support mechanism compatible with the possible opening , in the very short term , of a line of credit by the European Central Bank .
Three problems have become clear , however , and I should like to hear Commissioner Solbes Mira ' s position on them .
Firstly , with the proposal to apply this mechanism to the countries included in enlargement , will it really not be possible to have imbalances appearing in the balances of payments of future Member States , given the substantial structural reforms that must be implemented in order to make accession possible ?
Mechanisms must , therefore , be planned forthwith to address these situations .
Secondly , must and can this mechanism apply to candidate countries as early as the pre-accession period ?
Lastly , what advantage do we gain by having the Commission and not the European Central Bank supervising these loans ?
I wish to thank the Commissioner for the answers he may give us and I congratulate Mr Andria on this report .
Mr President , many thanks to Mr Andria for his report on the amendment of the Regulation on the facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments .
In your interventions you have raised a series of doubts and questions which I would like to clarify .
The first fundamental doubt is : can this facility be extended to the candidate countries ?
You know , and your report clearly expresses this , that this exact model cannot be extended to the candidate countries .
This system applies to Member States .
Another question is whether we can apply this facility to the candidate countries once they have signed the accession agreements and before they have been ratified , in other words , at the point that it becomes necessary to make more progress on the processes of structural adaptation of their economies .
Does this mean though that the candidate countries do not have any support system to resolve any possible difficulties in this area ?
Absolutely not .
We are still applying the macrofinancial aid system which can be applied to the candidate countries , just as it is applied to any third country .
We believe that that is the thinking behind the model and we believe that if we modify the system , trying to give special treatment to the candidate countries at the point of negotiation , not only would we introduce uncertainty in terms of which countries we apply it to , but we would also introduce doubts into the financial markets if the process of liberalising capital movements generates risks which would lead us inevitably to implementing a mechanism for compensating them .
The Commission therefore believes that it is much more logical to maintain the system as it is at the moment , with the guarantee that , without any doubt , if any candidate countries have problems , the macrofinancial aid system will be applied to them .
We believe that any other model would create more confusion and more problems , rather than helping to resolve the difficulties .
The second point that you have raised is the problem of the degree to which the new model implemented may negatively affect the Community budget .
I believe that there is no difficulty here .
You well know that we have a different model of guarantees , whether we refer to macrofinancial aid to third countries , or whether we do so in relation to long-term aid within the Community framework .
It is true that we grant macrofinancial aid to certain third countries with difficulties .
It is also true that we do so in cooperation with other international financial institutions and by applying programmes that have been agreed by them .
Experience suggests that non-payment difficulties do not generally arise .
There is a risk , albeit a slight one , but it cannot be ignored .
That is why the guarantee fund was implemented , allowing us to confront these difficulties in the event of non-payments .
And that system must be maintained .
An equivalent guarantee fund must be implemented for long-term aid to Member States of the Union .
In our opinion , that situation is not reasonable either now or in the future .
When we talk about long-term aid or loans to the Member States of the European Union , we are clearly talking about countries with solid financial structures , bound by Community obligations and therefore not posing any risk in terms of non-payments .
Will the candidate countries pose more risks than the current Member States at the point that they become members of the European Union ?
In my opinion , no .
Compliance with the obligations resulting from enlargement is going to mean , amongst other things , cooperation in the monitoring systems which allow us not only to help them to modify and improve their financial systems , but also to have all the necessary guarantees so that their situation may be similar to that of the current Member States .
We therefore do not believe that it is necessary to modify the system in this regard .
We believe that when the system is applied to them , the candidate countries will already be members of the European Union and therefore no special guarantee system will be necessary .
If they have to receive macrofinancial aid while they are candidate countries , the same model applied to macrofinancial aid would be applied to them .
The third problem you have raised is : who should grant this type of aid , the Bank or the Commission ? This is subject to a technical debate .
It has not been resolved .
I do not believe this is the greatest problem , however ; each model has its advantages and its disadvantages , in terms of coherence and speed , and I hope that a solution will be found in the Council .
However , for the Commission this is not the greatest problem .
The last point you have raised is : to what extent can the European Parliament be involved in the granting of this medium-term aid for balances of payments ?
The mechanism which has currently been implemented is based on a fundamental idea : urgency .
When we talk about a situation of balance of payments difficulties , we are talking about decisions which have to be taken very quickly and , secondly , with sufficient technical support to allow the financial markets to positively assess the decision adopted .
With regard to urgency , according to the current model , the decision is adopted by the Council on the proposal of the Commission , subject to a report from the Economic and Financial Committee .
We believe that this model allows us to respond to the urgency and also allows us to receive the necessary technical support so that loans or aid may be positively assessed by the market .
Should the European Parliament participate in this model ?
In my opinion , it is no accident that the Treaty does not include the European Parliament as an institution to be consulted previously .
I believe that this is due to precisely that idea of urgency .
But this must in no way mean that the European Parliament does not have the right to receive all the information and know what decisions are taken and why .
In my opinion , we could improve the system by giving information to the European Parliament as soon as these decisions are taken , so that they may have detailed knowledge of them , know why they have been adopted and know all their content .
Of course , the possibility of reviewing the regulation in the future , in two or three years , is not a great problem for us and clearly , in the event of a review of the Regulation , the European Parliament must continue to play the role it has played until now .
I would like to thank all of you for your participation on this issue , which is sometimes rather dry , but which I believe is also fundamental to everyone .
We must study the mechanisms which , as you have said , will provide us with a safety valve in the event that difficulties may arise in any Member State in the future , as a result of enlargement , difficulties which will have to be resolved efficiently , making full use of the procedures laid down in our Treaty .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0271 / 2001 ) by Mrs Ries , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank all those Members who took part in the debates on my report in committee , and in particular the shadow rapporteurs of the various political groups , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , Mr Bowe , Mrs Schörling and Mr Sjöstedt .
We have before us the proposal for a directive amending for the 24th time the 1976 dangerous substances directive , which proposes restrictions on the marketing and use of pentabromodiphenyl ether .
What exactly is at issue here ?
Pentabromodiphenyl ether is a flame retardant , 95 % of which is used in the manufacture of flexible polyurethane foam for furniture and in particular upholstery .
It is found , for example , in car head-rests and in the protective foam used for packing items of electrical and electronic equipment .
Starting with pentaBDE and its harmful effect on our environment and on our health , the picture is very clear indeed .
A preliminary study carried out in 1998 by the Swedish authorities indicates a high concentration of this substance in breast milk .
Two opinions of the Scientific Committee on Toxicity , Ecotoxicity and the Environment from February and June 2000 highlight the damage that could be caused by pentaBDE in relation to discharging this substance into the environment and its being a persistent and bioaccumulative substance .
There is therefore a risk to the environment and to human health .
There is a unanimity of opinions on this .
It was therefore totally logical for the Commission to propose in January of this year a total ban on the marketing and use of pentaBDE .
And I would say that it was also logical for our Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy to vote to confirm this ban .
A second substance , octabromodiphenyl ether , is also directly affected by the directive in view of the percentage of pentaBDE residues that it contains when it is sold .
OctaBDE is used mainly here as a flame retardant in furniture made of plastic and in office equipment .
In this case , the Commission preferred to accept the final conclusions of the risk assessment study still being carried out for this substance .
It therefore restricted itself to limiting the percentage of pentaBDE residues authorised in octaBDE to 5 % .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy does not share this view .
In fact it seems to us to be totally contradictory to ban pentaBDE while permitting the presence of what we regard as significant quantities of pentaBDE in other chemical products , in other substances .
Furthermore , I would say that the initial results of the current risk assessment , of which I am aware , are negative and tend to prove the harmful effect of this product not only on the environment but also on public health . These two areas have been assessed by British and French experts respectively , and I have consulted those experts in detail .
In view of these different factors , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has tabled an amendment which would extend the marketing ban to octabromodiphenyl ether also , thus strictly applying the precautionary principle .
I think I do not need to remind you that the precautionary principle does not mean waiting until there is absolute proof , which in this case would mean waiting for the final result of the risk assessment , when there is sufficiently serious and tangible evidence to demonstrate that a substance could have harmful effects on public health and on the environment .
That is exactly the case with octaBDE .
Third and last , and things always seem to go in threes , there is decabromodiphenyl ether , another flame retardant in the same family , which in practice accounts for 80 % of this family of brominated substances and has a great many applications , not just in electrical and electronic equipment but also and above all in insulating and building products and in textiles .
DecaBDE is the only one of these three substances not to be mentioned at all in the Commission document .
Yet I regard it as being difficult , nay , impossible , and I will come back to this point in a few moments , to exclude decaBDE , which is why in Amendment No 4 in my report I call for a method for the evaluation of risks by family of chemical products , and no longer on an individual substance by substance basis .
In order to ensure coherence , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has extended the scope of this directive to cover all the polybromodiphenyl ethers .
This is totally in line with this House ' s recent vote on the electrical and electronic equipment directive .
While waiting for precise information to emerge from the risk assessment in relation to decaBDE which is also currently in progress , Amendment No 16 , which I have tabled in conjunction with the PPE Group and the Socialist Group , essentially proposes a ban on decaBDE with effect from 1 January 2006 , unless the risk assessment in some way exonerates this substance and concludes that decaBDE does not pose any problems .
So this is a sort of reversibility clause .
While I am on the subject of amendments , I would like to mention that I oppose Amendment No 9 , which aims to change the title of the proposal so as to extend the immediate ban to the marketing of decaBDE .
I do not really have any fundamental philosophical objection to Amendments Nos 12 , 13 and 14 , but I prefer the Commission ' s original text .
With regard to the other amendment tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , I believe that my report already takes account of the criticisms contained in Amendment No 11 regarding the extremely cumbersome nature of the risk assessment and control procedures for existing substances .
I mentioned that just now .
To conclude , the Council Working Party on Dangerous Substances , which will be meeting in a week ' s time , will determine the broad guidelines to be adopted by the Internal Market Council on 27 September .
I hope that they will make it possible to narrow the gap between the positions of Parliament and the Commission .
I also hope , indeed I think , that it will be quite possible at second reading to finalise the adoption of this proposal for a directive amending the dangerous substances directive for the 24th time .
Mr President , may I first of all compliment Mrs Ries on her excellent and sound report ?
We are talking today about the limitations of introducing on the market and using certain hazardous substances and preparations , especially flame retardant agents such as pentabromodiphenyl ether .
Risk assessments have shown , as Mrs Ries has just said , that the use of pentabromodiphenyl ether carries risks for the environment and public health , because this bromide-based , flame retardant agent is used in the production of furniture and upholstery .
So for this reason , in the interests of public health and the environment , the marketing and use of pentaBDE and all articles containing pentaBDE must be prohibited .
As alternative flame retardants are available , fire and environmental risks will not increase as a result of this ban .
Besides penta , two other bromide-based flame retardants are available on the market , namely decaBDE and octaBDE .
Octa is mainly used in plastic office equipment and in components of household appliances .
In dealing with the directive on the limitation of the use of certain hazardous substances in electric and electronic equipment , this House has already come out in favour of a gradual ban on all PDBEs in specific uses by January 2006 .
The possible risks of octa and decaBDE are being evaluated at present and the results of this study will be submitted to the Scientific Committee on Toxicity , Ecotoxicity and the Environment by the end of this year .
With regard to decaBDE , on which there are as yet no negative conclusions , the ban must , in the view of the PPE-DE Group , be revocable , hence dependent on the results of the risk assessment which will be available before the end of the year .
For octaBDE , however , I share the opinion of Mrs Ries that the use of this substance must be banned forthwith , even though the assessment of the risks is not yet concluded .
The first known results of the risk assessments for octaBDE , which are at present being carried out in the United Kingdom as regards the impact of the environment and in France as regards the consequences for public health , show that with this substance there are clear risks for human health and the environment .
The precautionary principle , therefore , prescribes that we do not wait to impose a ban on this substance until the final results of the investigation are known .
Mr President , in the interests of health , the protection of European citizens , the protection of the environment and the maintenance of the internal market , on the basis of results so far known of the risk assessments of bromide-based flame retardants and on the basis of the principle of prevention , there should be a ban on penta- and octaBDE and also on decaBDE if the risk assessment expected before the end of the year shows that decaBDE gives cause for concern .
Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for the report which has been a difficult one in terms of reaching a balance between the interests of what is clearly the very important - and very immediate - issue of fire safety and the more difficult , but more long-term problem of future harm to public health and the environment .
The substances which are the subject of this report have clear and demonstrated beneficial properties as flame retardants in materials and products such as foam-filled furniture .
However , they also have important negative properties .
They are toxic .
They are bioaccumulative in animals and in the general environment and they have even been found , as has been said already , in human breast milk .
Action on these substances in the opinion of many Members of this Parliament has been long delayed due to the slow progress of the risk assessments undertaken under the existing substance regulations of 1993 .
The final results and publications of the risk assessments of certain of these substances are still awaited .
I hope the Commission notes that .
The general conclusions are clear .
These substances which have a potential for harm to the environment must be strictly controlled .
One cannot ignore however their very real and positive benefits in terms of reducing substantially the annual human death toll due to accidental fires .
Accordingly , I would welcome the report .
I give my support to the amendments to that report which enable the continued use of the most stable isomer , that is decaBDE , until such time as this substance has a complete risk assessment and its real uses and risks are assessed and we have some conclusions on it .
I commend the report to the House .
Mr President , I am really pleased that the rapporteur , Mrs Ries , and the discussion in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy have tightened up the Commission ' s proposal concerning brominated flame retardants .
We are of course aware that pentaBDEs , octaBDEs and also decaBDEs are resistant , toxic and also bioaccumulative , since highly brominated flame retardants have been found high up in the food chain .
It is within the field of Swedish environmental research that it has been established that decaBDEs too are bioaccumulative .
The whole group must therefore be banned .
The precautionary principle requires that we act now and not wait for the results of the current risk assessment , as proposed in the case of decaBDEs in Amendment 16 , for decaBDEs account for 80 per cent of the use of brominated flame retardants .
If we were to wait for a ban in 2006 , this would mean tons of high-risk chemicals being released into the environment , something which would clearly contravene the precautionary principle .
I therefore applaud the amendment by the Group of the Greens , designed to place an immediate ban on the entire group of brominated flame retardants right now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to add my own congratulations to those addressed to the rapporteur .
Everyone has already said that this is a very difficult matter since various interests backed by large lobbies are involved , but also fire safety and the long-term protection and future of the environment .
It will probably be a very technical debate .
Pentabromodiphenyl ether .
What ' s in a name ?
This concerns bromide-based flame retardants , but also a socially very relevant theme .
The previous speakers have clearly shown the problems this creates for the environment and public health .
OctaBDE and decaBDE are , as a result of a Regulation on risk analysis , which is now seven years old , the first to have been placed on the first list of priority substances for risk analysis .
The evaluations have not yet been concluded .
Since those substances are known to be dangerous for the environment , waiting for the conclusions of that slow risk analysis would unnecessarily delay better protection of human beings and the environment .
Although I should have preferred to see an immediate ban on bromide-based flame retardants - as my fellow MEPs are aware - I completely support the compromise , since it is also acceptable .
It provides for an immediate ban on penta- and octaBDE and the banning in 2006 of decaBDE , unless - and this is important - it is proved to be harmless .
It also immediately indicates that in this matter we are balanced between policy based on risk analysis and the new chemical policy that we are dealing with at present and that is designed to facilitate faster analyses , but also above all that responsibility for this no longer lies with the Commission and the Member States but with the manufacturers .
This matter shows yet again that the current chemical policy with a substance-by-substance analysis takes years and that as a result the authorities are in a very weak position for protecting human beings and the environment .
Therefore , in the strongest possible terms , we are calling for an urgent revision of the policy , as we are at present doing with the White Paper on Chemical Policy .
Firstly , I would like to express my thanks to Members for their interest in this proposal and especially to Mrs Ries , the rapporteur , for her constructive work .
PentaBDE is a flame retardant used in the production of polyurethane foam for furniture and upholstery .
It poses a risk to the environment , is bioaccumulating and has been found in human breast milk .
In response to the findings of a risk assessment under the regulation on the evaluation and control of existing substances , the Commission proposed , in January of this year , a directive banning the marketing and use of pentaBDE .
The Commission ' s proposed directive covers all uses of pentaBDE , and articles containing pentaBDE .
It is an application of the precautionary principle , given concern about the presence of pentaBDE in breast milk from unidentified sources .
The costs and benefits of the proposed ban have been carefully analysed .
Suitable alternatives , both in technical and economic terms , are available .
I would stress that the proposal will not result in greater risks from fires or greater risks to the environment .
I believe it is a proportionate measure .
The proposed directive provides not only for the protection of the environment , of consumers ' and workers ' health but would also preserve the Internal Market .
It would introduce harmonised rules in the Member States .
The Commission is unable to accept those amendments of the Parliament which would extend the scope of the proposed directive to include bans also on other substances i.e. octaBDE and decaBDE ( Amendments No 1 , second part of No 2 , Nos 3 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 and 15 ) .
These other substances could be the subject of a subsequent proposal of the Commission when risk assessments have been completed and the availability of safe substitutes analysed .
The Commission is also unable to accept the amendments that would introduce bans on octaBDE and decaBDE taking effect from 1 January 2006 if the risk assessments do not conclude that the substances cause no reasons for concern ( Amendments Nos 8 and 16 ) .
Accordingly , these substances would be totally banned from 2006 if the assessments show concern or they would be left totally unregulated if the assessments show no concern .
The Commission favours a more nuanced approach which would mean that measures could take effect much earlier than 2006 .
The completion of the risk assessments and analyses of availability of safe substitutes would allow the uses of concern to be identified and appropriate measures to be quickly taken .
If necessary , the precautionary principle could be applied to ban such uses .
As the assessments are expected to be completed in the autumn of 2001 , the chosen measures could be effective well before 2006 .
Nor is the Commission able to accept the amendment on procedures for risk assessment under Regulation 793 / 93 ( Amendment No 4 ) .
This amendment goes beyond the present proposal to restrict the marketing and use of pentaBDE .
The Commission can accept in principle to delete the derogation on pentaBDE in concentrations of less than 5 % in technical grade octaBDE from the ban ( first part of Amendment No 2 and Amendment No 5 of the Environment Committee ) as new information from producers indicates that octaBDE can be produced without pentaBDE .
To summarise our position , the Commission can accept Amendment No 5 .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 to 4 and 6 to 16 .
However , the Commission can , in principle , support the first part of Amendment No 2 .
We wish to carry on the dialogue with Parliament and I am convinced we can reach a constructive solution .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Quality and safety standards for human blood and blood components
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0272 / 2001 ) by Mr Nisticò , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the quality and safety standards for the collection , testing , processing , storage and distribution of human blood and blood components .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all my sincere thanks to the chairman , Caroline Jackson , for giving this report preferential passage .
Equally sincere thanks go to all the shadow rapporteurs for the optimum cooperation there has been , and thanks , too , to the Commission officers , the representatives of the various associations and all those Members who have contributed to improving this important and sensitive directive with excellent amendments .
The directive fills a void which has existed in Europe up to now around standards of blood quality and safety .
The objective of this directive is primarily the protection of donors and patients , finally making it possible for all the Member States to have the same standards which ensure the maximum possible level of quality and safety of blood and blood components , not only for blood available in the countries of the European Union but also for blood imported from third countries .
The directive provides for continuous updating , at least annually , of laboratory tests to identify bacterial or viral pathogens and other infective agents , as well as upgrading to the most sophisticated technology for safer and more effective sterilisation of blood and blood components .
There are also recommendations to the Member States to strengthen scientific research in the sector .
The existence of a new European directive which provides for the same standards of quality in the individual Member States will facilitate the free movement of blood from one European Union country to another and remove uncalled-for restrictions on donors moving between countries .
High standards of quality and safety must apply during all stages in the transfusion chain , from donation to inspection by means of specific laboratory tests , collection , processing , storage , distribution and utilisation of whole human blood and its components .
The quality and effectiveness guarantees must therefore cover the suitability of blood donors , plasma and their components , the transfusion structures , the qualifications and training of medical , technical and nursing staff and the checking , inspection and control mechanisms , as well as a system for ensuring the traceability of blood from donor to recipient .
The European Parliament provides for the person responsible to have a qualification in medicine , preferably with a specialisation in haematology or transfusion medicine or related medical specialisation .
In order to gain a better understanding of the importance of monitoring each stage in the process , it is worth considering the unfortunate , terrible , adverse reactions which have occurred and which we hope will never occur again , for example AIDS , hepatitis B and C and other , sometimes fatal infections , like anaphylactic shock or endotoxic shock .
The Commission has accepted the rapporteur ' s proposal to delete the annexes , as they cover extremely complex technical matters . They should be updated periodically by a simple and flexible mechanism .
Finally , the principle by which all donations should take place on a voluntary non-remunerated basis has been strengthened by numerous amendments from Parliament .
However in my opinion , Commissioner , the priority is to safeguard the needs and requirements of patients .
In fact , in view of the sadly limited number of donors still , and Europe ' s lack of self-sufficiency in blood , if all forms of incentive for donors were immediately banned it would create enormous , even fatal , difficulties for patients .
The shortage of blood and plasma is a well-known problem in Europe .
That is why I hope the House will approve the amendment by the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party which upholds the principle of free and voluntary donation on the one hand , but allows a transitional phase for achieving that principle on the other .
An oral amendment by Mr Lisi states that by the end of December 2008 all donations must be voluntary and non-remunerated .
Individual Member States must encourage the achievement of that principle , but sufficiently gradually to avoid any possible catastrophic effects on the public .
As regards imported blood - Amendment No 43 - it should be specified that the criteria this amendment refers to relate to the quality and safety of the blood .
In conclusion , Mr President , the guarantee of high standards of quality , effectiveness and safety of blood provided for in the directive will mean greater peace of mind for European Union citizens about any treatment with blood , as well as greater confidence in the European institutions and the national authorities .
Mr President , a well-regulated and hence safe supply of blood is of great importance for the health of the European citizen .
I therefore warmly welcome this directive with its inclusion of quality and safety norms for collection , testing , processing , storage and distribution of blood and blood constituents .
I am happy to compliment Mr Nisticò on his report and the way in which he has also improved the structure of the bill . However , on one point I disagree with him .
In my view - and this is also the view of Mr Nisticò for that matter - there are two important principles to which we in Europe must adhere and which I have constantly championed , in this House from 1989 and before that in the Netherlands .
What are those principles ?
Besides self-supply within the Union , this is the voluntary and unpaid provision of blood and blood products .
The amendments show that , as regards free provision , it is quite possible to give the donor a small consideration for his / her trouble .
Recently there has been much talk about the no-payment principle in particular . I should like to make a few remarks about this .
First and foremost , for me the safety of blood and blood products carries top priority . This cannot be overlooked .
Voluntary and unpaid donation is a question of safety and not just an act of human benevolence .
The safety of blood obtained free of charge is greater in comparison with other kinds of donations - and that has been demonstrated scientifically and not only in my own country .
Should shortages of certain products arise that are needed , for instance , for haemophilia patients , there is absolutely nothing against making up for those shortfalls by importing other blood .
If we start meddling with this principle , that will have a disruptive effect on the public bloodbanks which we are familiar with in a number of Member States .
Therefore I believe , unfortunately , Mr Nisticò , that in the compromise that you have struck , there has been too much tampering with the principle .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank the Commission for now having led the way by implementing the new provisions in the Treaty of Amsterdam establishing quality and safety standards for , among other things , human blood and blood components .
I should also , however , like to thank Mr Nisticò for the work he has put into the report .
I think it is a fine piece of work , and I am very pleased that , through the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , we are able to help improve the directive .
With the improvements proposed by the Committee , we can make for greater safety and ensure blood of a higher quality , from collection right up to distribution .
I also think that we shall have some crucial issues settled : firstly , that blood is not a commodity subject to the usual rules governing free trade .
I think that , with regard to self-sufficiency too , it is important for it to be said that , by means of these rules in the individual countries and in the EU as a whole , we can prioritise the issue of self-sufficiency .
Blood donated from a country ' s own population is clearly the best solution , and I would therefore urge all countries to establish large pools of donors who see it as their task , both personally and as members of society , to give blood and plasma to help other people in their own societies .
Many countries have already established pools of donors .
It can be done in actual fact , and there is therefore no excuse for those countries which have still not established such pools .
It is just a question of getting them going .
If such a large corps of donors is obtained , so too is a larger quantity of blood and , thus , the opportunity of genuinely becoming self-sufficient in blood of the highest quality .
That also leads me to say a few words about the extent to which blood donation should be non-remunerated , which is of course the major issue here .
I believe that blood donation should be non-remunerated , as also recommended by the Council of Europe in its guidelines and by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I think there are two reasons for specifying this .
The first reason is ethical .
In my view , a person ' s blood , tissue and organs ought not to be commodities .
That is one reason .
The other reason is that non-remunerated donation provides blood which is safest and of the highest quality .
Countless investigations show that blood donated for no remuneration is of a higher quality than blood otherwise obtained , and I think we have to tell it like it is : a pool of donors based upon voluntary and non-remunerated blood donation is different from a pool based upon remunerated donation .
In that connection , I am delighted with the broad support given by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy to the Council of Europe ' s definition of voluntary , non-remunerated blood donation .
There are sectors of industry which have lobbied powerfully against non-remunerated blood donation and , as usual , patients have been elbowed out of the way in the process .
I find that unsavoury , and I think that , in reality , industry is quite cynically helping to prevent the ideal situation for patients who have to be given blood , namely that blood and plasma are donated without remuneration and thus from an established and stable body of donors .
I think it provides food for thought that those countries in which there is non-remunerated donation by a large and stable body of donors are also , in actual fact , self-sufficient in blood and plasma .

However , I should like to add to what Mr Nisticò has said by pointing out that I am pleased with the oral amendment to Mr Nisticò ' s Amendment No 75 and that , in my view , there is no one at all in this House who could dream of putting a patient in a situation in which he was unable to obtain blood or plasma .
Naturally , all patients must be able to obtain these , but I believe that we serve patients best by having non-remunerated blood donation and thus securing blood of the highest quality .
Mr President , first of all , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Nisticò , for his thorough and excellent report , and for his open-mindedness and willingness to cooperate with the shadow rapporteurs .
This directive is essential .
For the first time , it lays down in Community legislation quality and safety standards for blood products , whether they are intended for transfusions or as starting materials for medicinal products .
I should also say that it also provides for the free movement of donors and blood products within the Union .
I regard the proposal as being both ambitious and satisfactory overall .
I would like to add that the main improvements approved by the committee all seek the same thing : to strengthen checking , inspection and monitoring measures throughout the transfusion chain , in order to protect donors from human error and to protect recipients against the risks of being exposed to donated blood that may be contaminated .
Having said that , patients now face another threat : the shortage of plasma and plasma derivates in the Union .
That is why the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is opposed to the absolute and immediate obligation to make donation non-remunerated , that is to Amendments Nos 55 and 56 , which , I would like to say in passing , also seem to run totally counter to the whole principle of subsidiarity .
I say that first of all because non-remunerated donation is in no way under threat .
We have never questioned the principle of voluntary donation or the essential social role played by voluntary donors .
So it is not the principle of non-remunerated donation that is being questioned , but compulsory non-remuneration .
I am also and above all opposed to these amendments because they totally disregard the concerns of patients .
We consulted in depth patients who are particularly concerned , and here I am using a euphemism , about the ever-increasing dependence on imports of American plasma in particular . This especially applies to haemophiliacs who remember that non-remuneration in no way protected them against viral contamination .
We do not want the better to be the enemy of the good here .
It is clear and it is vital that blood should not be a source of profit .
This is repeated in several places , in several recitals , in the compromise amendment which we have tabled together with the PPE Group .
This is an objective imposed on the Member States in accordance with the conditions and timing laid down in Amendment No 75 , but making non-remuneration an absolute condition for donating blood would be a disaster for patients , and I mean patients and not industrialists , Mr Lund , because we have had in-depth discussions with haemophiliacs in particular .
What really counts here is that blood should be of the highest quality and the directive ensures this , but what is the use of ensuring quality and safety if the blood is not available ?
Let me remind you that Europe has 7 million blood donors out of a population of 360 million .
In conclusion , Mr President , that is why I am calling on all the political groups to support this compromise amendment which ensures free access on the part of patients to blood and to medicinal products , both of which each day save thousands of lives .
Mr President , we have been waiting for a long time for a directive on blood quality , which is vital to ensure safety for donors and recipients at European level .
From this point of view , Mr Nisticò ' s report , which has been enhanced by various amendments adopted almost unanimously in committee , is a step towards improved human health protection , in particular because it calls for better medical checks on donors and also increases the responsibility of doctors and establishments dealing with blood at all stages , from collection through to storage and including the point at which blood is converted into blood derivates .
As we have seen , there remains an important question on which there is no consensus between us : whether donation should be remunerated or not .
We believe that the principle of non-remunerated blood donation is very important , a principle applied in many European countries without leading to shortages , and we cannot accept that this principle should be undermined , for two essential reasons .
Firstly , from an ethical point of view , we cannot advocate the idea of selling blood or any body part .
The human body is not a commodity .
Furthermore , we find it extremely shocking that companies should be able to profit from blood donated without remuneration .
Secondly , remunerating blood donation could be counter-productive in terms of quality .
Donors attracted by a financial inventive may want to conceal possible health problems , which could have dramatic consequences for their own health and the health of the recipients .
Recent information on the hundreds of thousands of Chinese now affected by AIDS because they have sold their plasma is a tragic illustration of this and we do not want the same situation to occur in Europe tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Nisticò has submitted an outstanding report whose content I fully support .
It is essential that this directive creates uniform standards for the safety and quality of blood and plasma in the Member States .
To this end , identical procedures for testing blood and plasma must be adopted which comply with the most recent techniques .
Trained personnel should ensure the highest safety standards for donors and recipients alike .
A transparent system of traceability and labelling will allow blood to be traced from donor to recipient and back .
This also helps to minimise the risk of infection .
Voluntary , non-remunerated donation is , and should remain , a basic principle .
Unlike Mr Lund , I believe that there is certainly no direct link between non-remunerated and remunerated donation and safety / quality .
The key issue is the selection of donors and testing by qualified personnel .
However , reimbursement for plasma donors must not be ruled out in the European Union in future .
Europe can only cover 50 % of its plasma needs .
The shortfall is made up from plasma from the US , for which the donors have received payment .
The import of plasma from paid donors must not be prohibited by the new directive .
This would inevitably lead to supply shortages , which would also affect the manufacture of medicines from these products .
Plasma is required to produce vital medicines such as coagulation factor 8 and coagulation factor 7 for haemophiliacs , and immunoglobulins to prevent infection in patients with congenital immune deficiency .
A shortage would put many patients ' health at risk .
I would ask you to bear this in mind when voting .
Mr President , the safety and quality of blood products have never been so important .
Every week we hear across the EU story after story about this issue .
I believe that every Member of the House wants to be reassured with the knowledge that there is a level of safety and quality of blood and blood products throughout the transfusion process in Member States .
For our citizens it means that in the unfortunate situation where , for instance , you have had an accident on holiday and you require a blood transfusion , you can guarantee the quality and safety being the same , whether it is on a Greek island or on a Scottish island .
As we all know , the main area of difference between Members has been on the issue of remunerated and non-remunerated blood products .
I believe that the preferred option should be that blood is given voluntarily .
As the European Blood Alliance outline , voluntary and non-remunerated donations of blood and blood components are considered to be a gift from healthy citizens to those in need .
But more importantly , the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights prohibits the making of the human body and its parts a source of financial gain .
We as a parliament , and within the institutions , have consistently advocated voluntary , non-remunerated donations .
Evidence shows that the prevalence of viruses and diseases which may be transmitted through blood is higher in those donors who are remunerated than those who donate without receiving payment .
There is , however , one issue which I would like to highlight .
That is Amendment No 43 .
In Scotland and the UK we have a specific issue with CJD .
Many haemophiliacs and those with immune disorders depend on blood products from the US , the reason being that in Scotland and the UK we no longer use plasma from UK donors to make blood products because of CJD and rely instead on imports of plasma from the US .
The oral amendment advocated by Mrs Korhola to Amendment No 43 is greatly welcomed .
I hope Members will support it tomorrow .
In conclusion , the safety , quality and standard of blood and blood products is an important issue which we have to get right .
Perhaps in the second reading the rapporteur could organise outside this Chamber an opportunity for Members to donate blood .
After all , as Members , we should lead by example .
Giving blood is a positive act of citizenship .
Mr President , a friend of mine lives with AIDS and so does his wife because he received contaminated blood in a transfusion and then unknowingly affected his wife .
I know the risks and dangers and the importance of quality and safety in our blood supplies .
That is why I welcome this proposal , particularly the work of my colleague Mr Nisticò .
But it would be a tragedy if it was spoiled by one amendment , an amendment which exacerbated the known shortages of rare blood groups and plasma .
It would be a tragedy in a very real sense because the WHO points out that there are 80 primary immune deficiency conditions in our world and it is estimated that some 50 000 to 90 000 people in our Europe suffer from those conditions .
Most are treatable , most people can lead fairly full lives but only if , every three weeks of their life for as long as they live , they have an infusion of immunoglobin which comes from human plasma and that keeps them alive .
Europe uses 7 million litres per annum , and 4 million litres come from compensated donors .
Of course we would all prefer all donations to be voluntary .
In the United Kingdom they are all voluntary but in the United Kingdom , as we have heard , there is no plasma coming from UK donors for blood products because of the theoretical risk of variant CJD being transmitted by blood .
Nor can we take any from other countries in Europe .
It does not matter about blood banks or plasma banks in Europe - we cannot take them from countries in the EU where there has been BSE or new variant CJD so we have to look elsewhere , and we and others rely largely on the United States ' supplies .
The United Kingdom Department of Health has said there are no acceptable alternative sources .
Of course , such imports include remunerated donations and there is no evidence at all that they are any less safe than unremunerated ones .
Amendment No 43 would ban the import of such literally life-saving plasma and I urge the support of this House for the rapporteur ' s compromise amendment .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive setting standards of quality and safety for the collection , testing , processing , storage and distribution of human blood and blood components has come at exactly the right time , given recent developments in the medical and public health sectors .
The primary objective in introducing new rules is to update the legislative framework , so that it covers areas not covered by Community legislation , by tightening the requirements for suitable blood donors , plasma and blood tests and creating a Community quality system for blood donation centres .
I should like to highlight two points where I have tried to improve the Commission text - and hence safety - for both the donors and the recipients of blood or blood components .
I refer to Amendment No 33 , requiring the manager of the blood donation centre to have at least a medical degree , preferably specialising in haematology or some related discipline .
The second important point is that blood is in ever shorter supply .
In Greece , the demand has increased to the point at which about three in ten patients require blood and , despite the increase in the supply of blood from volunteers , more and more blood has to be imported .
The aim of Amendment No 75 is to ensure that the ban on blood donation incentives is not an absolute ban because it is wrong , for medical and scientific reasons , to be dogmatic on such an important health issue .
The fact that we want blood donors to be volunteers should not be expressed in absolute terms .
We must give the Member States and blood donation centres the facility to offer incentives to cover the collection , testing , storage and distribution of rare blood groups and their components as and where necessary .
I should like to congratulate Mr Nisticò on his really excellent work and to ask the House to vote in favour of Amendment No 75 which , while adhering to the principle of voluntary blood donation , really does give the Member States and blood donation centres the facility to meet any requirements and , medically and scientifically speaking , this is exactly how it should be .
Mr President , the dispute in connection with Mr Nisticò ' s excellent report regarding the remuneration of blood donors is important in terms of its multidimensional , ethical and practical aspects , and a lot more serious than might be inferred from the debate .
I tabled an amendment regarding the non-remuneration of donor services together with my colleague , Mrs Grossetête , and the committee adopted it .
I appeal to my colleagues to maintain this position now also .
Various patient groups and authorities have appealed to us here in Parliament not to allow blood donation to become commercialised .
Firstly there is a safety risk .
Allowing remuneration will mean the donor profile will change and the overall risk increase : comparative studies show that the state of health of remunerated donors is poorer .
The importance of tests has been emphasised here , and that is good .
But with HIV tests , for example , there is a certain window period , as it is known , when the virus still does not show up .
There is also an ethical risk .
I want to stress that we also have a responsibility for how the rest of the world might imitate our practices .
If we permit the trade in what is part of the human body , i.e. blood , we have to remember that the less developed countries will follow Europe ' s example .
This will not only lead to exploitation but increased risks .
We already know of a case in China where an absolute catastrophe related to blood quality occurred when blood donors were paid what were for them vast sums of money .
In Austria 200 schillings is a nominal amount for the donor , but in Eastern Europe it is a considerable income .
Is this what we really want for others and ourselves ?
Thirdly , there is the risk of being guilty of inconsistency .
Many EU countries have signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine , which categorically prohibits the financial exploitation of the human body and its parts , including blood .
I do not dispute the need for plasma , and its shortage is very much a reality .
It is nevertheless intellectually dishonest to open up this whole area to market forces just because there is a shortage of plasma .
Amendment No 17 , however , makes adequate guarantees regarding the possibility of reimbursing costs incurred in donating plasma including travel expenses , and of offering compensation for lost working time .
At the same time I would like to ask my colleagues to support the oral amendment I intend to propose for Amendment No 43 .
It would allow exceptions to be made in cases where the plasma shortage really is an insurmountable problem .
Mr President , there are two principal issues here : one is an adequate supply and the second is a safe supply .
For the hundreds and thousands of haemophiliacs and all those patients with the whole range of immunodeficiency diseases , these are life threatening issues which they are faced with on a daily basis .
While I agree - and no one disagrees in this House - that we must foster a culture of voluntary donations as the norm , as the ethos , in all our Member States , I plead with this House not to specifically exclude paid donations .
Let us not exclude them for the rare blood groups and for the very scarce plasma and plasma products if they are needed to pay to ensure adequacy of supply .
It is not a question of ' if there is a shortage of supply ' .
There is one already .
Today 40-50 % of plasma products used each year by European patients come from plasma donors who are compensated for their time and inconvenience for this lengthy process .
These plasma products , particularly in the UK and Ireland , are largely imported from the US from paid donors .
The amendments to this directive , which were voted and passed by the Environment Committee , will have a major impact on public health .
They will prevent the remuneration of donors in any circumstances and preclude importation of plasma and plasma products from paid donors .
There is no longer any public health justification for imposing an absolute requirement for all donations to be non-remunerated .
This was the case in the seventies and eighties but it is no longer with our screening and sterilisation process .
Commissioner Byrne , I would like to put a question specifically to you and maybe you could answer it in your reply : do the amendments which were passed in the Environment Committee violate EU law , particularly various sections of Article 152 ?
I draw your attention to Article 152 ( 5 ) which prevents Community action from affecting national provisions on the donation of blood .
Do the amendments actually violate EU law ?
The doctors ' organisations , the patients ' organisations throughout Europe are pleading with us not to specifically exclude paid donations .
I congratulate Mr Nisticò on his excellent work and I commend Amendment No 75 which gets the balance right .
Yes , Mr President , I must put the record straight on one count .
I was approached by the Netherlands Haemophilia Patients ' Association to hold on to the no-payment principle , and that means , therefore , that fellow MEPs who have argued otherwise , are certainly in favour of safety and are also acting on behalf of their patient groups .
Mr President , let me first say that I am very grateful for all the work on this important and ambitious directive .
Important , as it constitutes our first directive based on the new and strengthened provisions in Article 152 of the Treaty , and ambitious , as a crucial element in our overall health strategy .
Before I turn to the details of the directive on the table today , let me pay tribute to the successful and valuable work of the Council of Europe in the area of blood safety .
Our proposal for a directive builds on these achievements .
This new directive will cover blood and blood components not considered medicinal products in so far as it will ensure a comparable level of quality and safety throughout the blood transfusion chain in all Member States .
In addition , the directive lays down provisions at Community level for a quality system for blood establishments and for the training of blood establishment staff .
I am pleased to note that the amendments debated today in general are very supportive of the basic approach of the Commission to issues related to blood safety and the way these should be addressed at Community level .
I appreciate the very valuable contribution of the European Parliament .
A greater part of the amendments constitutes improvements , clarifications , and useful additions to the text and I thank Mr Nisticò and all his colleagues for their contribution .
We can accept in full 29 amendments .
There are in addition a further 23 amendments which include valuable ideas that we can endorse , but which , as drafted , are not fully acceptable .
This is either because they contain specific points of substance which conflict with the approach of the directive , or because they raise legal or technical difficulties .
With so many amendments. it is not feasible for me to make specific comments on each of them .
I will therefore concentrate on four key areas , where there are several amendments which we cannot accept , and where I believe that some clarification of the Commission ' s position will be helpful .
First , ethical questions .
We all agree that the principle of voluntary , non-remunerated blood donation is of a very high ethical value .
As Mrs Stihler said , the EU charter of human rights demands that no financial gain shall be made from parts of the human body as such .
Therefore I welcome , and will actively support , any contribution the Community can make to achieve comprehensive application of this principle .
But we have to carefully analyse all aspects of the issue .
I am determined to ensure that this new directive will not unwillingly contribute to shortages of life-saving therapies .
The supply of blood and blood derivatives , such as plasma-derived drugs , is a matter of life and death for many patients , as many of you have said .
Much of the plasma used for these drugs in Europe does not come from donations which can be considered ' voluntary , non-remunerated ' in the strict sense of the words , and it is difficult to see how these donations could be replaced in the short term .
There is a clear danger that a ban on them might result in severe shortages of these products .
Consequently I consider it premature to effectively ban any donation which is not fully in line with the definition of ' voluntary , non-remunerated donation ' provided for in Amendment No 17 and to this extent I agree with Mr Nisticò and with the contributions from Mrs Ries , Mrs Müller , Mr Bowis and Mrs Doyle .
I endorse their views and I accept what they said in relation to this issue .
In addition , I have doubts about the legal basis for a provision determining the way donations should be carried out , and this issue was also raised by Mrs Doyle .
Article 152 of the Treaty does not allow the Community to adopt measures which ' affect national provisions on donation ' .
Whether an obligation to accept voluntary donation only can be justified in terms of increased safety seems questionable .
Particularly in the field of plasma-derived products , safety nowadays depends far more on sophisticated screening tests and inactivation steps .
Such a provision might therefore be challenged before the Court of Justice due to lack of an appropriate legal basis or on the grounds of subsidiarity .
For these reasons , I can only partly accept Amendments Nos 55 and 56 .
As already indicated , I am prepared to discuss any solution that would make it clear that a comprehensive application of the principle of voluntary , non-remunerated donation is a central long-term aim of the Community .
Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 7 , 8 , 12 , 60 and 61 aim to introduce declarations or requirements of enhanced ethical standards in one way or another .
All of them are certainly worthwhile discussing and studying in detail , but from our point of view they are not really suitable for this directive , because they are either not directly linked with its objectives or do not have a legal basis in the Treaty .
Some of you said that remunerated donations have a greater risk from a safety point of view .
Many of you referred to studies .
All the advice I receive is that these are old studies .
All of the modern studies run to the contrary .
In view of the fact of what I said earlier in relation to other safety measures like screening tests and inactivation steps , these provide the degree of security that is necessary having regard to this particular debate .
It was also suggested that if we did have a shortage of supply , that this could be replaced by imports , but I have to point out that the imports will be from remunerated sources , so this undermines the very purpose that people wish to achieve .
Mrs Ries also mentioned that she had been contacted by haemophiliac associations and indeed some others made the same point .
I should say that my services and I have also been contacted by haemophiliac and other associations urging us not to go down the route of eliminating from the chain donations from remunerated supply .
I would urge Parliament to take this very much to heart when considering voting on this issue tomorrow and to follow the views that I am expressing on this .
I fully endorse and fully agree with the views of many of you who have already spoken on this issue .
The next issue I want to touch on is the scope of the directive .
The last part of Amendment No 13 , together with Amendment No 72 , aims to extend the scope of the directive to the collection and testing of blood and blood components as starting material for medicinal products .
The Commission can accept this in principle , but legal clarity has to be maintained as to the respective fields of application of this directive and Directive 89 / 381 / EEC on blood and plasma derived products .
Therefore , it will be necessary to review the wording of both amendments in the light of the final compromise to be agreed with the Council .
Other amendments introduce the term ' blood derivatives ' into the text of the directive ; this cannot be accepted , because it might lead to confusion with ' medicinal products ' .
Let me be clear : Everything made from blood and used in human therapy should fall under either this directive or the existing Directive 89 / 381 / EEC .
If any doubts exist the Commission will reconsider the definitions used .
The third point relates to the technical standards .
The rapporteur has proposed to remove the technical annexes from the directive , and to adopt technical standards later by comitology .
I appreciate this approach and I am very grateful for the trust in the work of the Commission shown by this move .
Members of Parliament will know that this is an issue that I have spoken on before in Parliament and I am particularly pleased that this approach has been adopted on this occasion .
If the Council can accept this solution , my services will immediately start to draw up proposals for technical standards in order to ensure that they are adopted before the directive comes into force .
Let me also reassure you that my services will not try to reinvent the wheel when preparing the regular adaptation of the technical standards according to scientific and technical progress .
We will fully use the pioneering work of the Council of Europe .
To add to and further complicate these procedures would not be feasible in an area where quick decisions may have to be taken to protect public health .
For this reason , I can only partly accept Amendments Nos 68 and 71 , and I cannot accept Amendment No 69 .
Amendments Nos 39 and 41 , which refer to another directive or ISO standards as reference for standards introduced under this directive , cannot be accepted .
When proposing updated standards , the Commission will take into account all relevant external and EU standards by default .
To mention some at the expense of others could cause legal problems in the application , or force the Community to apply standards established outside its legal framework .
We are also unable to accept Amendment No 22 introducing a definition of traceability , which in my view is not only too general but also not covered by the Treaty .
Amendment No 44 , introducing a universal donor identification system , which is both costly and over ambitious and unnecessary , is not acceptable either .
Finally , the qualifications of blood establishment staff .
Amendment No 33 would restrict the qualifications of the ' responsible person ' to that of a medical doctor .
This is too restrictive and cannot be accepted .
The ' responsible person ' is , according to the proposal , charged with administrative and management tasks in relation to the application of the directive , and does not have medical responsibilities per se .
But again Member States are free to impose further demands as to the qualifications of the ' responsible person ' .
In summary , for the reasons I have set out , 19 amendments are not acceptable .
These are Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 12 , 19 , 20 , 22 , 30 , 33 , 39 , 41 , 44 , 47 , 60 , 61 , 69 and 73 .
52 amendments are acceptable in full or in part .
The following 23 amendments are acceptable in part : Amendment Nos 2 , 5 , 10 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 21 , 27 , 28 , 32 , 35 , 43 , 46 , 55 , 56 , 62 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 70 , 71 and 72 .
The remaining 28 amendments can be accepted in full , including Amendment No 75 , the so-called ' compromise amendment ' .
Let me , finally , repeat my appreciation for all the constructive work done by the rapporteur and the committee and indeed all of you present .
Many of the amendments will improve the proposal .
And for those elements where difficulties remain , the Commission is ready and willing to assist in finding solutions quickly .
Indeed , the fact that the Commission can accept in whole or in part 52 of the 71 amendments shows our willingness to take on board Parliament ' s substantial policy contributions and our confidence that together we will be able to bring forward this important objective and have it adopted as quickly as possible .
Mr President , I shall make this very brief .
The intention seems to be that this House should have a debate on blood at about midnight when the werewolves are out , but be that as it may , at precisely midnight , I heard Commissioner Byrne say - but it may have been an error of interpretation , which is why I should like to have it repeated - that he did not believe that blood from stable and voluntary pools of donors , familiar to us from a number of Member States , was safer and of a higher quality than that obtained from people who supplement their income by donating blood .
I am shocked that this is how the Commissioner for Health and Consumer Protection views the situation , so I hope that he will deny having said these words .
It is absolutely certain that blood from a voluntary and stable body of donors who readily make their blood available to their fellow members of society is of a better quality than blood obtained from people wishing to supplement their income in this way .
I would ask you not to reopen the debate , because at the moment the most you can do is ask for clarification or ask the Commissioner a question .
You have the floor , Commissioner .
Mr President , I would be very sorry to shock Mr Lund and , if I can explain my thinking on this , perhaps it might relieve your concerns .
Rather than put it the way you put it , I would say that it does not necessarily follow that blood from a remunerated source is any less safe than blood from an unremunerated source and the studies that have been produced more recently on this issue tend to support that proposition .
Reference has been made to some studies that go in the other direction , but my advice is that those studies are old studies and the more modern view is in accordance with the view that I have just expressed .
Mr President , I would like to corroborate what Commissioner Byrne has just said , with great authority , gravity and professionalism .
Whether the donation is voluntary or not does not affect safety .
Safety - and Mr Trakatellis , another man of science , has confirmed this - depends on the quality and sophistication of the tests .
Today we are concerned about prions because there are still no very advanced tests : there has only been one article published in Nature .
I hope that soon , through the flexible and rapid updating mechanism , those tests too can ensure safe blood , but certainly that does not depend on whether a donor is a volunteer or receives an incentive .
Thank you very much , Mr Nisticò .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12.13 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , as a democrat , I have to take on board decisions even if I do not like them .
Yesterday , however , in connection with my report , a decision was taken which points in two directions .
After we had already discussed the legal basis for this decision , and also raised appropriate objections to it , to which we received no response from the Commission , this House decided yesterday to agree to the Commission 's legislative proposal and then passed a resolution rejecting the Commission 's proposal .
This is recorded under item 11 of the Minutes .
I would now like to propose that the resolution passed by this Parliament yesterday be referred to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for the purposes of clarification under Article 148 ( 3 ) .
There are two specific reasons for this : Firstly , we need clarification as to which of the two resolutions in this instance is actually valid . Secondly , we need , for the future too , clarification in the Rules of Procedure as to what is to happen in cases such as this .
For if , as appears to me , votes are being , as it were , immediately corrected by the authorities , I find that not exactly in order .
I believe that a correction should in principle be made if the Committee on Constitutional Affairs so decides .
I therefore base my objection on Article 148 ( 3 ) .
I request this House 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs to clarify the situation and set down a ruling in the Rules of Procedure as to how we should proceed in future cases of this sort .
Mr Swoboda , I understand the reasons for your request .
I think the President will need to think it over very carefully and assess whether or not to give it positive follow-up .
I cannot give you an answer off the cuff .
I feel it would be discourteous to say no , but it would also be too hasty on my part to give an answer right away .
If your request is accepted the committee responsible should be the one for the Rules of Procedure , which is currently the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
( The Minutes were approved )
European Ombudsman / Code of administrative conduct
rapporteur . ( DE ) - Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to congratulate the Ombudsman most warmly on the work which he and his colleagues carried out in 2000 , and would like to lay before you some figures to emphasise these congratulations and this esteem , and which underline how this People 's Advocate has become an institution whose absence from the European scene can no longer even be contemplated .
In 1995 there were only 298 complaints ; in 2000 , to which my report refers , there were by contrast 1732 .
There were of course many cases which , in the final analysis , were not within the remit of the European Ombudsman .
However , the excellent networking of the European Ombudsman , which is to be further intensified in the future , resulted in the cases and complaints in question being passed on to the appropriate agencies .
An Ombudsman is there , after all , for the citizens , and there is sometimes confusion about who is responsible for what .
The Ombudsman has already addressed many of the points made in my report .
The ever shortening turnaround times are greatly to be welcomed ; here , the Ombudsman is an example of good administrative practice on a European scale .
Eighty-three per cent of complaints were against the Commission .
I do not wish to make this an accusation levelled at the Commission ; the division of competencies makes it quite obvious who is most going to be complained about .
What I , however , find interesting is what the complaints focus on .
In 28 % of cases , it is a lack of transparency or the withholding of information , and in 24 % avoidable delays .
Over half the complaints , therefore , focus on these two areas .
What this is about , Commissioner , is good governance .
It is precisely in these areas that we could improve European administration at no cost whatever .
However , I consider it quite remarkable - and this is something that must be said very clearly in a Parliament such as this - that those at the top of the Commission have neglected to consult the European expert on good governance - namely the Ombudsman - about the White Paper on the subject .
So I must ask you , Commissioner , how seriously you are taking the improvement of administration across Europe .
We do not need White Papers , we have an Ombudsman who gets complaints from our fellow citizens every year .
All that is needed is willingness ; not repeated postponement and the commissioning of reforms and White Papers and studies and who knows what else ; what we need is different administration .
That is perfectly clear from this report , in whose appendix I have taken the opportunity to discuss specific examples .
There is an instance , Commissioner , of a submarine .
You will be well aware of what significance submarines had for the previous Commission and what the consequences were .
If the European Ombudsman needs to intervene nearly a dozen times in order to get the Commission to certify that such a submarine had work done on it , then that tells you something about the new Commission .
If this Commission took until 2000 to concede that submarines existed , then whom are you trying to convince that this Commission is willing to take transparency and - let me say this as a Socialist - the protection of employees ' rights in Europe seriously ?
I really would like our Ombudsman to follow up instances like this rather more stringently in order to give them the critical attention they deserve , for the alternative would be undiluted flattery , credible to nobody .
Mr Södermann , I would again ask you , as I did in the report , to consider presenting a special report on the issue of access to documents and data .
Otherwise , I can only repeat my thanks to you for your work .
In these thanks I wish to include your colleagues .
I believe your work has become a quite central building block for the further development of the European Union , and I hope that it will continue as it has begun .
Mr President , this week we have been debating very many important issues : the enlargement of the Union , the future governance of the Union and anti-terrorism measures amongst others .
I do not want anybody to think that the issues addressed in the joint debate this morning are not themselves of the utmost importance .
The European Union is a great ideal .
The institutions are undoubtedly worthy and officials of the institutions seek to discharge their functions responsibly .
As the Ombudsman himself said this morning , unfortunately the institutions of Europe do not enjoy the highest reputation amongst our citizens .
It is critical , therefore , that every step is taken to ensure the quality of the administration of European affairs by the EU institutions .
In Parliament we have the Petitions Committee and the Officer of the Ombudsman to oversee allegations of maladministration .
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the work of Herbert Bösch in his report on the Ombudsman , my colleague on the later report , Felipe Camisón on the work of the Petitions Committee and Mrs Almeida Garrett on her work on the Statute of the Ombudsman .
We need a new framework agreement so that the Member States also pay more serious attention to their obligations under the EU Treaties .
We should also place on record our appreciation to the Ombudsman and to his staff for the calm and efficient way in which they discharge their functions .
It cannot be easy to be the complaints department of Europe .
It requires special skills and Mr Söderman has shown us that he has those in abundance .
To turn to my own report proposing a code of good administrative behaviour , this has been a long time in the gestation and in the last Parliament there were reports from myself and from Mrs de Esteban proposing a code of good administrative behaviour .
I am grateful to rapporteurs from the Citizens ' Rights Committee and the Legal Affairs Committee , in particular Mr Dehousse , who have pointed to a procedural route that could , and will I hope , enable us to get this code .
There are two central principles if the code is to be fully effective .
One , it must be based in law .
Good administration is a right , not a privilege and the code must be uniform for all the institutions .
Citizens need to know where they stand and precisely what their rights are in dealing with the institutions .
The right to good administration is enshrined in the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
But without this code , the charter would just be a form of words .
This code is to put flesh on the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is a concept that is contained within similar laws in most of the Member States .
Spain , is just one example .
Its 1992 administrative law requires that citizens be treated with respect and cooperation by the authorities .
Germany and its unfair practice law dating from 1909 enforces good practice upon its officials .
The European Union must now follow suit with its own code of good administrative behaviour .
I appreciate that the Commission in particular , but also the other institutions , have adopted and are applying their own voluntary codes .
They are good as far as they go , but they do not go far enough , and they have to be obligatory rather than voluntary .
There are , however , some differences between the proposed code as now drafted by the Ombudsman , which I hope that this House will support , and the codes currently in use .
I would refer just to one of them and that is the requirement that when an error has been made the official concerned has to apologise to the citizen who has suffered as a result .
A readiness to apologise never comes amiss , so I particularly support that particular clause in the draft .
In conclusion , British Members like me are often against written constitutions . They are alien to our tradition .
They seem to us very often to concentrate on giving power to those in authority and ignoring the rights of the citizen .
But from the Magna Carta 1215 to our citizens ' charter of the 1990s , we in Britain have welcomed codes that set out citizens ' rights .
I hope that fellow Europeans will see this as a contribution to the good governance of Europe that even British Members can support .
Mr President , Commissioner , Ombudsman , recently , the Charter of Fundamental Rights acknowledged every European citizen ' s right to good administration .
We feel that this is a fundamental objective of European integration and , as such , an area that unites us with everyone , in the sense that we are all on the same side , civil servants and politicians , taxpayers and administrators .
Since 1994 , European citizens have had their own Ombudsman and know that they can rely on him and his actions , always competent and judicious , to protect their rights and to sensitively and ceaselessly endeavour to correct and improve the running of Community administration .
For this reason , the Ombudsman has always been able to count on the support of this Parliament .
In the course of recent years and through the presentation of annual reports , we have been able to see the increasingly visible affirmation of this still young institution and the increasingly consistent and productive results of its worthy activity .
The time has come today to present you with some amendments to its statute .
We are not of course , talking about a revolution .
Time has proved , and the practice employed by the Ombudsman is an example of this , that the powers and the competences granted him have always been used to fulfil the central objective of his activity , in his ceaseless quest to improve the sound administrative practices of the European Union .
What we are discussing today is simply the adaptation of the Statute ' s provisions to the new legislative climate which has , fortunately , been making considerable progress towards the construction of a genuine Europe of the citizens , by improving the speed of a modern administration , which must be increasingly open and transparent .
By clarifying the Ombudsman ' s powers of investigation , by giving him all the resources for accessing documents and for uncovering the truth , we can be sure of improving the administration ' s operating conditions and of bringing the public closer to the various European institutions .
I wish to say one last word , Mr President , simply to mention the only area which has , on occasions , divided us , on which today an amendment to my report will be tabled which I cannot support .
It concerns the possibility for members of the institutions or more specifically , members of the Commission to also be heard by the Ombudsman .
I am convinced that the majority of this House will understand that given the hazy border that sometimes exists between political and administrative acts , Parliament claims for itself the monopoly on political control of the members of the Commission , as the prerogative of those who have been directly elected by the citizens of Europe and that it acknowledges that this power cannot be delegated .
It is in recognition of this common philosophy that this Parliament , and its rapporteur in particular , hope that the Commission , especially Commissioner Loyola de Palácio , will deliver a favourable opinion and that the Council will approve the amendments that I have tabled today .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate the Ombudsman on the extremely competent work he has done , and especially his work in defence of the rights of all the citizens of the Union .
A special thank you goes to Mrs Almeida Garrett , who has succeeded in putting her case with great ability , and has also been successful in conducting intelligent mediation .
Society advances and the law always follows its progress . Sometimes that progress is rapid and the law seems slow compared with practice .
That is why I think the Ombudsman is right to propose amending Article 3 of the statute , which dates from the 1990s .
However , together with other members of the Committee on Petitions , I felt that the request to amend Article 3 went too far , in particular as regards the obligation to testify , even for members of the Community institutions .
This is because there is a difficulty and confusion , including legal confusion , between control of the institutions ' administrative practices and control of political acts of members of those institutions .
There was therefore a need to maintain greater balance , although there is no intention to slow down any investigation , for clarity and above all in defence of proximity and transparency , fundamental pillars contained in the Union ' s Treaties .

I think the solution adopted of partial revision , to which the Ombudsman has also contributed with his final letter accepting the positions of the rapporteur , Mrs Almeida Garrett , and the Commissioner , is the best way forward , and in the future appropriate steps can be taken to carry out a more systematic and juridical revision of this statute , respecting Community legislation and continuing to act in accordance with that principle of proximity and transparency which governs - and should continue to govern - the relationship between European citizens and Community institutions .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . The proclamation of the Charter represented an important step forward for the citizens of the European Union , even if there is controversy as to what legal reality this proclamation has achieved in the meantime .
In any case , the continuation of this important process demands further efforts at every level .
The Charter further laid down , in addition to other important things , a triad of significance to EU citizens which is echoed in the three reports before us : petitions , the Ombudsman and good administration .
For this , the three rapporteurs , Mr Bösch , Mrs Almeida Garrett and Mr Perry , to whose report I have the honour of speaking , deserve especial thanks and also congratulations .
In reinforcing the triad I have referred to , they have achieved an important step forward , for there is a need for the creation of a further substructure , a network , to secure these institutions for the citizen .
It will now be exciting to see how this network 's ramifications will develop .
The law has many instruments through which to turn rights into realities - constitutions , laws , regulations , decrees , right down to service instructions .
In all these , the principle applies : the more generally a right is formulated , the higher up this hierarchy it should be set , and the more specifically , the further down it .
So it is good that we have a code for good administrative conduct before us , and it is right to encourage the Commission to make a regulation for this purpose .
When this regulation is put into tangible form , however , we must keep a careful eye on its precise final content .
In Germany , there was at one time a regulation which stated that a soldier had to start swimming , once he reached a depth of 80 cm of water .
Write this into a constitution and comedians will have a field day with it .
And so it was with good reason that this was not in the German constitution , but in a service regulation .
I believe it to be important that administration should be well organised .
This does not only mean ensuring that the right decisions are taken but also touches on the question of how administration comes across to the citizen - at the shop counter , as it were .
This is very important .
Modern administration means that the citizen is not the authorities ' supplicant , but one of its customers .
Modern administration involves the authorities not thinking of themselves as superiors , but as providers of a service .
That is what they are there for , and the citizen is entitled to expect good services .
Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating my fellow committee members , Mr Bösch and Mr Perry , and also Mrs Almeida Garrett , for their reports .
Also Mr Söderman for his continued unstinting defence of European citizenship .
The approach of these reports is based on the need to create a system of transparency and understanding , so that citizens of the European Union can be confident that when they have a legitimate complaint they have recourse to the Ombudsman or the Committee on Petitions , depending on the nature of their problem .
It is important that we clarify for the public the distinct functions of the two institutions and press for more publicity and a more effective information policy for both the Ombudsman 's office and Parliament 's petition process .
I fully support the view that is necessary to incorporate the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the treaties of the Union , so as to further enhance the rights of citizens of Europe .
To succeed as the most progressive combination of States , we must ensure that our institutions are fully democratic and accountable and that the individual and collective rights of all are guaranteed and defended .
I congratulate the Ombudsman in particular for succinctly identifying - perhaps one of the few to have done so at European level - the underlying reason for the failure of the Irish referendum and that is the gulf between rulers and ruled .
There is absolutely no doubt in my view that that is the case and it has given rise to all kinds of concerns .
The Bösch report quite rightly praises the cooperation between Parliament and the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman 's office and the invaluable procedure of referring complaints to the Committee on Petitions where they fall outside his remit .
I welcome the Ombudsman 's suggestion that there be a much closer working relationship between the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman 's office with regard to the legal implications of some of the cases that come before us .
The Perry report is another piece of important work and , as the Ombudsman has said , it is appropriate that Mr Perry , the author of the report , is given a role in initiating the whole idea of a code of conduct at European level .
It is essential that a common code of conduct applies in all our institutions , so that citizens are not baffled or bamboozled by the response of our institutions to their problems and complaints .
Mr President , these three reports generally give a strong endorsement of the function of the office of Ombudsman and also of its current incumbent and my group warmly congratulates Mr Söderman on his work .
It is clear that the Ombudsman , reinforced by the Charter , plays an increasingly meaningful and forceful role in protecting the citizen from abuses of executive authority .
We have tabled one amendment to Article 3 of the Statute , which would bring Members of the Commission and Members of Parliament as well as members of the agencies of the Union , such as Europol , beneath the purview of the Ombudsman .
The Commission opposes this reform on the grounds that it implies political interference , but we believe that the Ombudsman is perfectly capable of distinguishing between maladministration and defective politics .
The right to inquire into the conduct of those supremely responsible for administration is an essential part of good governance and a necessary complement to , not a substitute for , the work of this Parliament in exercising democratic accountability in relation to the College .
In most , if not all , Member States national ministers are subject to inquiries by the national ombudsman and it would be a pity if European standards of good administration fell below the norms now established in our Member States .
In fact , in our view , they should be superior .
Mr President , the Ombudsman , Jacob Söderman , said in this debate this morning that citizenship is perhaps less fashionable than the technocratic way of doing things , and in this he might be right .
However , I would like to say that the Committee on Petitions may even be the very committee in this Chamber that is able to find solutions to the gaping chasm that exists between the people and the decision-makers .
In my opinion these annual discussions are always among the highlights of the year and it is most agreeable to be able to participate in them .
Mr Bösch ' s report on the annual report on the Ombudsman ' s activities reiterates this call by Parliament for making the Charter of Fundamental Rights a binding component of the Treaties .
This deserves our enthusiastic support as this may just be one way - as Mr Bösch and the Committee state - to reinforce and broaden the scope of the right of petition instrument .
Some day it might evolve into a real citizens ' initiative , found in the legislation of some Member States .
With regard to the Code of Good Administrative Behaviour , the subject of Mr Perry ' s report , Parliament takes the view that what is needed is a law that is binding on all the institutions making it obligatory that administration should actually serve the people .
It is quite clear that the Commission should now be promoting this swiftly and determinedly .
Mr Duff has already referred to Teresa Almeida Garrett ' s report on the Statute of the European Ombudsman , and I have to say his arguments convince me that it should be possible that members of the institutions can also if necessary be heard by the Ombudsman when it is a matter of administrative error .
In my opinion , Members of Parliament have nothing to fear from this as the Ombudsman ' s competence is administrative and not political .
I hope Mr Duff ' s amendment will be widely supported .
Applause
Mr President , what we are discussing here today is European citizenship and the rights of European citizens themselves .
As I see it , the rapporteur , Mr Perry , is strongly advocating a code of conduct which reflects the aims guiding those who drafted Article 41 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , namely the citizens ' right to good administration .
Clearly , such a code calls for good administration by all those involved , institutions and officials alike . Furthermore , it should be implemented in the same way within all institutions .
The code must be as widely known , as transparent and as accessible as possible to the citizens and should help to make the European institutions more credible and bring them closer to the citizens .
Incidentally , I have to say that we still have a long way to go to achieve this . In addition , there must be no discrimination for reasons of sex , race , colour , ethnic origin , language or religion when implementing the code .
In this connection , Mr President , I think it is worth mentioning that , even in this institution , far more zeal than usual is displayed in asking one of our German colleagues for her card . It so happens that the lady is of Kurdish descent , with a dark complexion and black eyes and therefore does not look like the average Member .
If such behaviour goes on here , in this very House , imagine what can happen in the wider world .
It is therefore essential for the code of conduct to be implemented with no discrimination whatsoever .
The bodies already implementing the code of good conduct proposed by the Ombudsman deserve to be congratulated . I should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Ombudsman himself on his work .
Through the citizens ' complaints the Ombudsman and the European Parliament ' s Committee on Petitions on which I sit have become very aware of how much more still has to be done to make the European institutions more credible and bring them closer to the citizens . It is for us to work to promote such closeness and credibility .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to say something about the proposed modification of Article 3 of the Ombudsman ' s Statute , in other words Mrs Garrett ' s report .
We feel that giving access to all the classified documents from a Member State without the consent of that Member State , even if the documents could concern diplomatic or defence issues , is a very dangerous precedent , especially if this revision is in some way imposed on the Member States .
The perverse result of this measure , if it were adopted , would obviously be that the Member States would be encouraged to retain classified documents rather than passing them on to Community bodies , and this is why my group cannot support this proposal .
At present , with regard to the Bösch report , we do not entirely share Mr Bösch ' s optimism on the analysis of the activity of the European Ombudsman .
It is true that the work done by Mr Söderman ' s department seems quite remarkable given the modesty of their resources .
However , just over 1 700 complaints received in 2000 , of which only 297 have been declared admissible , does not demonstrate good administration by the institutions of Europe , it shows above all a lack of information to citizens on their means of defence against some aspects of Brussels bureaucracy .
As for the tenor of the complaints lodged , which were mainly against the Commission , we feel they are symptomatic : refusal of information , lack of transparency , delayed payment , abuse of power , injustice and even discrimination are the main grievances .
It is on the basis of these grievances that I think we should continue our discussion .
Mr President , Mr Söderman , it is more than ten years since we proposed introducing a European Ombudsman .
We fought for a long time to obtain a proper statute so that the Ombudsman might have the opportunity to inspect everything .
That battle was lost but must now be joined again .
The statute should be revised so that the Ombudsman is entitled to see each and every document before he has to pronounce upon a matter .
The Ombudsman must , of course , respect privacy and reasonable demands for confidentiality , but he must have the opportunity to see everything .
If the Commission ' s officials themselves can decide what they want to have inspected , then it is not of course the role of an Ombudsman we are talking about here , but a public relations function .
The European Parliament ' s Committee on Budgetary Control has the same problem .
The Commission itself decides what it wishes to have inspected .
Even the Court of Auditors does not have the opportunity fully to inspect the Commission .
The President explained in the Committee that he too is not allowed to see every document .
This is where Mr Prodi ought to begin , instead of issuing further empty promises about more transparency and a closer relationship with the people .
The Ombudsman and the Court of Justice have done some good work in the interests of greater transparency .
Mr Söderman deserves a lot of praise , but the new regulation on transparency will not constitute great progress towards transparency . Instead , it is in danger of being an actual setback .
There is therefore a need now for active efforts on the parts of the Ombudsman , the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
A number of active members of the Committee on Budgetary Control have brought legal proceedings against the Commission , and these are something which the whole Parliament should support .
The Court of Auditors ought not to accept a single refusal to let it see a document .
If the event of such a refusal , Parliament should make it known that it is not giving discharge . And why - I would ask the Ombudsman - not appeal to the people and go before the Court of Justice in the event of what you consider to be an unjustified refusal to grant access to documents ?
Mr President , this may well look like a fight over a tiny paragraph somewhere in the EU 's great system of treaties , but I believe that what we are dealing with is a quite fundamental question and not just a cultural contrast .
Again we see that the world has not yet managed to allow the principles of the Enlightenment , which have found their way into American case law via the Constitution and the Freedom of Information Act , to travel to Europe , because the Enlightenment unfortunately made no inroads into the French administrative tradition .
That is again how one experiences these various speeches .
It is a bitter experience to find that the EU is still where it was on 17 December 1992 , when dealing with the draft on the Ombudsman .
In any case , however , here we are , and I believe that this time we will win .
The many complaints from citizens having problems with EU institutions are essentially to do with so much still being withheld or suppressed .
What is now being proposed in the Garrett Report , which in my opinion can only be supported , is only the first step .
At first it should be the Ombudsman who is actually given access to all documents , but then it should also be the citizens themselves .
We urgently need here a reversal of the burden of proof ; I would , indeed , demand of the Ombudsman that he should tell us in future what documents he has still not received where regulations on confidentiality have been invoked , and that we should , by means of this reversal of the burden of proof , reach the point where we really are living out a democracy and , as far as possible , have access to all documents and also to public sittings of the Council .
For I am firmly convinced that a democracy cannot exist without transparency .
Mr President , I welcome all these reports but will concentrate this morning on the Bösch report , highlighting the very important work carried out by the Ombudsman which goes some way to respecting the idea of transparency and open governance .
This will hopefully show citizens that Europe 's institutions do endeavour to act in the interests of its people and that cases of maladministration will always be punished .
Of course the Ombudsman 's powers are limited , but I am happy that the report demonstrates that the Ombudsman does his utmost in most cases in the name of fair play .
The bulk of the Ombudsman 's report consists of a thorough account of the complaints made to him about maladministration by the European institutions , the investigations his office has carried out and the action taken , including , of course , the results .
However many complaints addressed to the Ombudsman still concern actions by national authorities , for which the European Ombudsman is not competent , and many complaints prove not to merit any action .
The number of cases where the Ombudsman 's intervention has proved successful for the complainant shows that the Ombudsman has developed efficient ways of ensuring that the European institutions comply with his recommendations .
The Ombudsman 's special reports , based on his right to own-initiative inquiry , make an important contribution to the interpretation and development of Community law .
I particularly welcome the fact that , in connection with the drafting of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the Ombudsman has strongly urged that the Charter recognise the citizen 's right to an open , accountable and service-minded administration .
Community bodies have a duty to shape Community policies and law in a way which is beneficial and comprehensible to citizens .
The People ' s Movement against the EU has , from the very beginning , worked to promote effective supervision of the EU ' s institutions by the Ombudsman .
We have never had any illusions that this Nordic guarantee of legal certainty , which is of course what the Ombudsman is , would revolutionise the EU bureaucracies , but if only the Ombudsman could clear just a few negotiable paths in the EU jungle , we should view this as progress .
The Ombudsman does not have an easy time of it .
It requires a great deal of patience to put up with the EU systems ' inertia .
The Ombudsman ' s very moderate proposals for a Code of Good Administrative Behaviour for the individual institutions has of course been met with that mixture of verbal good will and practical passivity which , in practice , can block any progress , and the current restrictions upon the Ombudsman ' s ability to obtain any of the relevant information on the matters with which he is dealing - we are concerned here with Article 3 of the statute - is downright scandalous .
The Ombudsman is patient , however .
The institutions shelve recommendations and enquiries , but that does not cause the Ombudsman to give up .
The mill turns slowly , but I believe it turns all the same .
A regulation concerning good administrative behaviour - and which is not ineffectual nonsense from the Commission , but the Ombudsman ' s own proposal - is something that we shall be able to support .
Such a regulation will not revolutionise the various forms of administration . For that , fundamental changes to the administrative culture are required , and these will not come overnight .
However , the rules can help develop legal certainty and transparency . Accordingly , we are able to support the proposal to amend Article 3 which , in its present state , really means that the institutions can refuse to provide the Ombudsman with the information needed for him to be able to exercise any supervision at all .
I do not consider the proposal to be far-reaching enough , but limited progress is better than nothing .
I wish Mr Söderman every success .
Mr President , the joint debate of these three reports is an important debate .
We need to convince people that the work of the Ombudsman is not just important , it is crucial to the proper integration of the European Union .
Unfortunately , a great many of our fellow Members still do not know this .
Luckily , these duties are being carried out by the experienced Mr Söderman , with his usual degree of enthusiasm for the job .
I drafted the report on the application of Community law and saw the huge problems caused by the poor application of Community law at first hand .
This is not just a legal problem , it is also a social problem , because the society of European citizens malfunctions as a result , and it is a political problem , because it reflects how mature we are about the type of European legal order we want .
At the same time , I saw the huge role played by the Ombudsman in ensuring that this legal order operates smoothly in the Community .
I need only remind you that most infringements of Community law are only discovered as the result of the complaints system .
The second point I want to make in connection with the regulatory role of the Ombudsman is that the right of complaint and petition is tending to develop into a conciliation procedure for resolving differences amicably , which is the only way of settling differences flexibly and cheaply and freeing up the Court of the European Communities .
However , first of all we must do everything humanly possible to find a way of cutting down the time taken to complete the procedure .
I should like to close by pointing out that we need a generally applicable code of conduct on general principles and that individual organisations should only have their own code of conduct on matters which relate specifically to them .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Ombudsman for the splendid job he has done with a view to securing citizens ' rights in the EU system .
The institution of the Ombudsman is very important , and it is important that we should all constantly keep an eye on it and ensure that it can thrive , in the light of the new developments too .
The Ombudsman himself stated that there is a gulf between the EU and its citizens .
We do a lot of talking about it , but in reality we bring about very few radical steps to change the situation .
One of the reasons why people cannot fathom the EU system is also , of course , the utterly hopeless way in which we have organised ourselves , with a physical presence in Luxembourg , Brussels and Strasbourg , and I think one might well ask whether it is particularly appropriate for the Ombudsman to be located here in Strasbourg , though this is , of course , also partly due to the Ombudsman ' s own decision .
I do not think it is appropriate .
I think it means that the Ombudsman is very easily sidelined in relation to the EU ' s other institutions which he has , of course , to inspect but then also to reform , and I am inclined to think that it might go some way towards creating further conflicts .
I would go on to specify a couple of specific areas .
The first is the White Paper .
The Ombudsman himself touched upon this .
I think this is a very good example of a situation in which , as Mr Prodi pointed out the other day , the fact that the Ombudsman does not associate with the Commission on a daily basis means that he is not mentioned at all in the White Paper , as it would otherwise have been only natural for him to have been .
The other thing I should like to say is that I think , in fact , that there are too few complaints .
I am well aware that the Ombudsman is pressed for time , but I cannot understand why there are not more complaints , considering the huge institutional apparatus with which we are concerned here .
The third very important point is that the Ombudsman has made an effort to obtain ombudsmen for the candidate countries .
It is , of course , extremely important that , when the new candidate countries come on board , we also make sure they understand the nature of good administrative behaviour , seeing that they do not of course , in reality , have any special experience of our way of administering matters .
Fourthly , I am very pleased that the Ombudsman has addressed the subject of the e-mail system and that he is doing some energetic work on this so that we obtain real complaints and not only junk complaints .
Mr President , I too welcome these reports and , with particular reference to Mrs Almeida Garrett 's report , I welcome the proposals to extend the Ombudsman 's right of access to all documents .
I particularly welcome the proposed change relating to the status of documents emanating from Member States .
In the Committee on Petitions and elsewhere , we are running into difficulties on this question : to whom does information belong ?
It is crucial that the Ombudsman should have the widest possible access and I agree with comments made by colleagues concerning the need for greater openness .
I only regret that we did not pursue this issue more fully in the Parliament 's own debate on access to sensitive documents .
Mr Perry 's report is also important , especially in its definition of an institution and the emphasis on the willingness to be helpful and to communicate .
Other civil services could well learn from this and I also welcome the extension of non-discrimination in his proposed Amendment No 11 to Article 5 .
Mr President , this year too the Ombudsman ' s annual report makes for inspiring reading .
I think it is on the right lines , and it is very gratifying to read that the Ombudsman has obtained the documents he asked for .
I hope this practice will rub off on the rest of the EU system , for that is the way it should be .
Only through openness do we ensure that it is possible to combat fraud and irregularities and that politicians have a better image in the eyes of the population .
We might well have had more use for the Ombudsman in relation to a case in Britain in which Lloyd 's cheated thousands of people , an event which led to a long list of tragedies in the form of suicides and much else besides .
We see a lack of openness in the British government , the Council and the Commission , and it would be useful if the Ombudsman could give us further help on this issue .
I believe that the Committee on Petitions should have greater powers .
It is perhaps one of the most important committees , for it is here that the ordinary person within the EU system can come to raise matters .
It is therefore also incredibly important that there should be a powerful committee which can help him when he does just that .
I should like to say that when I heard my fellow MEP ' s , Mr Krarup ' s , speech , I was very surprised indeed .
Naturally , there were the snide remarks that are bound to come from an opponent but , knowing Mr Krarup as I do , what we have here is proof that he loves this system and really thinks it is fantastically good . It is just that he does not really want to say so .
I believe then that , somewhere along the line , even Mr Krarup will say that we need the EU .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to congratulate the rapporteurs and Mr Söderman on their work .
It has made it possible for me to discuss with you issues of an institutional nature which are important to the efficient operation of the European Union . In particular , they are important to our relations with the citizens , and we do need to bring the Union ' s institutions as close to the citizens as possible .
I should like to turn first to the Bösch report , the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman for the year 2000 .
Allow me to say once again how much the Commission appreciates the excellent work undertaken by the European Ombudsman ' s office , and how grateful it is for it . The Ombudsman himself , Mr Söderman , deserves particular recognition .
He is the driving force and is largely responsible for the results and beneficial effects achieved by this new institution of the European Ombudsman . It has to be said that the citizens of Europe are daily becoming more familiar with it .
The European Ombudsman ' s work focuses on poor administration and the Commission is bound to improve its administration and the quality of services provided for the benefit of the citizens .
In this context , the Commission shares the concerns expressed by the rapporteur . In particular , it agrees with the need to receive the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions as positively as possible , and provide them with every facility required .
One aspect of the Bösch report of particular concern to us is the follow-up to critical comments .
Last year , we , in the Commission , set up a new procedure for methodical review of the conclusions to be drawn from the cases dealt with by the Ombudsman .
As I see it , we have definitely improved as far as study , approval and consequently cooperation with the Ombudsman are concerned .
Allow me to refer to two examples to illustrate such follow-up . Firstly , further to the Ombudsman ' s initiative , the Commission agreed to make the scripts of candidates in competitive examinations available to them as of 1 July 2000 .
Ladies and gentlemen , these are not empty words but actual facts .
I venture to suggest that some of you should keep a closer eye on what is actually happening .
You have levelled some serious criticisms at the Commission .
It is only fair to criticise the Commission when it acts inappropriately .
In my view however , constant criticism , targeting the Commission ' s work just for the sake of it , is entirely unhelpful . It does not promote the Commission , the institutions as a whole or the idea of Europe amongst the citizens .
Criticism should be voiced when it is called for .
We shall work towards improvements across the board . Furthermore , we shall take all critical comments into account and study , analyse and assess them .
Another example I should like to refer to concerns the citizens ' right to freedom of expression and lifting the age limit for staff recruitment .
The Commission is inclined , for example , to offer its political support here . However , these issues go beyond our competence and impact on other institutions too .
For instance , an interinstitutional agreement is required to amend the maximum age at which staff can be recruited .
We do endorse and accept the view expressed and are prepared to discuss the matter with the other institutions . Nonetheless , it remains to be seen whether the latter will endorse Mr Söderman ' s approach .
As I said , we totally support it .
I shall now move on to Mr Perry ' s report on the code of good administrative conduct .
Mr Perry has highlighted how these codes of good conduct are crucially important in guaranteeing a high quality service to European citizens .
They constitute an important tool for us , as we strive to turn the right to good administration enshrined in the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights into an operational guide for the staff of the European institutions .
The Commission therefore warmly welcomed the study undertaken by the European Ombudsman into the existence of such codes .
Furthermore , the Commission worked closely with Mr Söderman in drawing up the code of good administrative conduct .
The latter is now complete and contains a great many of his suggestions and contributions . It would not be fair to say that all his ideas have been included but most certainly have .
Once again , I should like to thank Mr Söderman for his unfailingly positive approach and for always making helpful suggestions .
We have taken full account of the provisions contained in the Ombudsman ' s draft code amongst the various other codes adopted by European institutions and bodies .
Indeed , the Commission ' s code approximates most closely to the model put forward by the Ombudsman . This is not only because of its content and legal nature , but also because it is binding on our officials .
I also wanted to urge you not to confuse issues , ladies and gentlemen .
The White Paper on good governance stands for much more than administrative reform .
Administrative reform is already under way and is Commissioner Kinnock ' s responsibility . To date , this House has agreed with the Commission that much has already been achieved in that respect .
We must carry the administrative reform through .
We are quite determined to do so .
Mr Kinnock is working very hard to that end , but it is a different issue , quite separate from good governance .
As I said , the White Paper on good governance stands for much more than administrative reform .
It aims to establish how best to gather , bring together and integrate the various links in the chain of responsibility within our complex society . This is a problem not only for the European institutions but for all our countries , all advanced democracies .
Society is becoming ever more complex , the technological means allowing information to flow more freely are increasingly widespread , and new possibilities are opening up . In addition , the way in which citizens organise themselves is daily becoming more complex .
Hence the significance of the White Paper .
It puts all this in the context of the interplay between the European institutions .
That amounts to far more than administrative reform .
Consequently , administrative reform should not be confused with the White Paper on good governance being drawn up by the Commission under President Prodi ' s guidance .
I should like to make it very clear to Mr Perry that the Commission agrees with him and with Mr Söderman on how unfortunate it is that such a wide range of codes of varying legal status are currently in place .
This does nothing for consistency or legal clarity .
It should however be borne in mind as Mr Perry suggests in his report , that it would be wise to consider the results of the codes of good conduct implemented or approved recently .
In the Commission ' s case , this was ten months ago .
As for the Council , it was just before the summer , in July . In our view therefore it is still too early to draw conclusions on the implementation of these codes of good conduct .
We shall start work on a report at the end of the current year . The report will refer in particular to the Commission ' s own code of good conduct which will by then have been in place for a year .
As soon as sufficient information becomes available , the Commission will consider whether or not to prepare a legislative proposal for a horizontal regulation .
We need to have more information available so we do not at present have a position on the matter .
As for Mrs Almeida Garrett ' s report , I have to say that from an institutional point of view it is undoubtedly the most sensitive .
I shall only refer to it briefly however , because pursuant to Article 195 of the Treaty the Commission is only competent to give an opinion , and the latter is not binding .
Nonetheless , I feel it is important to make our view known .
In the first place , Mrs Almeida Garrett deserves to be congratulated on her excellent work .
I have also had the opportunity to speak on the subject at the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and to emphasise how well the present statute has worked .
As I stated earlier , the Commission has followed up investigations launched by the Ombudsman . The code of good conduct is but one example of this .
In general , the Commission provides a constructive response and complies with the timetable for supplying information to the Ombudsman . I am grateful to Mr Söderman for highlighting this .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs has tabled three amendments .
Regarding lifting the secrecy classification for access to files , I have already explained that the Commission has not resorted to this in any of the twenty requests for access submitted by the Ombudsman .
We could certainly succumb to the temptation of bringing the law into line with reality and go along with the position adopted by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . On the other hand , given that everything has worked well , we might also query whether it is really necessary to amend this point .
We should always err on the side of caution when dealing with delicate matters , given the Commission ' s role and the nature of the issues it is dealing with at present . Indeed , the latter will become increasingly delicate and varied as the building of Europe proceeds .
We might also encounter problems with the governments of Member States of the Union .
The structure of the European Union , based as it is on three pillars , means that the function of the Commission and also that of Parliament itself varies depending on the pillar in question .
The Commission will therefore deal with these matters in greater detail in the opinion to be given and put to Parliament in the near future , once a final position on the text approved has been adopted .
Concerning the deletion of the principle according to which when officials give evidence they speak as representatives of their administration , the Commission does not wish to be dogmatic , but we do feel that it is important for officials not to speak simply as individuals . Rather , they should put forward the details and explanations pertaining to matters they are responsible for .
For the rest , they should comply with what is required of them under their statutes .
Further , I should like to emphasise that as a former Member of Parliament , let alone a Commissioner , I fully endorse the position of the rapporteur , Mrs Almeida Garrett , regarding the differences between political and administrative responsibilities and the European Parliament ' s responsibility concerning political responsibilities , the responsibilities of Commissioners and indeed not only Commissioners but members of other institutions .
As regards access to documents emanating from the Member States it would be appropriate , as I said earlier , to be consistent with the new Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 on public access to documents .
The principle of obtaining prior consent from the Member State is provided for under Article 4 Paragraph 5 of the Regulation , and in the framework agreement with Parliament .
Declaration 35 annexed to the Final Act of the Treaty of Amsterdam serves a similar purpose .
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs once again .
I must also say how very grateful I am to Mr Söderman for his work . It is most helpful to us because after all , criticism encourages us to improve and also offers solutions .
That has to be borne in mind . We have already made progress regarding the code of good conduct , infringement procedures , and officials ' freedom , to name but a few examples .
I venture to suggest in this context that many things are open to criticism , because nothing is perfect . When , however , one fails to go deeper and criticism is unfounded , it runs the risk of losing its value or at the very least , proving less effective .
Mr President , there were a few questions , including two that were raised in Mrs Almeida Garrett 's report , which I will try to clarify .
Firstly there was the question of hearing Commissioners as witnesses and the problem that arose in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs where people felt that there might be a difficulty in drawing a line between the political control of the European Parliament , the political responsibility of Commissioners and the administrative responsibility of the same Commissioners .
Many Members of the Constitutional Affairs Committee thought that this was very difficult to solve .
It is very important to understand that the Commission is the executive body and in theory it is the administration of the Union which has contact with the citizen .
Of course the Commissioners have administrative functions .
We have had a few complaints in this connection and the Commissioners have always replied very correctly .
Therefore to avoid further debate and confusion in this matter , this could be deleted from the proposal and , as the rapporteur said , one day an answer in writing might not be necessary .
I would like to stress that OLAF has the right to hear the Commissioners and that was the inspiration for my proposal .
Secondly on the question of all documents .
The idea that the Ombudsman has the right to see all documents is because the citizens do not have this access .
Trust in the Ombudsman 's work is based on the fact that the citizens accept that they cannot have access to all documents but they need to know that the Ombudsman has the right if necessary .
This is the basis of their confidence in the Ombudsman 's operations .
It is sometimes feared that the Ombudsman might get hold of state secrets .
Having been an ombudsman now for twelve years , I have never in a case of maladministration had to ask for documents on really secret matters .
I am not aware of any case in which an ombudsman has leaked documents .
The principle must , however , be in place that the Ombudsman has the right to see documents .
We have had some problems of interpretation here and we have lost time on both sides .
Mr Prodi asked for a debate on the White Paper and this is what I have tried to start .
It is very important that the White Paper is discussed because there is still one run to go .
I would hope for some more concrete proposals .
I will now turn to the criticism about the low number of complaints , publicising the work of the Ombudsman institutions , and the many complaints outside the mandate .
First of all our mandate lies entirely within the European Union .
Citizens may find this difficult to understand when they encounter problems with Community law .
They go to a Parliament Information Office or Commission Representation , get our form and complain to us .
We try to rectify the situation .
There is the possibility that this limits the number of complaints but the number has been increasing over the years .
On the question of publicising the Ombudsman 's work , I would mention that we are more known than many ombudsmen on the national stage and Members of Parliament can surely do a lot to tell citizens about the right to petition and the right of complaint to the Ombudsman .
After all it is you who meet the Europeans out there .
It is you who have the contact with the public . If you tell people about the possibilities then they will become much better known .
Many of you have done that and I am grateful .
I am really honoured that I had the possibility to discuss these matters .
I am very grateful for the comments made by Mrs de Palacio and all of you here and thank you very much for your work .
Thank you , Mr Söderman .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Petitions
The next item is the report ( A5-0236 / 2001 ) by Mr Camisón Asensio on behalf of the Committee on Petitions on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year . [ 2001 / 2010 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by saying that serving as rapporteur for this report is a matter of great personal satisfaction for me . This is because I am one of those firmly convinced of the value of the European Parliament ' s Committee on Petitions for society at large .
The reason is that the system enabling citizens to present petitions is the most direct channel available to Europeans when it comes to denouncing the loopholes still remaining in Community legislation . It is also invaluable for highlighting cases where commitments resulting from directives and regulations already adopted are flagrantly disregarded either because the latter are not being implemented or because they have simply not been transposed .
In addition , the European Ombudsman has a key role to play in this great task .
It has also been a matter of great personal satisfaction for me to note the high degree of consensus between members of the Committee during debates and votes .
The figures speak for themselves .
All sixteen conclusions in the report were adopted by unanimity . The same was true of the five amendments tabled following minor adjustments in the interests of compromise .
Accordingly , I should like to thank the entire Committee and its secretariat .
As you are already familiar with the content of the report , ladies and gentlemen , I shall only refer to what I consider to be its most innovative features .
For instance , the European citizens ' right to petition , which as I see it is a fundamental right , is extended to include natural or legal residents , together with those who have registered in a Member State . There is also the recommendation that in future debates this fundamental right should be ascribed the importance due to it , and that it should be included in the possible convention on the building of Europe .
Further , it is clearly necessary to grant the Committee on Petitions the status it deserves , given its social importance resulting from direct contact between individuals and the institution .
This must come about , because something has to be done to break down the barriers between the people and the remote European institutions highlighted by all the surveys undertaken .
One way forward might well be to encourage more own initiative reports , particularly concerning issues on which the citizens appear to be particularly anxious to be more closely involved with the institutions .
It also seems reasonable to try and devise ways to carry through legislative initiatives stemming from civil society itself . They are usually indicative of serious shortcomings .
All this serves to highlight once again the legitimacy of this Committee ' s right to have access to all relevant interinstitutional documentation . Indeed , this is essential if the Committee is to undertake its important task effectively .
In this connection it is only fair to mention the ongoing help received from both the Commission and the Ombudsman . Their support is invaluable and much appreciated .
Unfortunately , the same is not true of the Council . It remains conspicuous by its absence .
Clearly , at this stage the citizens need to become far more aware of the petitions system . This could be achieved through programmes aimed at informing and educating or more specifically , through information technology .
User-friendly guidebooks are needed .
This is an outstanding task .
Apathy on the part of certain public authorities at all levels , community , national , regional or local has been detected all too often when it comes to finding fair solutions to the problems arising .
Some reaction to this negative situation is called for .
At the very least , we should appeal to the President of the House to ensure that , if appropriate , publicity could be given to this reluctance to tackle problems and flagrant injustices which continue to afflict certain sectors of ordinary European society .
In conclusion , I should like to draw attention to the considerable importance attached to maximising personal contact between petitioners and the European Parliament through the Committee on Petitions , so as to ensure that the Committee ' s work bears good fruit . I should also like to express our appreciation of the splendid service provided by the European Parliament ' s Directorate-General for Research and by STOA .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank and congratulate Mr Camisón on the both meticulous and prospective work that he has done in writing his report .
Thanks to him our colleagues can be aware of the expectations of the citizens of the Union and therefore of the task of the Committee on Petitions .
The situations in which petitioners find themselves are often Kafkaesque .
That is what comes out of reading some of the cases mentioned by Mr Camisón : whether they are problems of recognition of qualifications , discrimination , payment , or withdrawal of vehicle registration , the complexity is such and the obstacles so clear that citizens feel completely powerless .
The combined work of our Committee and the European Commission means that , by dealing with the problems , what is felt to be injustice can be corrected .
The Committee on Petitions can go further , however .
It can involve citizens in drawing up Community rules .
On 13 June , I had the honour of putting a report on silicone implants to the vote in Parliament .
This report is an example of the use , which is unfortunately all too rare , of paragraphs 1 and 4 of Article 175 of the Rules of Procedure , which says in particular that the committee responsible may decide to draw up reports on the petitions that it has declared to be admissible and , if necessary , to put motions for resolutions to the vote in Parliament .
This was the case for the report for which I was responsible .
It was following two petitions collecting more than 1000 signatures that this report was undertaken .
But it was only the second time since the Committee on Petitions was created that a resolution adopted by Parliament resulted from direct complaints from citizens of the European Union .
As advocated by Paragraph 18 of Mr Camisón ' s report , in this case our Committee called on STOA to make a scientific analysis of the problems encountered by petitioners .
Increased use of Article 175 , an idea that is defended by the rapporteur , should enable our Committee to make a direct link between citizens ' problems and all the Members of the European Parliament .
In my view , this is a political recognition of truly listening to citizens and it is one of the paths for the future for the Committee on Petitions .
Mr President , the fact that over 10 000 petitions have been received by the Committee on Petitions since its inception clearly demonstrates the practical significance of the European Union for its citizens .
The work of the Committee on Petitions has often led to a successful conclusion for the citizen concerned and has in some cases resulted in changes to national law and practice in Member States .
The areas that present the greatest difficulties to individuals and groups of citizens continue to be social protection , healthcare , taxation and recognition of academic qualifications , particularly for citizens who work in states other than their own Member States , such as in border regions .
Environmental complaints are also made on major developments where it is felt that their impact on the environment and the livelihoods of people in the areas affected is being ignored by the developers and in some cases by the authorities concerned .
There have been many successes .
For instance , an Irish petitioner with a UK higher institute teaching qualification was refused the right to apply for a post in a state school .
The Commission took up this case on behalf of the petitioner and the Committee on Petitions and eventually won the case , having met strong resistance from the German authorities .
That is the kind of success that can be achieved by the Committee on Petitions and we need more resources if the Committee on Petitions is to do its work effectively .
Mr President , I should begin by saying how much I appreciate the work undertaken by the Committee on Petitions .
I am aware that it is not one of the most influential committees in the House , and that not everyone appreciates it fully . Nonetheless , the work of this Committee does represent one of the few channels allowing us to establish direct contact with the citizens and bring the institutions closer to them .
I entirely agree with Mr Camisón Asensio ' s report .
I believe it reflects the concerns of those of us who are most closely involved with the Committee ' s work . We shall therefore vote in favour of it .
I should however like to highlight some of the everyday practical problems we encounter ...
( Interruption by Mr Marinos ) I do apologise , Mr Marinos .
I was saying that we work well in the Committee on Petitions and that our work is very important .
I was hoping to highlight some of the everyday problems we encounter .
Firstly , we enjoy a good relationship with the European Commission .
The European Commission and the Ombudsman work closely with the Committee on Petitions .
The opposite is true as far as the Council is concerned . We do not cooperate with it at all , yet the Council could have something to say on a good many petitions and we very much regret it is always absent .
That is our first problem .
The second problem I would like to mention concerns swift and decisive action on petitions .
I am very involved in the Committee on Petitions ' work on environmental issues .
That is quite logical , as I also sit on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
It is often the case with environmental problems that if it takes a long time for a response to be received , the decisions taken in a particular country prompting the petition have had an irreversible impact on the natural environment by then . The petitioners lose patience .
That therefore is another problem . Responses need to be swifter and more efficient .
I am well aware that Member States are conscious of the fact that delaying responses can facilitate their political decisions . That is sometimes the case .
It is not entirely the Commission ' s fault . The Member States take a long time to respond .
As I said earlier , the Committee on Petitions is very important to me . It is however lacking in human , legal - and here I am addressing our own institution of course - and technical resources , and it does need them .
One of Mr Camisón Asensio ' s proposals seems to me to be entirely appropriate .
It would mean that in cases of lengthy delay in responding to the citizens , the President of Parliament would be requested to publicise the delay and its negative consequences for the petitioners . After all , the latter have enough to do familiarising themselves with Community legislation and assembling the documentation .
In conclusion , I do believe that work needs to be done to educate and inform citizens of their right to petition , because this is one of their rights .
I recall that in the previous legislature it was even proposed to do away with the Committee on Petitions and the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities .
For myself , I wish both Committees a great future in this House as they do at least bring the citizens closer to our work .
Mr President , there is much to support in and little to add to the excellent report by Mr Camisón Asensio .
I merely wish to highlight the inexcusable fact that the Committee on Petitions is still being rudely ignored by the Council of Ministers , none of whom - not so much as a representative - has ever wanted to work with us .
Why would they ?
European citizens generally take recourse to the Committee on Petitions precisely in order to complain about infringements or omissions by ministers and their services , when they are wronged or when their protest or complaint is ignored .
That is precisely why the Committee on Petitions and the European Ombudsman have become the refuge of those who believe that they have been wronged or who , as civic-minded citizens , are trying to do something about infringements , injustice or the destruction of the environment .
That is why the European Parliament needs to pay greater attention to the Committee on Petitions and to give it more scope for efficient intervention .
It is true that the Committee works closely with us but it often comes up against the indifference and filibustering of national services .
As a result , cases drag on interminably , to the disappointment of the European citizens seeking our support .
That is why the Camisón Asensio report quite rightly says that short , mandatory deadlines need to be introduced for dealing with petitions more quickly .
At the same time , we need a procedure for publicising complaints and the inertia or filibustering of the authorities against which the complaint has been made in the petitioner 's country .
This will give citizens the only weapon which the guilty authorities fear : publicity which exposes them to the voters .
A proposal which , if adopted , would I think be hugely important : we need , subject to certain requirements , to introduce an injunctions procedure so that an immediate stop can be put to any incipient infringements of Community law which threaten to wreak irreparable damage on the natural environment or our cultural heritage .
Because the time-consuming procedure up to final judgment by the European Court is bereft of any material value if the damage has already been done and cannot be reversed .
Mr President , as this debate comes to an end I would like to thank all the rapporteurs - Mr Bösch , Mr Perry , Mrs Almeida Garrett , Mrs Sbarbati , Mr Camisón Asensio - and all the Members who are committed to the institution of petitions .

I also would like to thank the European Ombudsman who carries on the fight in defence of the citizens from his observation post .
We are working together , of course , and we too are working for the citizens of Europe , because they have a champion in this Parliament , the most authoritative institution in that respect .
Thanks to the European Commission ' s particular sensitivity , as demonstrated by the preparation behind the officers ' explanations of their reports in the Committee on Petitions , we have made great progress .
However , more and more European citizens are presenting petitions on personal , social and environmental problems .
It is our duty give them increasingly relevant , detailed , and satisfying responses .
Their petitions illuminate the path the Union still has to travel to ensure peace of mind for our citizens .
Of course we do not want dull and amorphous standardisation in the European Union , rather we think above all that cultural differences should be harmonised by turning those differences into the true wealth of the institutions .
We have entered a season of reform , defence and strengthening of the institution of petitions and we believe that season of reform will give us the power to defend the citizens and , at the same time , make the European institutions better known to our ever-growing population .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the subject of this debate is the same as for the previous one , namely relations between the European institutions and the citizens .
I should like to congratulate Mr Camisón Asensio on his report .
In it he emphasises how petitions allow the citizens to make their legitimate aspirations known and also draw attention to the inherent weaknesses of Community legislation . The Commission is interested in your work on both these counts , ladies and gentlemen .
As an outside observer , allow me to reiterate what I said earlier to Mrs González .
I believe that the Committee on Petitions in this House does serve to bring the citizens closer to the institutions in general . The same is true of similar committees in other Parliaments I am acquainted with , for instance in my own country ' s parliament , with which I am most familiar .
They play a key part precisely in bringing the citizens closer to the institutions in general . They are also invaluable to the work of Members themselves , making them aware of issues a significant number of citizens feel are sensitive and worthy of concern .
This last year , not only have the Commission ' s services cooperated with this Committee , but we Commissioners have also made it our business to cooperate actively with you , ladies and gentlemen .
I would therefore like to thank Mr Gemelli for his remark .
It is certainly the case that Mr Kinnock , Mr Liikanen , Mrs Wallström and Mr Bolkestein have contributed to your work .
They have come in person to discuss and explain issues .
They have tried to adduce reasons , possibilities or solutions to concerns expressed by the Committee on Petitions further to requests or complaints by citizens .
This proves how much we in the Commission value your work , ladies and gentlemen .
In this connection I should like to reiterate what I said earlier . The Commission will respond in as open and constructive a manner as possible to your desire for strengthened cooperation .
I appreciate that the time it sometimes takes for us to respond to a query is a problem . Nonetheless , I am sure the House is aware that on most if not all occasions when problems were experienced they arose because the Commission was dependent on a Member State for information .
We have to deal with different administrations .
The only way we can obtain certain types of information from Member States is by exerting political pressure . There are no other means at our disposal .
The Commission brings pressure to bear in the same way as you do , ladies and gentlemen . We publicise the fact that the Member State in question has failed to respond to a query or is hindering a response by the Commission .
I can only promise that the Commission will continue to urge Member States to act on queries as quickly as possible , supplying the information requested . We will then be able to respond appropriately to the concerns raised by you .
In that sense we shall endeavour to continue cooperating fully with the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Sugar and preparations intended for human consumption
Mr President , we are being asked to discuss directives about breakfast at the end of the morning .
It is a little late , but I am still going to attempt it .
I would first of all like to point out that this is the second time that we have been consulted on this issue .
In the previous legislature , Parliament gave its opinion on the Commission ' s proposals on the simplification of vertical directives on sugar , honey , fruit juices , milk and jams .
The Council took a great deal of time to finalise the case and finally made significant changes to the Commission ' s initial proposals .
This is why we are being consulted again today .
I therefore remind you that the idea was to simplify the directives .
The point of view of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy is certainly compatible with this objective , but it also consists of not abandoning quality requirements in the name of simplification , and above all not compromising on good consumer information .
All the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , a large proportion of which came from the rapporteur , have this aim .
I would like to point out that the consensus in the Council obviously limits our room for manoeuvre , as we are simply being consulted , that is to say that following our vote today , the Council will , at the end of the day , be completely free to decide .
Nevertheless , I think that the amendments succeed in improving the texts from the point of view that I just specified : quality of products and correct consumer information .
I am going to review the various directives in order to give the main elements of them .
First of all , on sugars , there is a small problem of definition .
The Council , quite rightly , has defined a sugar that is being increasingly used , fructose , but it failed to give a definition of what it calls brown sugar .
Parliament ' s amendment therefore asks for a definition in the texts .
A deadline needs to be imposed , but the Commission needs to propose a definition .
That seems elementary .
The second case , that of honey .
This is a sensitive case insofar as honey is a high quality product , usually produced on a small scale , with which there have been many marketing problems in previous years , inasmuch as we often see mixtures of honeys and also honeys coming onto the European Union market whose quality is not guaranteed .
We therefore need to be vigilant on definitions and labelling .
The Commission proposes adding a new category of honey , filtered honey .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy proposes that we do not accept this proposal , as filtered honey is in fact a honey whose floral origin cannot be checked .
Most of the time it has lost the pollen that allows this to be checked , which prevents the product from being well defined and goes against a guarantee of quality for consumers .
We therefore propose that we do not accept this proposal .
With regard to harmful substances that may be found in honey for industry or baker ' s honey , we think that it should be forbidden for them to be present in honey .
We are of course talking about lower quality honeys , which are used as raw materials in certain preparations in the agricultural and food industry , but there is no question of accepting the presence of harmful substances .
There is therefore an amendment from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy in this respect .
The third case , that of fruit juices .
I think that the majority of the amendments are aimed not at making major changes to the proposal from the Commission and the Council , but rather at clarifying the texts and preventing them from going off course .
I will explain : we do not feel that a non-exhaustive list of treatments and substances authorised for production , as it is envisaged , is satisfactory .
A positive list should be given .
We therefore ask the Commission to put forward , within a certain period , a positive list of filtration adjuvants , precipitation agents and absorption adjuvants .
A positive list means that substances that are not on the list are forbidden .
We think that this is clearer , in the end , and more positive for consumers .
An amendment also asks for fungicides not to be used to preserve fruits to be used to make juices , but for only preservation by chilling to be permitted .
With regard to the fourth case , that of milk , there are no proposals for modification .
We think that the text proposed to us is quite satisfactory .
For jams , I personally reintroduced an amendment that was not accepted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , but which I hold to .
It concerns not accepting the general use of a chemical flavouring in jams and marmalades , that is vanillin .
It does not strictly do anything apart from altering the taste .
Mr President , it is about five years ago that the Council consulted us on the proposal to simplify seven vertical directives on foodstuffs .
The aim of those proposals was to simplify the existing legislation , which contains far too much detail , or to replace it by directives containing only the essential requirements .
In that way , they would be easier to implement and better correspond to the horizontal directives .
This is a commendable effort which is in line with the expectations of both consumers and those who are involved in other ways .
We , the PPE-DE Group , are keen to lend our support in this connection .
We have established that the Directive on cocoa and chocolate products , which also originally formed part of this package and which had to undergo the lengthiest legislative procedure , namely that of co-decision , was the first one we managed to complete .
As for the five other directives of the package of seven , the five we are debating today , we will ultimately require more than five years to complete the simplification procedure .
We do wonder if we should not aspire to faster working methods and other decision-making methods , for we do not believe that that is what the public wants .
The PPE-DE Group would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
The delay is certainly not due to him , but due to the fact that the Council has fundamentally changed certain components , thus necessitating fresh advice from us .
On behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I can say that we are in agreement with the report as it emerged from the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
That is the case for all components of the package , except for fruit juices .
On these , our view differs slightly from that in the report , but that was also apparent in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I do not believe , therefore , that I need to go into any more detail here regarding the reasoning , motives and strands of thought behind that difference of view .
However , I do not want to conceal the fact - and I should like to devote the rest of my speaking time to this - that we in our group , further to these issues arising , have held a serious debate on the issue of whether it is really up to a Parliament to discuss such detailed measures with 626 Members .
This is creating problems for us .
Parliament is being slated for this from outside .
That does not mean that we underestimate the importance of food legislation .
We realise that the detail is important in this connection , but we do wonder whether , with the material being at such a high technical level , we really are the people best placed to take the decisions and whether we should inconvenience 626 MEPs with these kinds of far-reaching , technical measures .
The question we asked ourselves is : should we not move towards two kinds of derived legislation , one on which Parliament deliberates and another which , surely , should be entrusted to the executive ?
This discussion has certainly not reached its conclusion , but I should welcome a discussion which includes groups other than the PPE-DE Group .
Mr President , back in 1998 this Parliament approved the five directives under discussion today with amendments .
They have been referred back to us simply because there are some changes to the comitology procedure .
I note with satisfaction that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has no objections to the revised procedure .
It is , however , proposing new textual changes to the draft directive .
The purpose of the directives is to simplify rules governing composition and labelling .
We should therefore avoid complicating matters .
Political agreement has been reached on this issue after long and arduous negotiations and we should therefore avoid reopening the negotiations at all costs .
I agree with changes that add clarity to texts but do not change the substance .
One case in point is the inclusion of the definition of brown sugar .
This would be an added protection for consumers .
In relation to fruit juices , the proposed changes to the treatments and substances would be more appropriate within the horizontal legislation governing these treatments .
The suggestion to introduce three new product names for fruit juices is not in line with proposals currently under discussion on the Codex .
Furthermore , they will only serve to reopen the entire debate .
I do not believe that substantial changes , if adopted by this House , will achieve anything .
They will only serve to delay the procedure . If that happens , it is the consumers who will be the losers in the end .
Mr President , talking about food is not very easy these days .
If we then turn to purely technical aspects such as those addressed by Mr Lannoye , the complications increase .
We find ourselves in agreement with his report , except for the point raised by Mr Thyssen .
However the point I want to make is not about the actual merit of the report , but rather about an evaluation that this Parliament needs to carry out over the next few months on the future legislative method .
We also found certain points in this report where we have either aggravated the situation or intervened in legislation already dealt with in the course of the last two months , and here I am thinking , for example , of problems relating to water .
Coordinated production of legislation can , I think , only be helpful to this institution .
Another aspect I want to bring up is the excessive regulation to which we subject our legislative process , which is not reflected in our Member States . In the Member States a whole series of areas are dealt with through the method of circulars .
As regards the report we drew up last year with the Commission , we will have to think very carefully about those issues , because I do not think a consumer who is buying honey is immediately aware of whether it is honey produced in beehives or filtered honey , even if the label is clear .
As our task is to be impartial and we need to produce legislation that is comprehensible to European citizens , perhaps further thought is necessary over the next few months .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen : I would like to make use of the short time available to me to comment on Article 3 of the Directive on fruit juices .
Today , we are increasingly advocating information and clarification for consumers .
Responsible , adult consumers , getting information from product labels , are meant to decide for themselves what they buy .
Strict , clear , unambiguous regulations , the thinking behind which is clear to all , must be enacted .
Descriptions such as ' juice ' , ' fruit juice ' , ' nectar ' , ' fruit juice from concentrate ' or even ' contains fruit ' make it difficult for consumers to assess a product 's true quality or know how it was produced .
It was in 1975 that the Fruit Juice Directive first introduced consumers to the designation ' fruit juice ' or reinforced it , and consumers have got used to it .
' Fruit juice ' and ' fruit juice from concentrate ' are in the final analysis one and the same product .
The designation ' fruit juice from concentrate ' refers only to the manufacturing process and not to the ingredients , which must of course be the same .
The additional designation ' with concentrates ' tends in my view to confuse .
Product designations must be clearly defined , simple and comprehensible .
We must prevent additional descriptions which are not absolutely necessary , as confusion is no protection for consumers .
In my view , the proposed Amendments Nos 18 , 19 and 25 make the current legal position stricter in an unjustifiable way , particularly for the juice industry , and I believe they should be rejected .
Fruit to be sold fresh in markets , in other words for consumption , may be treated with fungicides .
Why , then , not fruit for juice production ?
In exactly the same way , the criteria of the EU Drinking Water Directive must suffice for the water which has to be used in the preparation of fruit juice .
I would ask you therefore , ladies and gentlemen , to vote objectively and purposefully to set a directive on course which will help the consumer and which manufacturers will be able to implement .
Mr President , I share some of Mrs Thyssens ' reservations about what we are being asked to do here and the degree of expertise with which we do it .
Mr Lannoye knows he has my respect , but I have to say with some regret that I fear we are repeating some of the debating errors of the chocolate directive and the determination to rechristen some products .
Mr Lannoye 's amendments have caused confusion in the name of purity when we come to the issue of honey .
I agree with him about fruit juice and I certainly salute his motives .
But there are a number of Member States which use filtered honey extensively to remove insect debris , grains of sand and pollen fragments .
I have heard no convincing argument that this damage of the product adds unwanted material and indeed there are other amendments before us today which call for the removal of organic and inorganic material from some honeys .
The Council had arrived at a sensible position on this and I have seen no evidence - and I have checked back with our own Food Standards Agency - that there are any legitimate concerns about content .
There are other ways of tracing the origins of honey , as well as the pollen content to which the rapporteur has referred .
Finally I would like to look at what a number of Member States call ' baker 's honey ' , which is to be redefined , if the rapporteur has his way , as ' industrial honey ' .
There is no such thing .
I would like to think this was an unwitting translation error but this derogatory phraseology is probably not accidental .
By just putting a noun with an adjective you cannot always make sense .
If I were to describe Mr Lannoye , whom I hold in esteem as an ' industrial Belgian ' , it would be a meaningless phrase .
We should use a real description understood throughout the Community , not an invented one .
This is not a product only fit to grease the wheels of industry . It is a product that people know and have confidence in and it is safe for consumers .
Mr President , Commissioner , as time is short I shall only refer to the directive on fruit juice .
The Commission ' s proposal is sound and does not require amendment .
In particular , I welcome the double definition of juice from concentrate and fruit juice . It helps to keep the consumer better informed .
Consequently I cannot support Amendment No 39 , deleting the Commission ' s text . I do support Amendment No 30 dealing with the subject in greater depth and referring back to Annex 1 .
Further , I totally reject Amendments Nos 18 , 19 , 23 and 25 .
The first of these concerns a ban on the use of fungicides in treatments after gathering .
It has to be borne in mind that fruit gathered in Europe is in principle destined for the fresh fruit trade . The decision on which fruit will be sold fresh and which will be processed is only taken following selection by quantity and size .
Directive 97 / 41 / EC has already set a maximum limit for residue in the case of fresh fruit , based on detailed studies to ensure consumer safety .
I believe this Directive applies equally to juice , fresh fruit , juice produced in the home , or packaged juice .
Treatment after gathering is required to guarantee optimum storage , transport and distribution conditions . I should like to reiterate what I said earlier .
A substance may not be harmful in itself , it depends on the amount used . Regarding the quality of the water added to concentrates , Directive 98 / 93 / EC refers to the quality of water for human consumption , including water used by the food industry .
Finally , Amendment No 23 calls for a list of authorised substances to be drawn up .
It does not make sense to specify additional substances over and above those referred to in Directives 89 / 109 / EEC and 90 / 128 / EEC on materials and objects liable to come into contact with foodstuffs . This would restrict the juice industry ' s capacity to adjust quickly to technological developments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , food and consumer protection have become vexatious topics .
They also involve a great deal of uncertainty .
This report should achieve greater clarity , and Mr Lannoye has evidently put a great deal of effort into it .
I believe , however , that too much exactitude and too many details can also be dangerous , and with this in mind I can only support what was said by Mrs Thyssen : here , and also in our work generally , we should distinguish more and more between political statements and technical considerations .
We are also overstretched in many respects , not through our average IQ being so low , but simply because the specialised technical knowledge cannot be present , because simply too much is presupposed and we then also have difficulty at some point in deciding what is lobbying and what is meaningful activity .
I also believe that we should be careful when deciding on the details of labels , so that we do not , through the sheer compulsion to regulate - as for example with fruit juices , where , however , we have now reached a compromise - end up leading the consumer astray with duplicated explanations and elucidations .
If we carry on that way , even wines will soon have to carry their chemical composition on the label , and then the marketing of wine will no doubt be far less straightforward .
I am glad to be able to thank all those who have contributed to reaching compromises - in the field of fruit juices , on the subjects of fungicides , water adulteration and the juice and concentrate issue , as well as on aromas - and hope that , in the problematic area of honey , it is impossible to conceal the product 's origin .
I would ask you , ladies and gentlemen , when voting , to pay careful attention to this as well .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the directive on fruit juices , I would like to indicate our agreement with the Council ' s proposal , which we think is going in the right direction , that is to say towards effective protection for consumers , who need to be provided with clear , easy to understand and objective information that will enable them to make a completely informed choice , both in terms of quality and in terms of food safety .
The higher production costs associated with the effort and the quality guarantee must , however , be clearly acknowledged in labelling .
There are currently , depending on whether they are free of concentrate or made from concentrate , two major categories of fruit juices , each of which correspond to the nature of specific products and a particular production process .
In terms of labelling , current practice does not enable consumers to clearly distinguish between these two categories .
In order to remove this source of confusion in the mind of consumers as to the actual nature of the product that they are buying , the Finnish Presidency has proposed introducing two simple , clear and objective definitions .
The term ' fruit juice ' would be reserved for juices without concentrate , while , according to them , juices made from concentrate should be named for sale purposes in accordance with their characteristics .
Thus , consumers looking for a more authentic and more natural product will easily be able to find it on the shelf under the clear name ' fruit juice ' , knowing that they are prepared to pay the price corresponding to the specific qualities associated with this product , while consumers inclined towards a more standardised and cheaper product will be able to turn with full knowledge of the facts towards a juice made from concentrate without any ambiguity about its nature and particular characteristics .
We , think , Mr President , that defining these two categories of juice , corresponding to two different names , represents real progress in consumer information , and that is why we support it .
Mr President , I too shall refer only to the directive on fruit juice , as time is short .
Along with previous speakers , we believe that the Council ' s proposal represents definite progress because it establishes a clear distinction between fresh fruit juice and concentrated juice .
This is a welcome development as it provides consumers with full information on two products with different characteristics produced in very different ways .
We cannot therefore support any amendment aimed at blurring or doing away with the distinction established so clearly in the Council ' s text .
Further , we cannot accept the amendments aimed at ending the use of fruit from the fresh market . This is what would result if we agreed to ban treatment after gathering .
The use of this fruit makes it possible to provide the consumer with a healthy product , manufactured to high standards of quality and food safety . It is also a way of utilising surplus agricultural production so that large quantities are not allowed to rot and pollute the environment .
Consequently , we shall support the Council ' s proposal and vote in its favour .
In our view , the majority of the amendments tabled in committee do not serve to clarify or improve the situation . Instead , they cause further confusion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I first wish to thank the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and you in particular , Mr Lannoye , as rapporteur , for examining the drafts of the five so-called vertical directives communicated to you by the Council .
These directives relate to sugars intended for human consumption , to honey , to fruit juices and similar products intended for human consumption , to certain partly or wholly dehydrated preserved milk for human consumption and to fruit jams , jellies and marmalades and chestnut purée intended for human consumption .
The Commission welcomes the way that Parliament has kept to the guidelines given by the Council on comitology and has thereby agreed to replace the advisory committee procedure by the regulatory committee procedure .
As regards the amendments to the Council 's five drafts , the Commission notes that Parliament had been heard as early as 1996 on the corresponding proposals by the Commission and had adopted positions on them in the sittings of 14 January 1998 and 4 May 1999 .
Even though some of these amendments appear to me thoroughly sensible from the editorial or technical point of view , I regret however that I must point out that , as has been said , we are dealing here with Council drafts and not with original proposals by the Commission and that these amendments therefore apply to the Council drafts and not to the Commission 's proposals .
I must therefore , unfortunately , observe that the Commission cannot accept the amendments proposed in the report .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.49 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon . )

Mr President , I have no wish to hold up the vote but this morning I raised an objection to the session minutes under Rule 148 ( 3 ) .
Rule 148 ( 3 ) requires a decision by Parliament .
No such decision has been taken .
I just wanted to know what happens to my objection now .
Secondly , I should like to point out that we decided yesterday to adopt the Commission proposal on which I reported .
We then adopted a legislative resolution rejecting the Commission proposal .
The services changed this in the Minutes to ' approves the Commission proposal ' .
However , item 4 still contains a sentence which contradicts the first decision because it still says that the upper ceiling is to be maintained , which was something we rejected at the outset .
Because of this contradiction in the current draft minutes , I have asked that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs should be instructed to look into the matter with a view to making a general amendment to the Rules of Procedure clarifying what happens when this sort of contradiction arises .
I just wanted to point out that no decision has yet been taken on my objection to the minutes , as required under Article 148 ( 3 ) .
I assume that the Minutes have not been approved on this point and will not therefore be approved until a later date .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr Swoboda is making a mistake and I would ask you to consider it carefully .
Parliament did indeed make a slightly contradictory decision yesterday , I repeat a slightly contradictory decision .
We adopted the Commission proposal on the transit system by a clear majority of 303 votes to 253 .
The proposal says that the previous upper ceiling is to be abolished .
Parliament approved this by a clear majority .
In my view , item 4 has been included because of a faux pas by a number of colleagues .
However , there is still no material contradiction here because we also call on the Commission in item 4 to maintain an upper ceiling until the ecopoint system expires .
In other words , we clearly decided in the legislative act to adopt the Commission proposal .
If the Council agrees , and I hope that it does , then all will be well .
The second call in item 4 is a call for the Commission to reflect .
What the Commission does in this case , whether it proposes a new upper ceiling or no upper ceiling , is up to the Commission .
We did not , as you will see if you read the second clause , call for the old upper ceiling ; we said the Commission might like to consider setting a new , reasonable upper ceiling .
However , this faux pas was carried by a majority .
All that means , however , is that the Commission has been asked to reflect and submit an opinion to Parliament once it has done so .
Parliament 's clear position was , is , and remains - and in this respect there is nothing to correct , Mr Swoboda - that we approved the Commission 's position yesterday by a large majority and I should like to confirm as much .

Mr Swoboda , Mr Jarzembowski , it is my understanding that the longer you talk , the more you seem to be seeing eye to eye .
We will have this carefully examined and you will be informed of the outcome in due course .
VOTE
Ladies and gentlemen , having consulted the relevant services , I do not wish to state the Commission 's definitive position at this moment in time .
The Commission reserves the right to re-examine this matter .
I now give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Cappato .
You can now do one of two things .
You can in any event inform Parliament of whether you endorse the proposal , in which case we will proceed to vote on the legislative resolution .
Alternatively , the proposal can also be referred back to committee .
Mr Cappato , please let us know what you decide to do .
Mr President , in view of the outcome of the vote and the high number of abstentions , I think it would be prudent , not for the rapporteur but for the House , to remit this report to committee .
( The matter was referred back to the committee responsible )
Report ( A5-0271 / 2001 ) by Mrs Ries , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending for the 24th time Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( pentabromodiphenyl ether ) [ COM ( 2001 ) 12 - C5-0018 / 2001 - 2001 / 0018 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0272 / 2001 ) by Mr Nisticò , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive setting standards of quality and safety for the collection , testing , processing , storage , and distribution of human blood and blood components and amending Council Directive 89 / 381 / EEC [ COM ( 2000 ) 816 - C5-0034 / 2001 - 2000 / 0323 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , as rapporteur I would like to ask you and the House to accept my proposal to vote on Amendment No 75 before Amendments Nos 55 and 56 .
This is to make the sequence of amendments logical , given that Amendment No 75 can replace Amendments Nos 55 and 56 .

There will also be an oral amendment , which I support , to Amendment No 75 , presented by Mr Lisi and Mr Santini , and an Amendment No 43 , presented by Mr Tannock and Mrs Korhola , which I also support .

Mr President , the question Mr Nisticò is raising here about changing the voting order has been discussed , I believe , in the course of the last 10 days with Mr Nisticò , and we reached the conclusion evident from the voting list a long time ago .
I do not therefore understand at all why Mr Nisticò is raising the issue now .
Amendments Nos 55 and 56 should clearly be voted on before Amendment No 75 , and there has been agreement about this for quite a long time .
However , it seems that Mr Nisticò still wants to try to raise doubts about the matter .
I do not understand why .
I can be quite clear about this , Mr Nisticò .
We must apply the Rules of Procedure in this instance , too , and the order of voting , which was re-examined by the services before you spoke , is the correct order , and that order is ultimately to be decided on by the President .
I believe that we are thus following the correct order .
Mr President , I was asking the House to decide - because the House is sovereign - whether I can change a sequence I regard as illogical .
I therefore insist on putting my proposal to the vote to see who is in favour and who is against .
Mr Nisticò , you said two things .
We will deal with the compromise amendment later .
You can present it later , and then the House can decide whether or not it accepts it .
The order of voting on amendments is ultimately a matter for the President to decide , however .
I call on my authority to maintain the order of voting , advised by the services .
That is the reasonable order .
Once again , we can vote on a possible oral amendment , should this prove appropriate , in a moment .
Mr President , Mr Nisticò said there was an oral amendment to Amendment No 43 , which is one of the ones you are trying to take en bloc .
If the oral amendment pertains to Amendment No 43 which forms part of the bloc vote , then you can read it out , in which case we will deal with this matter now before we vote en bloc .
Is that right , Mr Nisticò ?
Absolutely right .
Mr Tannock is presenting that amendment .
The oral amendment to Amendment No 43 can now be clarified .
Mr President , the oral amendment I proposed to Amendment No 43 by Mr Lund is to replace his second paragraph .
This is one that I have reached a compromise on with Mrs Korhola . It states the following : " In the case of shortage of certain plasma products , and solely with regards to the importation into the EU from countries outside of the EU , the Member States may permit exemptions to the directive provided the quality and safety requirements laid down are met . "
This is absolutely essential to safeguard the interests of European haemophiliacs who rely , occasionally , on imported Factor VIII plasma products which may contain some donated and some sold blood from the United States .
So this is absolutely essential , if we are not to put in jeopardy the lives of British and other haemophiliacs .
It has the support of myself and Mrs Korhola .
I understand Mr Lund will support it as well .
Following the vote on Amendments Nos 55 and 56 . President .
As we are familiar with the procedure when oral amendments are tabled , I have to ask the House whether there are any objections .
Twelve Members or more can object to voting on this oral amendment .
I would ask if the amendment can be accepted .
I see more than twelve Members .
This oral amendment is therefore not put to the vote .
I suggest we address this in a practical manner and vote on Amendment No 43 in a moment .
We will now vote en bloc on all 60 committee amendments , except for Amendment No 43 .
Mr President , I am sorry you could not give me the floor when I asked for it before the vote on Amendments Nos 55 and 56 , precisely because the oral amendment was intended to allow the House to decide whether it could unite behind the compromise incorporated into my proposal before voting on Amendments Nos 55 and 56 .
At this point , as the first part has fallen because unfortunately I was not given a chance to speak , it is absolutely pointless to take the oral amendment , which related to the first part .
I am sorry , because if we had accepted the reversal of the order , as the rapporteur proposed , I would have been able to present it .
I tried to do so before the House voted , I did not get the floor and this is the result .
Mr President , before we vote on this motion , I should like to point out that , if we vote in favour of this motion , we shall be in serious violation of European primary law , by which I mean the fundamental Treaties of the European Union .
It is unacceptable , in a democratically constructed Europe , for the Ombudsman to be given control over Members .
It is unacceptable for Members to be accountable , irrespective of how much one approves of and supports the office of the ombudsman .
( Applause )
Mr von Boetticher , we will not be debating the content of the amendments during the voting .
That was not the agreement .
You know yourself that the House is very aware of the content of the amendments .
Mr Duff , you are not allowed to make any comments regarding the content .
We will not be holding a constitutional debate .
You can make a very brief comment , if you so wish , on a point of order , but not on the content .
Mr President , should I be unable to speak about the content , I would only say that the previous remark from the PPE side of the House is complete baloney .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is high time we voted .
Mr President , I did not want to interrupt the vote earlier but I should like to refer back to the Nisticò report .
Dr Tannock drew to our attention the question of concern about the supply of blood and plasma products for haemophiliacs if the source of supply is outside the Union .
I am not well-informed on the facts of the matter but my impression was that his intervention was based on verifiable facts rather than simply issues of political preference .
When we deal with legislation which intimately affects human health we must exercise great care and attention .
I ask you , Mr President , to ask the services to prepare a note on the facts of this matter so we can bring it to the attention of our colleagues in the groups .
I fear we may have voted in error .
Mr Cox , I shall naturally ask the services to examine everything very carefully .
That goes without saying , and certainly upon your express wishes .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Cappato Report ( A5-0270 ) / 2001 )
Mr President , I close my eyes and what do I see ?
I am in Venice , the most beautiful city in the world !
There is the moon , there are the gondolas , we are on the Grand Canal , Italian cooking , spaghetti with sepia , Dom Pérignon French champagne and a blonde beauty who takes me back to my youth .
However , because of lack of secrecy on personal data and lack of protection of privacy , when I get home I find my suitcases outside the door : my wife found out !
That is why I have voted in favour , Mr President .
But was it a dream I was talking about or was it reality ?
- ( NL ) Many people in the Netherlands have self-adhesive labels on their letter boxes against commercial printed matter .
It has increasingly become the norm that ignoring this sign is rude and even unlawful .
Such a regulation has meanwhile become known as an opt-out , whereby the recipients themselves must make it known that they do not wish to receive such mail .
An opt-in , which requires an instruction that one does wish to receive commercial mail , would be preferable still .
In the case of electronic communication , there is even more reason for having such an opt-in , for it would prevent consumers from being harassed by unwanted communications they receive and need to delete , and for which they also have to pay .
Moreover , the e-mail system is also being weighed down by this deluge of advertising and is thus becoming unusable for reliable communications .
The Commission is right to propose such an opt-in in Article 13 .
I am rather shocked by the view of the rapporteur , who appears to choose an opt-out which will only free consumers from the inconvenience after they have expressly lodged their protests .
Furthermore , people have already had bad experiences with pledges from organisations which make their money through direct marketing .
The protection of privacy , which the Directive is right to have as its objective , is seriously threatened by Mr Cappato ' s view .
Mr President , I would like to make explanations of vote on two reports combined : on the Cappato and Cederschiöld reports .
I voted against both these reports .
There is a great danger , first of all , in relation to the blanket retention of information on users . It raises serious questions about civil liberties .
With cybercrime we have the situation where new forms of crime are being created .
The lack of attention to civil liberties , the lack of attention to people 's basic right to privacy is being overlooked .
There is a great danger here that in future we will have a society where people are afraid to communicate and use modern technology because they know that their communications will be intercepted , listened to , and be in the hands of people who have no right to them .
Before we start looking at bringing in legislation in these areas we should first of all ensure that people 's basic rights and civil liberties are protected .
Both are enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights and in the EU Treaties .
The emphasis here is to use scare-tactic arguments such as the issue of paedophilia , terrorism , drugs or arms trafficking .
These are issues which are very emotive . People are very willing to allow legislation to be put in place and oppressive measures to be brought in because they are concerned about these issues .
The fact that I voted against does not mean to say that I am not concerned about these issues .
But first and foremost we must protect people 's basic civil liberties as enshrined in international law .
We should not overlook that .
What kind of a society will we have if people 's basic rights are overlooked in the combating of other crimes ?
There are a lot of similarities between the two .
We have to remember that .
Nisticò Report ( A5-0272 / 2001 )
. ( PT ) There are controversial aspects to this report as there are , in fact , to the Commission ' s own proposal .
As the rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market said , it would perhaps be preferable for the two directives , that is , the current proposal on the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector and the directive on universal service , to merge .
Furthermore , the Commission proposal to give employers the right to monitor their employees is a complicated and very sensitive issue .
Equally , the bulk sending of unsolicited e-mails ( so-called spamming ) , is another cause for concern , for which a satisfactory solution should be found .
This is why we should devote our full attention to the position of DECO , which endorses the Commission proposal , which in turn seeks to make prior opt ­ in consent compulsory for unsolicited emails , since this appears to be the best guarantee for European consumers ' choice as to whether they receive spam mail or not . This option thereby attempts to protect consumers from being bombarded with unsolicited electronic mails in the form of advertising , except when they have given their consent to receive such mail .
. I voted for ' Opt Out ' .
The opposite , an ' Opt-In ' regime for Europe , would be entirely ineffective .
If the EU legislates to try to restrict the sending of emails , whether for marketing , or fundraising , or political messages , the emails will still be sent to receivers within the EU - but from outside the EU .
Indeed , I am tempted by the thought of setting up a little business in somewhere sunny like a Carribean island from where I would spray unlimited emails into the EU from EU businesses in return for a nice fat fee .
This business could not exist in the EU .
The well-meaning EU , if it chooses ' Opt In ' , will do two harmful things : it will handicap EU-based businesses against their worldwide competitors , and it will transfer jobs outside the EU .
The road to hell , they say , is paved with good intentions .
' Spam ' needs to be controlled - but it can only be controlled by global legislation and cooperation .
I choose to vote against the position adopted by my political group when it comes to the rules about sending out unsolicited advertisements to consumers via e-mail .
E-mail advertisements are , in general , an inconvenience for the consumer since it takes time , for example , to open and delete them .
They also contribute to the spread of viruses on the Internet .
What is more , it is the consumer who has to bear the costs of receiving and reading the advertisements .
In the light of this , I consider that only an opt-in solution can effectively protect consumers from unsolicited advertisements .
My position on this issue has influenced my vote in the final vote on this report .
Ries Report ( A5-0271 / 2001 )
Schörling ( Verts / ALE ) , in writing .
( SV ) High brominated flame retardants are to be found high up in the food chain .
This is being seen for the first time now that a Swedish environmental study has shown that high brominated flame retardants , which were considered to be less dangerous than low brominated flame retardants , are also bioaccumulative , having been found in peregrine falcon eggs in Sweden .
The study shows that the content of brominated flame retardants in eggs from wild peregrine falcons is 400 times higher than that in eggs from falcons kept in cages .
We know that low brominated flame retardants are bioaccumulative now that they have been found in birds , fish and mammals , but it was previously believed that high brominated flame retardants were not especially dangerous .
High brominated flame retardants were thought to have larger molecules and thus to find it more difficult to penetrate the cell membranes of living organisms .
This has now proved not to be the case .
This is a major health and environmental problem because many users replaced the high brominated flame retardants in products with low brominated ones , and the use of low brominated flame retardants such as decaBDEs accounts for 80 per cent of all flame retardants .
The Group of the Greens therefore voted in favour of an immediate ban on the whole group of penta- , octa- and decaBDEs .
This is required by the precautionary principle , given the new discoveries that have been made .
A majority of Parliament chose to await the risk assessment that is at present under way in the case of decaBDEs .
This means that tons of dangerous high-risk chemicals continue to be released into the environment , something which in our view is contrary to the intentions of the precautionary principle .
Mr President , the Pensioners Party is totally in favour of regulating blood donation and the movement of blood .
Pensioners are very active in blood donor associations throughout Europe .
This excellent , spot-on , comprehensive report by my friend Mr Nisticò is therefore very welcome , and I have voted for it .
There is a saying in Italy , Mr President , that laughing makes for good blood , and we want the blood which is moving around the States to be good .
I therefore think it is a good thing that I sometimes go on with these explanations of vote to make people smile , because that makes for good blood and helps achieve the purpose of this directive .
The European Parliament has repeatedly turned its attention to the problem of testing blood for transfusions and blood donors and has passed a plethora of resolutions since 1993 .
And there is still serious public concern as the result of criminal irresponsibility on the part of the relevant authorities in various countries of the European Union .
The aim of the Commission proposal to amend Directive 89 / 381 / ÅEC is to improve both quality and safety in standards for the collection , testing , processing , storage and distribution of blood and its various components .
More importantly , Member States can impose even stricter standards and blood moved between the 15 is not governed by the rules of the internal market .
I shall be voting for the Nisticò report because it is in favour of strict standards , it is against the commercialisation of human blood and because , for reasons of greater safety , it calls for security of supply via networks of volunteers in order to reverse the dependence of the European Union on non-Community suppliers .
. ( FR ) We voted in favour of this text as it was following the modifications proposed by the European Parliament Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
And we voted against all the amendments that could endanger or restrict the giving of blood on a voluntary and non profit-making basis .
We only regret that the report does not envisage a formal obligation for companies to grant their employees the necessary time in order to give blood and to remove the bureaucratic authorisation procedures that discourage those with good intentions .
We are opposed to the whole economic system that is driven by profit .
Profit made directly or indirectly from trade in human organs , cells or tissues , is one of the most despicable manifestations of this system , an expression of the fact that society has not come out of barbarism .
. ( FR ) The European directive on quality and safety standards for the collection , testing , processing , storage and distribution of blood should be modified in order to increase protection of donors and recipients .
The safety of recipients should be further guaranteed , both through the traceability of the whole transfusion network and by guaranteeing highly qualified staff in all blood transfusion establishments in Europe .
Greater safety increases confidence in the supply system , which , as a result , encourages donors to give blood .
This directive , however , should also highlight principles .
Blood is not a commodity .
Moreover , the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights states that it is forbidden to use the human body for profit .
This is why we need to clearly affirm the principle that the service should be free .
By donating blood , citizens are making an act of solidarity .
This means , as the European socialists have maintained , that blood components should only be taken from voluntary donors .
I cannot but vote in favour of the report by Giuseppe Nisticò .
This is because for a long time all sorts of people from all walks of life have been warning of the need for Community standards to establish definite rules in this sensitive sector of the collection , processing , storage and distribution of blood and its derivatives .
This is a sector where the extreme urgency of meeting great therapeutic needs must never be separated from considerations of control and prevention .
Mr Nisticò has set out the arguments extremely well , drawing on the strength of his professional expertise .
Those are the reasons , in short , that lead me to support the report in full and consequently to vote for it .
. I , like many of my colleagues , have heard from blood donation organisations concerned by the possible modifications to existing legislation in this field .
Everyone agrees in deploring , quite rightly , the shortage of blood and plasma within the European Union while stressing the fact that under no circumstances should we relax our vigilance regarding the quality of these products , so much so that the European Union ' s requirements are half covered by imports !
This directive , amended by Parliament , modifies , integrates and completes the legislation that currently governs quality and safety standards in Europe for the collection , testing , processing , storage and distribution of human blood and blood components .
It is about adopting stricter requirements regarding the admissibility of donors and practical screening of them , as well as putting in place a quality system at Community level in blood transfusion establishments .
This would all be completed by an equivalent testing and approval system in the Member States .
Finally , common standards would be defined for staff training and for the traceability of blood from donor to patient .
Of course , these measures will not prevent the Member States from maintaining or establishing stricter protection measures .
It is also desirable to reduce the European Union ' s dependence on imports of blood or blood components from third countries .
In order to do that , information campaigns need to be aimed at potential donors .
But under no circumstances should we envisage a system of payment for these products .
The European Parliament report rightly stresses the importance of the voluntary nature of blood donation while accepting that the social contribution made by donors and the commendable nature of the donations that they make should be highlighted .
As a blood donor myself and a supporter of the cause of blood donation , I therefore voted in favour of this report .
I have been involved in the issue of blood donation for many years in the Italian Parliament , including setting up a parliamentary group belonging to AVIS , the principle Italian donor organisation .
Over the years the task has involved the passing of and subsequent amendments to what is known as the ' Law on blood ' .
I formed the opinion then that increased European harmonisation of the sector ' s rules is vital , not just because of European citizenship which compels us to take the same attitude in dealing with problems of human health in Europe , but also because common rules are indispensable when faced with serious illnesses - AIDS , BSE - and a worldwide market in blood which must also take account of scientific progress ( artificial blood , human blood produced from stem cells )
Our amendments to the directive satisfy those , like me , who have always fought to strengthen public policy in favour of non-remunerated voluntary donation .
It might perhaps have been possible to do a little more , providing funds to promote initiatives in support of voluntary blood donation , but we are still taking a good step forward .
. ( PT ) It is important to state once again , as this report does , that the human body or its parts cannot be traded as commodities , and this includes human blood , of course , irrespective of the state it is in .
Various donor organisations , including the Portuguese Association for the Protection of Blood Users and the International Federation of Blood Donors support this position , including the various positive aspects of the report which signify progress on providing incentives to volunteer blood in the various Member States of the European Union .
A high number of donors is crucial to enabling each Member State to be self-sufficient , although the principle of solidarity must also apply between Member States , whenever necessary and whenever possible .
As stated in the report , if we want donors to give blood for free , which should be the case , the blood supply system cannot be commercial .
The processing of blood at all stages must be a service carried out for the Member States ' health services for the benefit of patients .
All proposals that improve on the current Directive 89 / 381 are also positive , specifically in the areas of the levels of quality and safety in the various phases of collection , processing , storage and distribution of blood .
. ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report .
The initiatives advocated by this report will , I believe and hope , enable us to prevent the disasters that we have experienced , particularly in France with the case of contaminated blood .
We cannot keep this tragic outcome , which is so imprinted on our minds , out of our discussion .
It is therefore up to us , at European level , to establish high standards for blood quality and the safety of collection , to be exacting about storage conditions and traceability and to impose strict testing rules .
Blood is not like other commodities .
It is not a commercial commodity and nothing should make us depart from this idea .
I remain firmly opposed to any commercial use of human blood and I am in favour of the principal of voluntary and unpaid donation .
For ethical reasons , first of all : our Parliament , and in particular its Committee on genetics , makes many references to ethics .
Do ethics push us towards establishing payment for blood donation ?
Should the relationship between doctor and donor be based on trust or solely on a financial relationship ?
With regard to ethics , we adopted a Charter of Fundamental Rights in which it is clearly stipulated that it is forbidden to use the human body as a source of profit .
Coherence must be a part of our political commitment .
Also , for scientific reasons : studies have shown that the safety of supply appears to be better guaranteed through the practice of unpaid donation , that the blood collected in this way is less likely to transmit infectious diseases .
In a directive whose aim is the quality and safety of blood , this scientific observation cannot be left out of our discussion .
Finally , for cultural reasons : in France - and the support of the various associations that have contacted me shows me this - we cannot accept the idea of payment for blood donation , precisely for the reasons that I have already given .
( Speech cut short pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
Evans report ( A5-0229 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , Jonathan Evans , the rapporteur for this report amending the rules on competition , usually sits next to me in this beautiful Parliament .
He has convinced me of the virtue of his report , which I have voted for , but as a representative of pensioners and the Pensioners Party , Mr President , I have to say that it would be good to have the same rules for pensions throughout Europe if we want to have true competition between products made in Europe .
If the cost of employment , which includes the cost of pensions , is different - it is higher in Italy , lower in Germany , lower in Holland - then there is unfair competition .
We need to have the same pensions rules throughout Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . I rejected the Evans report because I am not in favour of renationalising competition policy in Europe .
If the Commission gives up its monopoly on exemptions in the future , this will not reform competition law , it will merely change the system .
If the Commission then confines itself to supervising abuses within the context of this changed system , then that is something which , to my mind , is highly questionable .
If national courts in the European Union are allowed to return judgments under competition law in the future , we shall no longer , I think , be able to talk of a uniform competition policy in Europe , especially now that the European Union is preparing for enlargement .
What we need is a European Monopolies and Mergers Commission and I think that is what we should be working towards .
- ( NL ) The Evans report receives our support because the rapporteur has correctly indicated where the Commission proposal needs adjusting .
It is a step in the right direction .
For reasons of subsidiarity , I would certainly value a greater role for national competition authorities in the implementation of the competition rules .
However , it should not undermine the standard application of these .
That would not only lead to uncertainty for businesses , it would also lead to discrepancies in competitiveness between one Member State and another .
The national authorities need clear guidelines in order to rule out different interpretations .
It is too precarious at this stage to carve up responsibilities among different authorities .
The most appropriate authority could be the authority on whose territory the most important effects make themselves felt , but also the authority that has been monitoring the situation for a good while .
The rapporteur gets to the heart of the matter when he asks for the proposal to be further developed for the benefit of legal certainty .
Despite the demarcation of powers , the Commission is responsible for safeguarding standard application in the event of effects being felt from one State to another .
Set against the Commission ' s authoritative powers , a strengthening of the rights of defence would be appropriate .
In this connection , the question arises as to whether the Commission could indicate how the companies ' need for a prompt , EU-wide statement can be met .
The call for legal certainty is not only a matter of further development by the Commission .
The European Institute of Public Administration recently indicated that , in many cases , there is simply too little case law available to draw on .
It is therefore inherent in the current state of European competition law itself that major legal risks cannot be ruled out .
Before the proposed reform can take place , the Commission must lay a foundation in the form of guidelines , or legislation which safeguards legal certainty .
In this perspective , the concept of core tasks for the Commission and implementing tasks for the national authorities is worth further consideration .
Just and decentralised application will prove its worth , certainly following enlargement .
Andria Report ( A5-0269 / 2001 )
.
( PT ) This report examines the proposal for a regulation tabled by the Commission on the implementation of Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty with a view to creating a genuine common competition policy which is more uniformly implemented , and which will enable problems to be more effectively detected by abolishing the notification system in force today and in increasing the basic powers of the Commission , but also by decentralising power over policy implementation to independent national authorities , which would work in conjunction with the Commission .
Lest any doubts remain that the Commission is seeking to renationalise policy , it has tabled Article 3 of the regulation , which guarantees the primacy of Community law over national law , in other words , the implementation by national authorities and courts of Community law .
As a matter of fact , throughout the Commission proposal runs the blatant desire to increase its powers , as Article 7 shows clearly , which the European Parliament report , nevertheless , seeks to limit .
What remains , however , is this haste on the part of the Commission to reformulate competition policy before enlargement , thereby increasing both its powers of intervention and supranationality .
Since Parliament ' s report seeks to establish benchmarks and curb the ambitions of the Commission , we have abstained from voting on it .

Mr President , Mr Andria , who is a great friend of Mr Fatuzzo and the Pensioners Party , has convinced me I should vote for his important report , which makes it possible to lend money to Member States of the European Union which do not use the single currency , the euro , to restore their balances of payments to health if they are in difficulties .
That will be of interest in a very short time - I hope - to all the countries that have asked to join the European Union , the twelve states which are to become members of the Union and which I hope will become members as soon as possible , but it occurs to me to say this to Mr Andria : ' Mr Andria , we are correcting the balances of European countries , but why can you not succeed in finding a system that allows pensioners to correct their own balances of payments ? '

- ( NL ) On Tuesday , an extensive debate was held on the possible accession of twelve new Member States .
The economies of most of those states are weak in comparison with those of the current Member States .
It is not to be expected that these new Member States will swiftly change over to the euro as their own legal currency .
In those states , the euro can at best acquire the position of a second currency , additional to the national currency and involved in an ever-fluctuating exchange rate battle .
In those countries , the euro will at best be the currency for the rich and foreigners and have a role similar to that of the American dollar in many countries .
The result of the enlargement will therefore be that the number of Member States which are eligible for financial support for their balance of payments will rise sharply .
I am therefore not in favour of the simultaneous cut in the maximum level of loans to be allocated , from EUR 16 billion to EUR 12 billion .
The Commission has still not made a concrete proposal for the way in which the new Member States can participate .
I do , however , agree that responsibility for the management of the loaning mechanism should be transferred from the European Central Bank to the European Commission .
A responsible body is needed which can operate at a political level , and the bank is not that body .
Lannoye Report ( A5-0217 / 2001 )
Mr President , after the approval of Mr Lannoye ' s report , which I have voted for with pleasure , my breakfast will never by the same .
At last we - I - finally have a European breakfast , a real European breakfast , because the sugar will be more European , there will be European honey , there will be European fruit juice , there will be European milk and , finally , the jam will taste European .
We could never have a sweeter Europe without this directive , presented by Mr Lannoye and voted for by me ?
Thank you , Mr Lannoye , and thank you Europe !
Conference on climate change ( RC B5-0539 / 2001 )
Meijer ( GUE / NGL ) , in writing .
( NL ) The follow-up conference on climate change in Bonn produced two extremes .
On the one hand , those who say that the result obtained there was the best achievable under the present circumstances , are correct .
On the other hand , the result is worse than the worst-case scenario that was feared at the previous conference in The Hague in November 2000 .
That conference was dominated by the fear that , for the sake of a worldwide agreement , concessions would be made to the US .
Among the EU Member States , the question was about the choice between two possibilities .
One was to stand firm in order to maintain the reductions agreed in Kyoto .
The other was to search for what might be just acceptable to the Americans , and to accept the required moderation as inevitable .
As an observer at this conference , I took the side of the steadfast German and French Green Environment Ministers in the debate at the plenary session on 29 November .
Since the refusal of the new American President to sign any agreement , the resistance against what was then feasible seems to have fallen by the wayside .
In order to keep Japan and Australia on board , more has now been paid than was demanded by America last year .
Bush is the winner .
In ten years ' time , this inadequate agreement will be deemed a disgrace .
. ( FR ) In the last few years , the news has highlighted food scandals and consumers are rightly demanding to be very well informed about the products that they buy .
The information given to consumers must be as clear as possible and as legible as possible , while avoiding increasing the number of categories .
Therefore , for fruit juices , the sales name should not lead to any confusion .
It is therefore essential to indicate to consumers the difference between a fresh fruit juice and a fruit juice made from concentrate .
These two different names will enable people buying them to choose a product with full knowledge of the facts .
In the same way , some fruit juices are produced by mixing fresh fruit juice and juice made from concentrate .
Just marking it as ' fresh fruit juice ' would be deceiving consumers .
It is important that in this case labels should have an additional note indicating that the final product is also made from concentrate .
The name ' made with concentrate ' or ' partially made with concentrate ' should then feature directly under the name , in sufficiently large type to ensure that consumers are informed .
This measure also applies to nectars made from concentrate .
These decisions are aimed at informing consumers as clearly as possible , but also at not penalising producers .
The production processes for these two categories of products have technical , financial and organoleptic differences .
The production of fresh fruit juices requires high quality treatment of products , particularly during the pressing and pasteurisation phases , while the production of fruit juices from concentrate does not involve the same requirements .
Cederschiöld Report ( A5-0284 / 2001 )
. - ( FR ) Four years ago now , I spoke in this House on the vertical directive on honey , for which Mr Lannoye was also the rapporteur .
One of my main concerns in this case was , at the time , labelling .
I had tried to demonstrate that the label on a pot of honey should above all inform consumers about the origin and quality of that honey , in order to prevent honey imported from who knows where containing who knows what pollen from being confused with quality honey produced by our beekeepers .
Today , once again , we are talking about the quality of honey .
My aim is to draw your attention to the Commission ' s proposal concerning the possibility of filtering the honey in order to remove the pollen from it , which I strongly condemn .
Pollen is the only indicator of the origin of honey .
Fortunately , the amendments proposed by our rapporteur prevent consumers from being misled , as they would no longer be able to know the origin of the honey and its exact composition if it were filtered to remove the pollen .
Without these amendments , there would therefore no longer be any guarantee of the quality of honey , and consumers would no longer be able to distinguish between quality honeys from their region as opposed to industrial honeys from abroad , which have been subjected to the filtering technique for a long time .
Moreover , honey could , according to the directive , contain 20 % pollen ' A ' and be 80 % from 8 types of pollen .
On the label it would only say ' Honey from pollen A ' as the English version of the directive propose , the term ' mainly ' to describe the composition and the presence of pollens in honey .
This word ' mainly ' indicates a majority , but not necessarily a majority of more than 50 % .
( N.B. the German translation ' überwiegend ' and the French ' essentiellement ' reflect that majority of more than 50 % ) .
It then becomes possible to mix different sorts of nectar , without more than 50 % of a nectar being present .
One could imagine a honey with 20 % nectar A and the remaining 80 % being made up of 8 different varieties of nectar .
( Speech cut short pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
After more than five years in the pipeline , we have finally voted today on the proposal for a Council directive relating to fruit jams , jellies , marmalades and sweetened chestnut purée .
I am delighted that the Parliament has left the Council 's exemption on biscuits intact , which means that British favourites , such as the jammy dodger , will not fall within the scope of the directive .
The jammy dodger is a fine British institution and many in the UK had feared that the directive would result in the outlawing of this biscuit .
It is good to see that not all of Britain 's traditions and institutions are under threat from Brussels .
I abstained on the joint resolution on the Bonn conference on climate change .
It presents a much too enthusiastic assessment of the agreement negotiated .
It is difficult to believe that this agreement ' gives new impetus ' to Kyoto , constitutes an ' essential instrument ' for a ' world strategy against global warming ' and represents ' an extremely positive message for all citizens who are concerned about globalisation ' .
It should in fact sound the alarm bell : nine years after Rio , no real measures have been put in place and the ambitions displayed by the Member States have been strangely diluted .
The Bonn agreement includes positive points , such as the refusal to present nuclear energy as ' clean energy ' .
But it marks a new climb down in the face of supporters of the ' let the market decide ' approach , which can only concern and not reassure ' citizens who are concerned about globalisation ' .
The joint resolution is still quite ambiguous on this essential issue .
Paragraph 9 ' regrets ' the space given in Bonn to ' coal wells ' and ' flexible systems ' .
But paragraph 6 proposes that the 2003 conference on the climate should have these ' systems ' as a theme ( the international system of exchange of emission rights ) rather than the essential public policies that are required to fight against climate chaos .
The simple fact that an agreement was reached in Bonn with Japan , Australia , Canada and Russia should not hide how far the content of that agreement is from responding to the urgency of the challenges .
Mr President , I am sorry I am having to speak so often , but I have heard that anti-Fatuzzo amendments to the Rules of Procedure have been tabled , intended to restrict explanations of vote at each voting time to three , so I am forced to take the opportunities I still have left for explanations in these last few days .
Now , I have voted for this Cederschiöld report because one of the worst dangers threatening us is computer crime .
However , I wonder why we do not pay consultants , the computer criminals , to draw the poison from the secrets of computer crime so that we could better combat this ugly habit which too many people in Europe have .
Bösch Report ( A5-0280 / 2001 )
Mr President , I am entirely in favour of the activities of the European Ombudsman and what he has been doing over the past few years , as set out in this report .
The truth is that many European citizens do not know their rights , do not know what they can do on the basis of European directives and , above all , think that European directives and regulations are not European .
They are convinced they are Italian laws , and I do not think that is a good thing .
I therefore propose to the European Ombudsman to insist , and this Parliament to accept my request , that European directives and regulations are called ' European laws ' when incorporated into national legislation .
Almeida Garrett Report ( A5-0240 / 2001 )
Perry Report ( A5-0245 / 2001 )
Dehousse ( PSE ) , in writing .
( FR ) Mr Perry ' s report marks the happy and constructive end to 15 months of calm and continuous work by the European Parliament .
It was on 11 April 2000 that the European Ombudsman , Mr Jacob Söderman , charged Parliament with the innovative project of a code of good administrative conduct applying to all the institutions and bodies of the European Community .
It is this code that has been approved this morning .
In order to achieve this result , with the practically unanimous assent of the European Parliament , several obstacles have had to be overcome .
First of all , like most legislative assemblies , we had to prevent a conflict of responsibilities between our different committees as , depending on the approach , four of them could be declared to be responsible for the whole of the proposal .
We succeeded in overcoming this risk .
Next we needed to find a sound and undisputed legal basis for adopting the code .
This is what the Legal Committee applied itself to doing , beyond the traditional disputes and opposition between the groups , and the more discrete but no less acute disputes between nationalities .
I am delighted to have been able to contribute to it through an opinion that was very open to the expression of this large constructive majority .
Today the European Parliament wished to both strengthen and simplify the rights of European citizens with regard to the Community ' s administrative actions .
It has managed to do so as the code adopted contains significant new elements , the importance of which we will gradually discover .
Simplification , however , is just as important as it prevents an endless breakdown of all citizens ' rights , rights which would actually lose their importance if they differed in every case .
I am happy to have been able to contribute through my vote in favour to this significant advance for European citizenship .
Mr President , I had a dream about Mr Söderman !
Yes , it was actually him !
We were having dinner , but it was not Mr Söderman as he is today , it was a young Mr Söderman , very young .
We were friends and we were chatting and he said to me : ' My dream , Mr Fatuzzo , is one day , when I am grown up , to become the European Ombudsman , because I want to be able to check up on what the European institutions do and , if there is any bureaucrat who is out of order , I want to be able to find that out and take action so that all the citizens of Europe have the chance to benefit from European laws ' .
Well , Mr President , at last the dream that Mr Söderman had in my dream has actually come true with the approval of this directive .
Camisón Asensio Report ( A5-0236 / 2001 )
. ( FR ) Although the text talks about ' deepening of democracy ' and mentions ' emphasis on administrative openness and transparency ' and despite its very aim which is to give the Ombudsman greater access to official documents , its whole spirit is marked by a concern to preserve the ' professional secrecy ' of the information to which the Ombudsman may have access .
Rather than making the institutions and their operation more transparent , the function of the Ombudsman only serves to conceal the fact they are in no way transparent for the overwhelming majority of the population .
As a result , we did not vote in favour of the report .
And although we did not vote against it either , this is solely because the official French authorities are rising up against slightly more flexible access - solely for the Ombudsman ! - to ' classified documents ' , in the name of the Europe of defence and are calling for the report to be rejected .
We reaffirm our opposition both to commercial and industrial secrecy and to the so-called State secrets , which are not so much aimed at protecting the State against a third country as at concealing the actions , including the most disgraceful actions , of the State institutions from their own populations .
In today ' s vote , I gave my support to a crucial strengthening of the European Ombudsman ' s position .
The proposal is aimed at amending Article 3 of the Ombudsman ' s statute so that the Ombudsman also has access to classified documents within the EU .
It is also proposed that all officials of the EU should be instructed to give full evidence in accordance with the truth and that their duty of loyalty towards their employer should cease .
Officials are thus obliged to defend the truth and their fellow citizens rather than to protect their own institutions .
This is a crucial improvement in terms of transparency and democratic control in the EU .
Mr President , on page 8 of Mr Camisón Asensio ' s report , he says : ' individual citizens are entitled to demand an effective and prompt response to any infringements of their rights or any omissions and delays in this respect ' .
That is an excellent thing .
The Pensioners Party approves , and I personally have approved this report but I wonder when will we succeed in achieving what I have read in this report , and what is right , in Europe in terms of our fifteen Member States paying pensions ?
There are quite a few where pensions are paid late , even quite a few years late , sometimes decades .
We must also commit ourselves , as Europe , to take action to prevent these delays happening any longer .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.22 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Zimbabwe
We will start with the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-0549 / 2001 ) by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0554 / 2001 ) by the Members Mr Cox , Mr Mulder and Mr Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0571 / 2001 ) by the Members Mrs Lucas and Mrs Maes , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0581 / 2001 ) by Mr Andrews , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the worsening of the situation in Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0582 / 2001 ) by the Members Mr Van Orden and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0583 / 2001 ) by the Members Mr Bertinotti and Mr Herman Schmid , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0592 / 2001 ) by the Members Mrs Kinnock and Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe .
Mr President , it is truly unbelievable that the once so prosperous Zimbabwe , potentially Southern Africa ' s breadbasket , has made such a rapid decline into economic and political chaos .
Behind the guise of ' land reforms ' the so-called ' veterans ' loot and occupy white-owned farms at will .
These bandits shrink from no form of violence .
The police stand by laughing at the brutal scenes of intimidation and even murder of honest citizens .
Thousands , mostly black agricultural labourers , are also robbed of their jobs and driven from their houses .
Despite the fact that the judiciary has branded these activities as illegal , the pillaging goes on undeterred .
In addition , the campaign of intimidation has now also turned against the judiciary itself .
Various independent senior judges have resigned as a result .
The ban on the publication of ' incorrect ' news capable of causing panic and despair , is used with increasing frequency to muzzle the free press .
Opposition leader , Mr Morgan Tsvangirai , was indicted earlier this year for infringing the same law .
I should like to take this opportunity to second the proposal of Mr Van Orden to put forward this man ' s name for the award of the Sakharov Prize .
The orchestrator of this state terrorism is the 77-year-old dictator Robert Mugabe .
He justifies his crimes with an appeal to a renewed liberation struggle , a fight against ' evil capitalism ' and ' evil whites ' .
His Vice-President , Mr Joseph Msika , takes things even one step further .
He recently declared that whites are not human beings .
No comment .
It is becoming clear that Mugabe ' s excesses are causing him to lose all credibility as a national and regional leader .
Still , the isolationist President still has his own friends here and there .
At the Libyan festival of revolution last weekend , Mr Mugabe sat next to Colonel Khadaffi as the principal guest .
A few days before , his host , Mr Ghaddafi , had given him an oil loan of USD 360 million and a gift of USD one million for his election fund .
This crystal-clear joint resolution asks the Council and the Commission to take concrete steps against the criminal policy of the Mugabe regime .
No Member State should be allowed to shirk this .
Mr President , perhaps there are others in this House who , like me , paid regular visits to Zimbabwe in the early 1980s and were able to discover at that time the kind of country it was .
It was a land full of hope , the civil war was over and people wanted to embark on a new future .
The oppositions between white and black would cease to exist .
If we look at what has come of these plans twenty years on , we see chaos , poverty , possibly famine in prospect , no press freedom and certainly no democracy .
Of course , Europe cannot stand idly by , just as it could not in the past .
I think , however , that Europe , in particular , must encourage Africa to condemn Mr Mugabe , because if we are not careful that situation may spread to other countries in the region .
What are our options according to my group ?
In the first place , we have to suspend aid .
Food aid will be a different matter .
If the reports are correct , Zimbabwe ' s self-sufficiency may already be under serious threat , and this will certainly be the case in future .
If that happens , food aid will have to be given , but of course it must not be distributed via the government bodies , since we know what will happen to it in that case .
It must be distributed by independent organisations .
We should also like an investigation to be carried out into what kind of sanctions can be used against Mr Mugabe and his clan personally . Can we take steps against possessions that they have in Europe , such as the freezing of bank accounts , etc ?
Finally , I should like the Commission to investigate whether the rumour is true that people from Zimbabwe enabled to study at European schools and universities , are mainly selected from the circles of Mugabe and his henchmen .
Is that correct and does the Commission intend to do anything about it ?
Mr President , Zimbabwe is a country that , some years ago , was a source of so much hope that it was felt that Africa and the post-apartheid regime in South Africa should look to Zimbabwe as the country that had succeeded .
The wretched fact is , of course , that Mr Mugabe has extended his term of power to an unreasonable length of time and has forgotten to settle the problem of land reform himself .
The way in which he is now tackling it beggars all belief and is bringing his country to the brink of collapse .
I am therefore very disappointed that Zimbabwe is still , despite the misery befalling the country , involved in the war in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
I am deeply disappointed that the land occupations that this country is subject to are throwing the whole economic system out of balance and that a country that is actually suitable for food production is now itself going hungry .
Much of the hope awakened by Zimbabwe has meanwhile been dashed .
Consequently I am disappointed by the attitude of the European Union , which is unable to adopt a coherent stand in respect of Zimbabwe and to take the necessary measures on Zimbabwe that are required to consign the government of Mr Mugabe to the past , and to give a chance to the hope for a new age .
Mr President , Parliament today will vote on its fifth resolution on Zimbabwe in the last 18 months .
If the Council and the Commission did not feel moved to act before , then it is certainly time to act now , before the Mugabe regime destroys all hope for what is potentially one of the most prosperous countries in Africa .
The breakdown in the rule of law , the terrible human rights abuses inflicted on all sections of the population in Zimbabwe and the catastrophic economic situation have all been well documented and have intensified .
The political opposition to Mugabe 's regime has been in the frontline of attacks from Zanu-PF militants .
The opposition press has been bombed and critical journalists have been routinely attacked .
Opposition politicians in the movement for democratic change and their supporters have been the particular targets of harassment , violent intimidation , arbitrary imprisonment and murder .
In the last few weeks , many MPs and party officials have narrowly escaped death after violent attacks .
This is not some family squabble between Britain and Zimbabwe .
Mugabe 's regime is a destabilising factor in central Africa and his human rights record is of international concern .
The economic collapse in Zimbabwe is pulling down neighbouring countries .
In the last two days , senior black opposition activists visiting this Parliament have insisted that the crisis is nothing to do with land , but about Mugabe 's desire to hold on to power .
He faces defeat in the presidential election next year , but is trying to head this off with a savage campaign of brutal intimidation against his political opponents .
We must recognise that democratic norms , protection under the law and basic human rights have been abandoned in Zimbabwe for all elements of the population .
It takes enormous courage to stand up for democracy , liberty and freedom of speech in such circumstances .
Morgan Tsvangirai , as the leader of the opposition MDC since 1999 , personifies this courageous stance and the struggle for genuine freedom in Zimbabwe and deserves international recognition for his stance .
I had rather hoped that we would have senior Council representatives here this afternoon .
This resolution is aimed at the Council in particular because there are a number of high-level meetings taking place in the next few weeks .
Can I have an assurance that today the secretariat will ensure that our resolution is passed to the Presidency , so that it can brought up at the informal meeting of ministers at Genval near Brussels this weekend and formally put on the agenda of the General Affairs Council on 8 October ?
Mr President , after having plundered Zimbabwe during a century of colonial domination , after having exploited its working classes and despoiled its farmers of land , the United Kingdom has left a legacy of a situation in which the best land still belongs to a few thousand rich white farmers .
The major powers did not find fault with the dictatorial nature and the corruption of the regime in Zimbabwe until its dictator , Mr Mugabe , started , in order to preserve his power , to make a few demagogical gestures calling into question the privileges of the white farmers .
France , which is less associated with this category of privileged people , is meanwhile continuing to unscrupulously support the dictatorship .
The feigned indignation of all those who , here , are protesting against the violence of Mugabe ' s regime , seems , in these circumstances , to be above all a hypocritical way of defending a handful of privileged people against the right to live of millions of farmers in that country .
Even though some occupations of land by groups of poor farmers are violent , that only represents a small fraction of the violence that was imposed on them in order to despoil them .
For our part , we express our protest against Mugabe ' s regime , both against its dictatorial nature and its corruption , but also because that dictatorship continues to protect revolting social inequalities and the privileges of a limited section of society to which his clique and the rich white farmers belong .
We do not , however , associate ourselves with this joint resolution , of which we reject both the letter and the spirit .
It is up to the population of the country to settle its accounts with Mugabe and his dictatorship .
It is not up to those in collusion with the privileged minority and those who conducted or supported colonial violence to give morality lessons to that country .
We would also like to express our solidarity with the working population of Zimbabwe and our support for their right to take possession of all the land , without any repurchase or compensation .
Mr President , I must say to the last speaker that , as somebody British , I can confirm that my ancestors had absolutely nothing to do with the oppression or repression of the people of Zimbabwe .
I would like to make it clear that I and my family are in no way guilty of colluding with anything that took place in colonial days .
It is very important for us to recognise that this resolution is being debated here today at a very important time .
It is an opportunity for President Mugabe to make the decision once and for all to step back from the brink , as Mr Van Orden has clearly said .
In addition to the negotiations , which are taking place as we speak in Abuja between foreign ministers of the Commonwealth , there are a number of European Union initiatives including the intended visit to the southern African countries by the Belgian Foreign Minister , representing the Presidency and Mr Solana , the high representative .
There are a number of other things going on as well .
Very importantly , in about three weeks , the preparatory team will be going out to prepare for the European Union 's involvement - hopefully - in the March presidential elections .
That makes it extremely important .
But if it turns out that all those initiatives fail and he still turns his back on the willingness of the international community to have dialogue with him , then it will be time to take stock of what is happening .
I would say to Mrs Maes in particular that one of the reasons the Council and the Commission have not wanted to take urgent action , as some in this Parliament would perhaps have wanted , is the danger that what Mugabe wants is an excuse to call a state of emergency in Zimbabwe so he can cancel the election , stop the democratic process and stifle the official opposition as well as any opposition from the press and media .
We need to understand the potential impact of anything that the European Union , or indeed the Commonwealth , does in order to tackle what is happening in Zimbabwe .
The defining moment will be on 8 October when the next General Affairs Council is due to take place .
If no progress has been made by this time , if the dialogue has failed , if we say this is a useless procedure , then at this point it is essential that we adopt so-called smart sanctions .
We should restrict visas to all Mugabe 's associates and his government and identify those individuals with foreign bank accounts and freeze their assets .
Those are smart sanctions that will not hurt the poor people of Zimbabwe but would certainly hurt those Zimbabweans who very much like coming to London to shop in Harrods or visit their children who are in British public schools .
Those are the kind of important things that the European Union can do .
Similarly we will have to look at the possibility of the suspension of development aid because that is how the Cotonou Agreement would suggest that we should proceed .
At that time , we would have to express Parliament 's view , as we say now , that insufficient progress has been made on land seizures , on political violence , on all of these things that others have raised .
Finally , I support the words of Morgan Tsvangirai , the leader of the Opposition Party , who this morning on the BBC was very tough on Mugabe and I will quote what he said and finish with this : ' President Mugabe has clearly violated all the tenets of the Commonwealth and all other international organisations and should now be isolated from the international community . '
We should heed the words of the leader of the opposition in Zimbabwe .
Mr President , in one minute you can say very little but I concur with what Mr van Orden , Mrs Kinnock and many of the other speakers have said .
I was in what was then Rhodesia in the 1960s and there was a great deal of injustice in that country at that time .
We had such great hopes for President Mugabe .
We thought we had in him a liberal , serious , intelligent leader .
Unfortunately , as we see the developing chaos and threats of famine and the destruction of the economy , we can but mourn the fact that he did not fulfil the hopes we had of him .
I agree that the smart sanctions are the way to go , because already the ordinary people of Zimbabwe are suffering grievously , as they watch their country disintegrate into chaos .
I urge all colleagues to support this resolution .
Mr President , there are 4 500 farmers of British , Dutch , German and Greek origin who own 8.3 million hectares of land in Zimbabwe .
Nine white farmers and 360 black farm workers have been killed in the chaos over the last few months .
Thousands of black farmers have lost their jobs and their homes and the farms are unworkable .
Zimbabwe depends on the success of agriculture and the contribution of these farmers is vital to sustain its economy .
There is money available from the United Kingdom government under the Lancaster House Agreement and there is a willingness among the white farmers to give up 80 % of their land to settle the black families .
Mugabe must accept such a solution .
In 1970 , Tanzania nationalised sisal farms , businesses and real estate , killing its private sector .
The same happened in Uganda in 1972 , when the Asians were expelled , and those two countries ' economies have been bankrupt ever since .
I sympathise with the farmers and farm workers of Zimbabwe , as my family was a victim of similar confiscation and nationalisation .
My family has lived in Tanzania for 166 years , much longer than many white farmers in Zimbabwe .
We bought land from Deutsch-Ostafrika in 1876 and I still have a title deed .
We lost land and property through nationalisation without compensation and I know what that means .
I share the grief of the silent black majority in Zimbabwe , who continue to live in poverty .
The poorest in Zimbabwe do not want to shoot , kill , loot and burn crops .
They are hungry and unemployed .
They need food , education , health , employment and shelter .
It was the vision and quality like Nelson Mandela that at last set an example for Africa that reconciliation , cooperation , democracy and respect for all people , irrespective of their colour , is the only way to govern a developing country the only way to help the poorest to be free of poverty and disease .
President Mugabe must follow Mr Mandela and accept reconciliation and democracy , allow the white farmers to thrive and continue farming and accept that Zimbabwe belongs to the people of Zimbabwe and nobody has the right to deprive them of a decent life based on peace and democracy .
Mr President , the Council , Commission and Parliament are well aware of the situation in Zimbabwe .
No one can claim they knew nothing about it .
In taking a passive line , the Council of Ministers is guilty of aiding and abetting .
It is outrageous that , yet again , the Council 's ' Africa ' working party failed to pass a resolution at its meeting in Brussels yesterday .
Obviously the presidency is only paying lip service to Africa , despite advertising it as a priority .
Unfortunately , France is the ringleader of a group of Member States that obviously has a different agenda .
How else are we to explain the fact that , while everyone else is either stopping or drastically cutting back on funding , France is increasing it .
I call on the Member States of the European Union who want to take a more active line to step up their collaboration , even before the Treaty of Nice takes effect , and to remind France and the rest that they are surely backing the wrong horse in taking this de facto passive line .
I think , my dear Mrs Kinnock , that Mr Mugabe will have no need of our resolutions or demands if he decides to impose a state of emergency .
He will do so anyway because , even if the elections are held , he will lose .
Mr President , I was part of the observer mission that went to Zimbabwe , as was Mr Gahler and others here .
I want to explode the myth that this is about land and land ownership : This is about politics .
This is about the fact that Mugabe knows that if they had the same votes that were cast last year in the general election , he would lose a presidential election .
He is driving the farmers and their farm workers off the land , out of the constituencies , so that they cannot register to vote .
It is plainly about politics .
It is not about colonial powers . It is about politics .
Those farms are well run , they provide churches , schools and hospital treatment in those areas .
The communities come together .
70 % of Zimbabwe is about agriculture and the economy is being destroyed .
We need smart sanctions to be taken on President Mugabe .
He is not listening to placations .
We have got to act and we have got to act now .
As the Members who have just spoken have pointed out , Zimbabwe is clearly in the grip of a serious crisis , which could lead to economic collapse and political conflict in extreme social conditions , bordering on a humanitarian emergency .
Our analysis is the same as that which most of you have made : the sole objective of the Zimbabwean government is to stay in power , even if that means ending up destroying a country that not long ago was considered to be one of the soundest economies and democracies in Africa .
The Zimbabwean government , which could have reasonably avoided this crisis , is therefore clearly responsible for this dramatic descent into hell .
The European Union ' s political objective , as many of you have pointed out , is that presidential elections should be held . The Union ' s main objective is presidential elections in 2002 , in the best possible conditions to enable change , as we say in conventional language .
The Union ' s position , if that is the objective , should therefore be to seek a balance between , on the one hand , indicating our disagreement with the current development of the situation and , on the other hand , preventing it from serving as a pretext for declaring martial law , which would have the effect of delaying the elections that we want to take place .
Therefore , observing the presidential elections in 2002 is , in our view , the absolute priority for the Union .
With regard to what was said in your speeches on the implementation of Article 8 , that is political dialogue ( Article 8 of Cotonou ) , we approve the pursuit of political dialogue , while stressing , like you , that no substantial progress has been made in this dialogue in recent months .
A small hope remains , which is the forthcoming visit by the presidency to the countries involved in the Congolese crisis , an event that could perhaps lead to this dialogue being revived .
As far as the following stage is concerned , which is the implementation of Article 96 of Cotonou , which we call consultation and adoption of appropriate measures , again in conventional language , the Council will look at this issue at the beginning of October with , of course , our participation , and we will decide then whether or not we will take this step .
With regard to the impact of this situation on development cooperation , we hope to be able to maintain the programmes that the Community funds in Zimbabwe , particularly in the health and education sectors , given the humanitarian and social nature of these programmes , in order not to penalise the population , which is already being heavily affected by the economic crisis .
All this is taking place , as you have all said , in an extremely worrying economic and social context .
In Zimbabwe this year we see that a cereal shortage has already occurred and that should be manageable if it was only a question of the cereal shortage and its consequences for the population .
However , the serious instability prevailing in the country , the economic crisis and the societal conflicts that are taking place there are an important factor in a situation of food insecurity that we think , in these conditions , is in danger of becoming worse .
It is therefore the interaction between the food situation , the agricultural shortages , in this case of cereals , the economic context and the political context , which contains the germs of a crisis that is probably even more serious than that which we are currently experiencing , and which we should do everything we can to avoid .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Foot-and-mouth disease
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-0548 / 2001 ) by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the EDD Group , on foot-and-mouth disease ;
( B5-0553 / 2001 ) by Mr Martinez and others , on behalf of the TDI Group , on foot-and-mouth disease ;
( B5-0555 / 2001 ) by Mr Mulder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on foot-and-mouth disease ;
( B5-0563 / 2001 ) by Mr Goepel , Mr Sturdy and Mr Maat , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on foot-and-mouth disease ;
( B5-0573 / 2001 ) by Mrs Lucas and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on foot-and-mouth disease ;
( B5-0580 / 2001 ) by Mr Berlato and Mr Hyland , on behalf of the UEN Group , on foot-and-mouth disease ;
( B5-0584 / 2001 ) by Mr Jové Peres and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on foot-and-mouth disease ;
( B5-0593 / 2001 ) by Mr Garot and Mr Adam , on behalf of the PSE Group , on foot-and-mouth disease .
Mr President , the regions of Oene , Kootwijkerbroek , Mayenne , Cumbria and Northumberland have become notorious in Europe .
Regions where humans and animals have suffered from the foot-and-mouth epidemic .
However , the suffering was caused not only by the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease , but also by the means of combating the disease imposed by EU regulations , namely the slaughter of all animals on infected farms and in a buffer zone around them .
An approach based solely on the preservation of distant export markets .
Odd , if we realise that the European Union actually imports meat from vaccinated cattle from Argentina .
Much of the suffering of the last few months would have been unnecessary if the Commission had been prepared to accept preventive vaccination .
In France and since June also in the Netherlands the crisis has been averted .
Unfortunately , that is not yet the case in the United Kingdom .
There the suffering of farmers and animals continues unabated .
The figures make our heads spin .
Since 9 a.m. this morning , there have been 2 005 new cases .
Twenty recent new cases in Northumberland that for three months had seen no new infections .
In the United Kingdom , four million animals have been destroyed in connection with foot-and-mouth disease and a further one-and-a-half million because of welfare problems related to the crisis .
Let me be clear about this .
This is not a loss of production units .
This is the destruction of living creatures .
It surprises me that the British government is only now considering using vaccination .
The argument that they wish to retain the lucrative export markets no longer cuts any ice , now that winter is nearly upon us .
Under the present circumstances , the United Kingdom will have lost that market for a considerable time .
I sincerely hope that the British government will listen to Sir William Stewart of the British Association of Science who says that vaccination must play a part in combating foot-and-mouth disease and should have been used at a much earlier stage .
There is intensive contact with continental Europe through the many movements of people , animals , vehicles and lorries .
That makes the situation in the United Kingdom life-threatening for agriculture in Europe .
The present checks , including those at the Dutch border , are so minimal that they are asking for trouble .
I therefore call on the Council and the Commission to take adequate preventive steps to prevent the spread of foot-and-mouth disease in continental Europe , so that humans and animals are spared unnecessary suffering .
Finally , I appeal urgently to the Commission once again in the light of the unmanageable crisis in the United Kingdom to change the non-vaccination policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , in this outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease , there are technical areas of shadow , political certainties and strategic questions .
First of all regarding the areas of shadow , how , far from the known endemic sources - Turkey , Asia and Thrace in Europe - how has foot-and-mouth disease , and its virus , managed to reach Great Britain , an island ?
Perhaps by swimming ?
Why this dogmatic refusal of a vaccine that is nevertheless effective .
In 1950 , before the obligatory vaccination between 1961 and 1991 , France had up to 300 000 sources of infection per year , which disappeared with the obligatory vaccination .
Why , in the same country , have we had the foot-and-mouth virus and the prion for mad cow disease ?
So many questions that lead to political certainties , if not lessons .
In both cases , BSE and foot-and-mouth disease , the British authorities have reacted late and have been overwhelmed , because the ultra liberalism of the Thatcher years left only 220 vets compared with 8 000 in France .
Just as for a developing country , Australia , Canada and even the French army had to send vets to Great Britain .
A lack of vets and no epidemic monitoring , which is why the disease spread .
It was also ultra liberalism that led to abattoirs being closed and meant that , from Carlisle , Hadrian ' s Wall and Northumberland , sheep are taken to the south and the virus is spread .
The virus is spread across Great Britain and , following the removal of borders , it is also spread across France .
Freedom of movement is freedom of contamination .
The third certainty , demonstrated in an investigation report from the French Parliament in June 2001 : it was illegal purchases , at knock-down prices - less than 90 euros per sheep for the Muslim feast of Eid-el-Kabir - which led to the spread of the virus .
Along with these certainties , however , there are questions for the Commission ; and it is good that it should be Mr Lamy , the strategist , who is here .
First of all , does the compensation system in Great Britain not end up becoming a bonus for contamination ?
The impression was given that the beneficial compensation meant that people perhaps had an interest in having contaminated animals .
All the more so given that , collectively , four million animals were slaughtered , the majority of which were sheep , means that the surpluses will be drained .
And finally , does New Zealand , the leading world exporter , not have an interest in seeing its potential market share in Europe increase as animals are slaughtered ?
And my God , if Anglo-Saxons were able to come to an understanding on the Echelon Treaty , they can exchange favours .
For me , Great Britain , excessive individual compensation , for you , New Zealand , the possibility of more exports .
The Cairns group would be happy .
Doha would be a success .
It would be good if Mr Lamy could clarify this for us .
Mr President , no crisis in Europe , and especially in the Netherlands , has had such an impact on public opinion as the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease .
The great question is , and I do not know whether the Commission can answer it : what is the Commission ' s explanation for the continued outbreaks of foot-and-mouth in the United Kingdom ?
In my view , it is not only a matter for the authorities in Great Britain itself .
After all , every European taxpayer contributes to the solution of the crisis .
Has the Commission urged Britain for example to use ring vaccination ?
I should have thought that the example in the Netherlands was very successful , and why could it not be repeated in other European countries ?
Another question .
One of the reasons for the crisis is that meat was imported illegally into Europe .
Controls on our outer borders were inadequate .
My question to the Commission is : what has been done since on the outer borders ?
What has changed from , let us say , some six months ago ?
Why not implement a similar type of check as in the United States or in Australia , where there are strict controls on entry ?
I have not been able to find this anywhere in Europe .
A further question .
I believe that the large-scale slaughter of animals will no longer be acceptable to public opinion in the long run .
The development of marker vaccines might be one of the solutions .
The Commission has already done something about this , but will it do a little more to ensure that these marker vaccines and also the accompanying testing methods are made available as quickly as possible , so that we no longer have to slaughter so many animals ?
Finally I should like to know something about the costs .
The situation in Great Britain is special , since the whole question of rebate is taken into consideration , but how much does the Commission estimate that this has cost up to now ?
Mr President , the British countryside is at the moment in total crisis .
I have a document here in front of me stating that the British government admits that it was unable to meet the required deadlines for the slaughter of infected animals .
It goes on to say that the control of the disease , as my colleague there has said , has failed because we are now having new outbreaks in the centre of Britain , in the centre of the region where we thought we were rid of it .
We have failed to control it and we have also failed to provide the necessary border controls .
Last Sunday I drove from my farm in North Yorkshire to Strasbourg .
I was never questioned about whether I was carrying any meat and there were no border controls at all to check my vehicle .
There were no disinfection points .
There was a simple carpet in the middle of the road and that was all .
I say to Mr Lamy , who is the really important man here today , that we have a situation where England is the dustbin of Europe .
We are importing food from these countries .
We must look at that .
Finally , will he consider the possibility of a public inquiry into the way this matter has been handled ?
Mr President , I very much regret that this is the second time in six months that we are having to debate foot-and-mouth disease in this House .
The reason for our debate is , as the Joint Resolution says , that the measures taken by the UK government to control this disease have failed , that new outbreaks are appearing and that there is a very real risk of the disease spreading again to mainland Europe .
We need to ask ourselves why the UK government has failed and why in particular it consistently rejects the idea of ring vaccination in the face of mounting calls from those in rural communities who want to adopt it .
It is ever more clear that it is not small farmers ' livelihoods , it is not even the tourist industry and the wider rural economy that the UK has as its priority , but simply our meat exports and the desire to regain FMD-free export status again as soon as possible .
Yet even this dismal economic justification for culling on such a scale does not stand up .
According to the National Farmers ' Union the UK earns just GBP 630 million a year from meat and dairy exports .
Compare that with the estimated cost to the wider rural community of GBP 9 billion as a result of the foot-and-mouth epidemic .
I welcome the call in this resolution for a full cost-benefit analysis between the various disease control approaches so that we can compare the losses that have been suffered under the culling approach to those that would have been incurred under a vaccination strategy .
I feel sure that the results will demonstrate that the UK government ' s approach is not only inhumane , it is also uneconomical .
We are urging the Commission to revise the EU strategy on defending by all means FMD status and to recognise that the culling and destruction of healthy animals is both inhumane and ineffective .
Mr President , I represent the region in the north-east of England which was the scene of the original outbreak and has just recently been affected by further outbreaks .
I regret very much that we have been unable to agree a compromise text on this occasion .
The reason is simple .
Recital A accuses the UK government of failure to control the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease .
In truth , it is not an attack on the UK government but on all those who have battled very heroically against the disease since the end of February - the farmers themselves , the vets , the scientists , the civil servants , the police , the military , many different rural agencies which have all been involved .
In particular , the farmers in the Allendale Valley , the scene of the recent hotspot , believed that they had taken all the necessary measures to avoid the disease .
Failure to control implies that the outbreak should have already ended .
But the mover of the resolution did not explain when and by what means that might have been achieved .
No-one ever promised , or even surmised , that the outbreak would be over at this stage .
At its peak there were 40 to 50 cases a day .
Despite the recent outbreak in Allendale , the average is now two or three cases per day .
If this does not indicate a degree of control then we really have a very serious problem in front of us , something that none of us ever imagined .
It is important also to recall that from the very start the UK government has given full information to the other Member States and has followed the advice of the Standing Veterinary Committee .
In that respect , we can point to a considerable success for the mechanisms that we have operating within the European Union .
A word on vaccination .
I would suggest to Mr van Dam , the original speaker on this resolution , that perhaps he ought to apply for the job of chief scientist in the United Kingdom .
He certainly seems to bring to the debate on vaccination an authority and conviction which far exceeds that of the current holder of the office , Professor David King , who only this morning in a radio broadcast said we could not be certain that vaccination would have done any good .
In the Netherlands the animals were also slaughtered and there is quite a problem here in the suggestion that vaccination actually saves the animal 's life .
That does not necessarily follow - but I do not know when the job becomes vacant !
Mr President , Mr Adam calls the approach of the British government a great success .
But the great success of the tackling of foot-and-mouth disease by the British government is causing many farmers in continental Europe sleepless nights once again .
Is that a successful policy ?
Foot-and-mouth policy there is not only inadequate , because we do not use , for example , vaccination and ring vaccination but because the Council and members of Council are treating the threat from Great Britain extremely lightly .
After all , it is extremely simple to lay disinfectant mats and carry out standard soil checks in ports and airports in order to clamp down on the problem .
We emphatically appeal to the Commission and the Council on this point .
Mr President , in my country , financial subsidies to farmers are cut back drastically if they have made minor mistakes and have had foot-and-mouth disease .
At the same time , however , many Ministers have no reason to talk , because they are doing nothing to avert the danger of foot-and-mouth disease from Great Britain in border checks .
This is a very nasty business , which the Commission and Council must tackle .
Mr President , no one doubts the seriousness of the foot-and-mouth epidemic in the UK .
I believe it has been the worst epidemic of this disease that the world has seen .
Nobody can doubt the drastic measures that have had to be used to curtail it .
The two current hotspots show that this outbreak will be with us for many months .
We cannot , on the one hand , say that the containment is too drastic because of the slaughter policy and , on the other hand , that it is too slack because it has let the disease take hold .
We did not anticipate effectively the extraordinary scale of animal movements , particularly of sheep , in February 2000 and later .
The first of the three inquiries that have now been launched in the UK will need to look at that and perhaps also at the role of one form of CAP subsidy in encouraging some of these forms of animal movement .
We provided effective information for our Dutch , French and Irish neighbours and for them it worked .
We should study how their containment worked and why .
Vaccination , in my opinion , has to be one of the options that the inquiry can recommend if they so find .
Finally a word to Mr Sturdy , who called for a European public inquiry .
When we had one into BSE , he was not so enthusiastic .
But BSE was a new disease .
There was a real element of concealment in some of the factors that led to that disease and particularly in the European factor and the fact that we were still exporting infected meal to continental Europe for years after we banned it for ourselves .
That was a genuine European inquiry .
The epidemiology of this outbreak is not in doubt .
I believe that our friends should accept that the British have to get their own house in order and , if that means a public dimension to the inquiries , that case can be made in the UK .
It is not like what happened with BSE : we have done our duty by our neighbours .
We hope that they will now have the confidence in us to let us help ourselves and see all remedies properly examined so that this dreadful disease can be exterminated .
Mr President , neither BSE nor foot-and-mouth are British diseases ; they are a European problem .
With millions of animals being slaughtered and farms being crippled or wiped out , this is hardly the time for party political argument .
I well remember how Labour let fly at the Conservative government during the BSE crisis and now there is the temptation for the Conservatives to let fly at the Labour government , but even if governments are guilty of omission , what you are doing here is not exactly constructive .
We have submitted a regulation on feeding meat and bonemeal in certain cases - we are talking animal waste here .
Had we had it at the time , there would have been no BSE problem .
The same applies to foot-and-mouth .
The Commission needs to change its strategy .
Holland may have ring vaccinated successfully , but it was only by going against the mood in the EU and the Commission .
I do not want you to help , I want you to do something so that we end up with a different strategy which we can then also secure through our trade policy .
We must move away from this insane strategy of ' foot-and-mouth free ' or ' disease free ' and discuss this with our trading partners .
We need a regulation on feeding or destroying leftovers .
What the Council has done now , that is , just banning , is no help at all .
This rubbish has to go somewhere and we cannot dump it in landfills because then the problem of improper processing will keep recurring .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . The number of cases of foot-and-mouth is on the rise once again .
As you know , the foot-and-mouth virus is harmless to man but is highly infectious to all cloven-hoofed animals and results in huge financial losses .
With new outbreaks occurring , I again call on the Commission and the Council to favour vaccination rather than slaughter .
We must rethink how we fight zoonoses in Europe and today we have what I think is a very balanced resolution in order to do so .
Consistent preventive hygiene is only one side of the coin .
With people travelling the world for business and pleasure , foot-and-mouth disease is an ever-present threat and we must be far more consistent in applying controls at airports to prevent this epidemic from coming in and spreading .
I realise that both farmers and consumers are having difficulties with the ethical implications of the current vaccination policy .
We are talking fatal consequences here .
We must , at long last , move away from our non-vaccination policy .
We need marker vaccines .
We need a reasonable approach to ring vaccination and we need to make up our minds once and for all to show through our policy that science needs to make progress with prevention , that is , by formulating suitable vaccines .
To give a brief description of the current situation in the Union as a whole , no restrictions have been imposed in the Union as a result of foot-and-mouth disease , except in Great Britain , and that was on 25 June this year , thirty days after the slaughter and destruction of the last vaccinated animal in the Netherlands .
So in fourteen of the fifteen Member States of the Union , plus Northern Ireland , we have quite a favourable situation , which is the result of the implementation and effective application of measures to combat foot-and-mouth disease at Community level .
I shall now run the risk of offending Mrs Lucas by referring briefly to the international point of view , and from that point of view we sincerely hope that the measures which have been adopted by France , Ireland and the Netherlands will enable them to obtain the necessary status from the International Office of Epizootics , thus enabling third countries to lift the trade restrictions that are still in place .
However - and on this point I should like to reassure Mrs Lucas - since this is perhaps not the most important aspect , let us come back to the case of the United Kingdom , which is actually still giving cause for concern , since the two-thousandth case occurred on 3 September .
Although the situation in Great Britain has remained stable for almost three months , we are still worried about it because of the fact that cases are continuing to occur within or close to the areas that have been placed under restrictions .
Many Members have referred to the most recent cases , in the county of Northumberland , the place where the epidemic first appeared .
These cases are worrying , because they were confirmed three months after the disease had disappeared there .
Radical measures were taken : infected herds were slaughtered , as were neighbouring herds and contact herds , and although the occurrence of this admittedly limited but nonetheless worrying number of cases was to be expected , after the disease peaked at the beginning of April , the period over which a small number of cases have continued to occur is excessively long , and the Community has asked the British authorities to step up their eradication measures .
Time is pressing , because things will become more difficult in autumn and winter , not only because of weather conditions , but also because it is customary for animals to be moved during that period .
The present development of the disease is clearly passing through a critical phase .
This is not the time to relax our controls .
As has already been said , and as several of you have emphasised , this is the time of year when we see herds being moved around and handled in various ways , and in our opinion it is therefore necessary to reduce animal movements to the absolute minimum .
The Commission has made this known to the people involved .
Staying with the United Kingdom , the complex structure of beef and dairy farming , the absence of any clinical signs in sheep , and the fact that the spread of the disease within a herd or flock is slow , are all factors which complicate the problems and which make it necessary for us to have recourse to laboratory testing , and the capacity available for such testing is now sufficient .
So what is the Commission ' s opinion ?
We would not say that the situation is satisfactory , because in this specific case it is not , but the risk of the disease spreading to other Member States is now much less than it was in March and April , when the disease was at its peak , because all the restrictions that were imposed , in particular on the movement of animals and untreated products from Great Britain , are still in place .
We are carrying out regular on-the-spot inspections , the latest of which goes back to the end of August , in order to satisfy ourselves that the British authorities are taking adequate measures .
Other regions of Great Britain , in some cases quite large regions , have not been affected by the disease , and the Veterinary Committee must continue to consider the matter so that when the time comes , and circumstances make it possible , trade with those regions can be envisaged subject to stringent conditions .
On this point we shall be extremely careful , because the experience of Northumberland reminds us that the risk is still present , even in those areas where it seemed that the disease had been brought under control .
To come back for a moment to the question of third countries , if Mrs Lucas will allow me , a certain number of countries have continued to take discriminatory measures against European products , which go beyond the international standards currently in force , and we are working on this matter together with a certain number of our trading partners .
Many third countries have gradually lifted the somewhat extensive prohibitions that they had initially imposed .
Others , by contrast , such as the United States , Canada and even some of the countries which have applied for accession , have been slow to lift the restrictions , which they still maintain , wrongly , even today .
We shall continue to work on this question , taking as our basis the WTO Agreement on Health and Plant Health .
Speaking more generally , it should be emphasised , first of all , that this crisis has had major repercussions on the Community budget .
We decided to grant an overall budget of EUR 400 million to the four Member States affected this year , and the latest forecasts show that the Union ' s anticipated financial contribution will be slightly more than EUR 1.5 billion .
We shall take the necessary measures from the point of view of budgetary procedure .
There is no doubt that this is an exceptional situation .
We do not know how to predict the budget for epizootics on this scale , and we shall therefore have to make adjustments as we go along .
That is just one aspect of this issue .
A second aspect , of course , is the damage done to the image of our livestock farming industry , following the slaughter of almost four million animals .
A third aspect is the fact that the problem , as has already been mentioned , is also present outside the European Union , and we are seriously worried following the recent appearance of a case in Turkish Thrace .
Finally , we at the Commission hope that we shall be able to learn some lessons for future use , with regard to the handling of this sort of crisis , so that we can improve our current regulatory and legislative system , for example by making provision for a certain number of additional requirements for intra-Community trade in small ruminants , such as restricting the number of stopping points , which would probably be the first step .
We are also working on a proposal regarding the identification and registration of sheep and goats , and on another proposal regarding the importing of animal products by travellers .
We are also working towards adjusting our inspection procedures when this type of epizootic appears .
I believe that we now have sufficient experience , but we must not delude ourselves .
The reinforcement of our legislation and of our systems , however necessary it may be , will not , on its own , be enough to prevent the reappearance of such an epidemic .
We must also improve the operation of the veterinary services within Member States , and there is not doubt that we must also change our farming practices .
My last point is one that several Members have drawn attention to during our discussions , and that is the question of vaccination .
As far as the use of so-called ' ring ' vaccination around infected holdings is concerned , I should like to remind those of you who have sought to implicate the Commission by asking why the Commission did not order compulsory vaccination as a matter of urgency , that in our present legal system , which whatever any one says is characterised by certain forms of subsidiarity , vaccination is the responsibility of the national authorities .
There is therefore a procedure which allows any Member State that wants to to use vaccination , and that is how it is done .
The system exists and it is at the disposal of the Member States , but it is not the Commission ' s responsibility .
I believe that I have thus given a clear answer to the questions raised by Mr van Dam , Mr Martinez , Mr Mulder and Mrs Lucas .

The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
Mr President , the abolition , in October 2000 , of the main opposition party in Mauritania , the Union of Democratic Forces-New Era , and the arrest and subsequent sentencing , to five years ' imprisonment after a summary judgment , of the leader of the Popular Front , Chbih Melainine , calls into question the fundamental principles of democracy laid down in the constitution of Mauritania .
What , then , is that constitution worth ?
There is no freedom of association for political parties .
The Green Party , which submitted its articles of association several months ago , has still not been recognised and has not even received an acknowledgement that its application has been received .
These anti-democratic manoeuvres are taking place on the eve of the legislative and local elections planned for October .
We have no guarantee regarding these elections , because there is no independent electoral commission .
In our opinion , the release of Chbih Melainine is a prerequisite for holding the elections in October , as is the reconstitution of all the opposition parties .
It is in order to allow all these political actors to participate that we are asking that the elections should be postponed .
In order to re-establish democracy and guarantee the organisation of free and fair elections in Mauritania , we are asking the Council and the Commission to enter into consultations with the government , in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
Mauritania is preparing thoroughly for the elections in October .
Political opponents of the regime are being neutralised .
People are being arbitrarily arrested , excessive force is being used against peaceful demonstrators and the press now serves only as the president ' s lackey .
The judiciary is again entirely at the disposal of those with political power .
Their Honours recently sentenced the principal political opponents of the president in a show trial to no less than five years in prison .
The imprisoned politicians were kept incommunicado for a long period and then taken to prison 800 km from the capital , so that they can receive almost no visitors .
It appears that no one can do anything to stop this .
Independent human rights organisations can scarcely operate in the country .
While Western countries are obliged to apologise in Durban for the slave trade conducted by their distant ancestors , slavery is still common practice in Mauritania .
In the caste system , people become serfs at birth .
They receive no education ; no income from forced labour and are not allowed to marry without the permission of their master .
According to an estimate by the American State Department a few years ago , there are still some 90 000 slaves in Mauritania .
As recently as 1983 , this country was the last on earth to abolish slavery officially , but still does its utmost to keep the gruesome reality hidden from the outside world .
It is high time that the European Union opened the consultative procedure of Article 96 with Mauritania .
We cannot continue giving aid and maintaining intensive trade relations as if there were no problem .
We must prepare for pseudo-elections in a pseudo-democracy .
Mr President , Mauritania is a vast country and almost 90 % of its land is desert .
Water is a scarce resource and its 2.2 million people are poor and live in rural areas .
It depends on its exports of iron ore and fishing - just two things .
I was invited in May of this year to lead a small delegation of MEPs and visit Mauritania , which I did .
I spent a week with parliamentarians , all the ministers , President Taya , civil society and NGOs .
We travelled up and down the country - a week is a long time to be in Mauritania .
Mrs Sudre and Mrs Langenhagen came with me .
I was impressed by what President Taya has done over the years in a country as poor as this .
I am astonished - and I want to embarrass him and his government , which I shall do at the ACP Conference when their delegates come - that there is now this sad case of locking up the opposition .
There is no reason for it , there is no need .
He is quite strong , he is quite popular .
He has done well .
He can do well without locking up his opposition .
As far as slavery is concerned , it is actually banned in Islam and Mauritania is a Muslim country .
There are Moors , there are blacks and various mixtures of these two .
I saw their lifestyle .
I did not see any slaves , though that is not to say they are not there .
What I shall certainly do is embarrass the government of Mauritania at the ACP Conference to make sure this practice does not continue and the opposition is allowed to operate freely so that there is accountability of the ministers .
It is better for the president of the country and the people of the country .
Mr President , the situation in Mauritania is actually getting worse and worse .
We are talking about a country that falls within the ACP framework in relation to the European Union and which , furthermore , hopes to move on from its current observer status to becoming a full member of the Barcelona process .
We are obliged to remind the Mauritanian authorities that it is impossible for the European Union to envisage , for example , that country acquiring full member status in the Barcelona process if democracy does not become a reality , if human rights continue to be violated and , what is more , if the date is maintained for the municipal and legislative elections which , as things stand at the moment , will take place this October without any type of guarantee .
There is clearly little chance of dissolved parties and imprisoned opposition leaders being able to participate when , furthermore , they have nowhere to express themselves because the press is either overseen by the government or simply does not exist .
I shudder to think about the situation of that one Member of Parliament who does not belong to the government party in an assembly of 79 seats , but I imagine that if any opposition Member were elected in these elections - which will not happen - he would probably soon be sent from Parliament to jail .
I therefore think that the European Union must implement the provisions of Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
Mauritania lowers the already low average level of democracy and human rights in the Maghreb .
However , it is clearly just one more case on a continent such as Africa , where human rights are constantly violated .
Mauritania is a country where the permanent dictator , not the dictator of the moment , President Mauya Uld Sid 'Ahmed Taya , has just torn up all the rules which , with the mediation of the European Union , the opposition and the government had established for proper elections , elections furthermore which have been delayed indefinitely .
I believe that the Union must act decisively .
Togo
Mr President , two years ago , my first speech to this House condemned the situation in Togo .
Since then , although some good souls have assured us that everything is working out nicely , Togo is still living in a political wasteland and it has a long way to go before it escapes from it .
Democracy is still a fleeting ideal .
Civil rights and human rights are constantly flouted , and I believe that the passive attitude of the governments of European Union Member States does nothing to encourage things to change .
Parliament ' s regular condemnations are merely rhetorical and ineffective .
Most recently , the sum paid by the Commission to organise new elections - CFA francs 4 billion - was dismissed as insufficient by the government , which took advantage of the opportunity to postpone , yet again , the long-awaited legislative elections .
In a complete violation of his previous undertakings , President Eyadema and his government are even thinking about amending the constitution so as to allow him stand for election again .
Finally , one of the opposition leaders , Mr Yawovi Agboyibo , was arrested and sentenced , a month ago , on trumped-up charges .
The truth of the matter is that he had denounced the terror tactics employed in areas where the opposition had a majority , tactics which took the form of rapes and other crimes , including the murder of opponents .
Mr Eyadema seems less than ever prepared to honour his obligations to his people and his obligations to the international community .
Here again , Parliament should firmly condemn his actions , demand that free elections be held on the planned dates , and ask the Council and the Commission to initiate consultations in accordance with Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
How do you stay in power for 34 years in Africa ?
Opposition parties are banned or it is made impossible for them to function .
Opponents who have or threaten to acquire support are put behind bars .
The press is completely manipulated and anyone openly criticising the president winds up in a cell if he is lucky and six feet under if he is less fortunate .
Mass demonstrations are mercilessly broken up .
The political class consists entirely of slavish servants of the president as a result of a system of rewards and punishments .
A ludicrous cult of personality is designed to give the Head of State a quasi-divine status .
The French President , Mr Chirac , has to be hoodwinked to such an extent that he condemns Amnesty International instead of the human rights violations in Togo .
The murdering of opponents of the regime goes unpunished .
This is still unfortunately the familiar pattern in many African countries and we do not really know how to deal with it .
Crude misuse of power hampers development and perpetuates poverty .
The European Union quite rightly suspended aid as long ago as 1993 , but the situation has not improved .
On the contrary , the opposition leader and human rights campaigner , Mr Agboyibo , was thrown into jail for six months , for allegedly insulting the Prime Minister .
In order to add force to his arguments his Excellency maintains a private army of 1 000 troops .
Togo is asking for financial support to hold parliamentary elections in October .
The question is whether or not we would then contribute to the organisation of a democratic farce , designed solely to give those in power a semblance of legitimacy .
President Eyadema has announced that he will keep to the constitution and step down in 2003 , but why should we believe someone who has lied for 34 years in order to stay in power ?
Mr President , Zimbabwe , Mauritania , Togo , it looks very much as if the democratisation process in Africa is in reverse .
Some leaders are indeed proving exceptionally creative in eliminating their political opponents and getting round the democratic rules of the game .
One of them is General Eyadema from Togo .
At the last elections in 1998 he did not hesitate to have the counting of votes stopped and himself again proclaimed president .
A period of bloody repression followed , in which , according to Amnesty , hundreds of people were killed .
An international committee confirmed those findings , but at the present moment , no one has yet been called to account or punished .
On the contrary , the repression is simply continuing .
The latest victim is opposition leader , Mr Agboyibo .
Last month in a show trial , he was sentenced to six months ' imprisonment for spreading false information .
I have met Yawovi Agboyibo several times personally in his home base .
I have developed a very great admiration for the way in which , at the constant risk of his own life , he continues to campaign for human rights and the restoration of democracy in his country .
This must be stopped in some way .
Maintaining the suspension of aid is one thing , but I believe that we must ask ourselves whether a country like Togo still belongs at conferences of the ACS and the European Union .
However , the problem is that , just as in the case of Zimbabwe , certain European states follow their own agenda for the sake of commercial or other interests and , in so doing , run counter to the European strategy towards Togo .
It is not enough to establish fine principles in an agreement .
They must also be applied consistently and that also applies to a country like France .
Mr President , the resolution calls for the release of Yawovi Agboyibo , the opponent of the dictator , General Eyadema .
We support this resolution in that respect , but we wish to make it clear that those who approve the policies of the great Western powers are not in a position to be indignant now , because this dictatorship , which has oppressed the people of Togo since 1967 , could not have persisted without the support of the great powers , and particularly of France .
One might therefore question the usefulness of a resolution adopted by Parliament , when the present dictator is then welcomed with as an honoured guest of our governments , and when he continues to receive subsidies that allow him to buy the arms that keep him in power .
Cambodia
Mr President , Commissioner , it is clear that the political situation in Kampuchea is calmer at this moment than it has ever been and it is equally clear that the country is still a long way from being a real democracy .
Much support is still required on the slow road to democracy , and the local elections will be an extremely important moment in that process .
The Kampuchean People ' s Party , which controls the country , is an old-style Communist party , which means that it as a party is directly or indirectly involved in everything , in every sector , at every level in that country .
Consequently , it is not surprising that the local elections should be considered a threat and that they have been repeatedly postponed .
It is therefore essential that we continue to exert international pressure on the government to do everything possible to create a violence-free period before the elections and to reopen the procedure for voter registration .
Voter registration is in the hands of the village headmen , who are appointed by the central committee of the Kampuchean People ' s Party , and nothing is simpler than to give poll cards to those in favour of the government and withhold them from those opposed to it .
Only last Monday , the leader of the opposition , the Member of Parliament , Sam Rainsy , had a meeting with the local representative of the European Commission , who in that conversation , was able to make the point that we have a very positive attitude to the National Election Committee .
I am far from being so enthusiastic .
We must watch that National Election Committee very closely , since it is at the crux of whether or not the elections are being conducted fairly .
The European Union has little cause to be proud of the way in which we observed the elections in Kampuchea last time , and we must do a lot better this time .
Mr President , Cambodia has been through a black period , a bloody period , a period in which nearly three million people were sacrificed to Marxist ideology .
During this period , there were two people who personified the hope for freedom , Son San , the important democrat , who often visited us here in Strasbourg and who has since died , and King Sihanouk , who is now an old , ill man .
That is why this country needs to be renewed from the roots upwards and young , democratic forces need to be supported .
This can only be done through the communes , it can only be done through democratic local elections from the roots upwards .
That is why it is so important for us to support and back the numerous candidates in the communes , for us to ensure that fair local elections are held , for us to monitor efficiently , for us to ward off , prevent and correct any jiggery-pokery during registration .
As for the Criminal Tribunal , we must state quite clearly that this is not a question of revenge , it is a question of law .
We must state quite clearly to future offenders that acts of violence , genocide and mass murder will be ruthlessly punished on the basis of the rule of law , irrespective of who is responsible .
That is why we need the International Tribunal to have a large Cambodian contingent , so that it is seen not as a foreign court but as a court of the Cambodian people .
Mr President , in our memories Kampuchea will always remain the country of the ' Killing Fields ' .
The period of terror still casts a shadow over the country .
Even now , with elections in prospect , the democratic process turns out not to be proceeding completely smoothly .
On the contrary , restrictions have been imposed on the opposition .
There is increasing violence .
Voter registration has been halted , so that 30 % of the electorate cannot even take part in the elections .
There is the lack of legal guarantees in the special tribunal , and so on .
Nevertheless , it remains a challenge for the European Union , or the democratic world , to do our utmost to keep watch and to help guide the country towards democracy .
It would surely be positive if at least one guarantee could be given .
Something concrete , namely that voter registration will be reopened , so that the hope of a democratic result is not completely dashed in advance .
Afghan refugees seeking asylum in Australia
Mr President , the crisis concerning the boat full of Afghan refugees off Australia again calls attention to the whole problem of Afghan refugees .
In the last 20 years , millions of people have fled Afghanistan and , according to the UN human rights organisation , approximately 6.2 million Afghans are classified as refugees .
Their first port of call when they leave the country is generally one of the refugee camps in Pakistan and Iran , where they live in appalling conditions .
Pakistan can no longer cope with the number of refugees and is sending them back to Afghanistan .
Outside the refugee camps , there are so-called travel agents waiting who send refugees with money on to other countries , and the cheapest fare to a Western country is now a journey to Australia , which costs approximately EUR 6 000 .
This stream of refugees will not stop if we do not manage to receive the refugees properly near Afghanistan and that is what we as the European Union must put our money into .
This is the solution to the problem .
As long as people are living there in dreadful conditions , they will want to go on fleeing to Western countries .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fate of the Afghan refugees on their desperate quest for a chance of a new life provides a predominantly depressing story , were it not for the actions of the captain of the Norwegian ship Tampa .
Not only did he rescue the people from a sinking ship , but subsequently too he consistently took the side of the people .
It is thanks to such humanitarian help that we can retain a vague hope in a better future .
For this reason , our group feels that a legal obligation should be introduced to allow the stowaways ashore at the first port of call , in agreement with the 1957 Treaty on stowaways .
As a result of the clash between the various spheres of law , the refugees become the exhausted pawns in a game of passing the buck .
Consequently , it must be clearly stated that Australia ' s actions in this matter have been far from praiseworthy .
Local political interests have taken precedence over the respecting of human rights .
Through its actions , Australia supports and finances the source of the problems with which the country is confronted .
Too little attention is paid to the cause .
The main responsibility for this drama lies with the Taliban regime , which is systematically destroying its own country and killing the spirit of its own population , so that migrations of people have become a necessary evil .
In this matter , we have an international political humanitarian responsibility .
We might have wished that Australia would use its political weight to condemn the regime in Afghanistan and to spur the international community on to constructive action .
Mr President , I think any of us can understand why people should flee Afghanistan .
Not only because of the repressive and fanatical nature of a regime which denies women and children education , work and even medical care , but also because of the deterioration of the economic situation which that fanatical regime is causing in the country .
We therefore perfectly understand the almost 500 people which tried to flee , at risk of their lives , and came up against a brick wall erected by a country such as Australia , a rich country which could have taken them in from the outset without any problem .
I believe that we should acknowledge the courage of the captain of the Norwegian freighter , Arne Rinnan , who , without thinking of the consequences and led only by humanitarian considerations , immediately picked up these people , who were in danger of drowning .
In contrast , we must strongly criticise a country which , like any of our countries , is obliged to take in a ship which was sailing in it waters with almost 500 people in a situation as precarious as that of these refugees .
Rules must be laid down to prevent this type of situation .
I know that it is not easy , that there are increasing numbers of refugees , that poverty is spreading and is the reason why many people are seeking a better life , but I believe that the attitude of Australia must not be imitated by any country towards any group of refugees who , under the protection of the United Nations Convention of 1951 , are asking to be allowed to survive .
Mr President , we were negotiating the motion for a resolution on Afghan refugees when , at precisely that time , a Turkish ship approached Greek waters and threw 350 people into the sea .
215 of them have been picked up and more than a hundred are still being sought , and we do not know if they have drowned or if they have been able to survive .
In fact , a former European Commissioner and Member of this Parliament , the current Greek Minister for the Merchant Navy , Christos Papoutzis , has highlighted the irresponsibility of the Turkish government in allowing a situation such as this to come about .
As the Member who has just spoken has said , we are undergoing a universal process of globalisation .
The phenomenon of illegal immigration is not confined to one part of the world .
The European Union , to be specific , is currently seeing the arrival of huge numbers of immigrants , and since Commissioner Lamy is here , and he has been so concerned with the problems of globalisation , I would like to say that I believe we are dealing with another aspect of the phenomenon of that globalisation .
Just as capital and goods are being moved about freely , it seems that people also want to move about freely .
As Mrs González Álvarez has said , this is not an issue which is easily resolved , but I believe we could do something from here on many levels .
On the most general level there would be a regulation of the international economy that includes population movements .
And on more specific levels it would mean action by the institutions of the European Union to try to regulate this illegal immigration .
This very week , this summer , on the island where I live , we have seen the bodies of illegal immigrants who have been flung from the boats on which they were arriving by Moroccan skippers who form genuine mafias .
The question should be put to the Commission of what measures the European Union is preparing for action within its own territory and what measures it is proposing on an international level .
I believe that we must act in our own territory , and in the area of neighbouring countries , such as Turkey and Morocco , which are sending us illegal immigrants , and on an international level , by establishing regulations of a general nature .
I do not believe that responsibility on the issue of the Afghan refugees should fall exclusively to Australia .
Responsibility also falls , for example , to the Indonesian government because it was from there that the original boat sailed , the crew was Indonesian , it all began in waters under Indonesian jurisdiction and it seems that nobody is remembering to state this type of responsibility at the moment .
I believe that international action is required in this case and I believe that this would be an excellent opportunity for the European Commission to implement an initiative , I repeat , not only in the closer area of our neighbours , but also on an international level , with a view to achieving the regulation of migratory flows and illegal immigration .
Mr President , in August the Norwegian freighter Tampa rescued 433 Afghans and four Indonesian crew members from a fishing vessel that had set sail from an Indonesian port .
The captain was given permission to proceed to the Indonesian port of Merak , after which he was put under duress by the passengers with threatened suicides and forced to sail towards Australian waters .
It is believed that many of these passengers set out from a refugee camp in Pakistan , paying about GBP 4 500 each to be taken illegally to Australia .
Apparently the going rate for Germany is GBP 7 000 and Britain , the destiny of choice , is GBP 10 000 .
The Australian government was perfectly entitled to exercise its sovereign right under the law of the sea to secure its borders by refusing the ship access to Australian waters .
Nor do its obligations under the 1951 Geneva Convention apply until an asylum seeker is actually present on its territory .
The convention itself , introduced before the age of cheap mass jet travel , was a response to the horrors of Nazism and designed to protect the principle of asylum .
However , as we are all aware , it is increasingly abused by economic migrants who pass through several safe but poor countries in order to reach rich countries to settle in , where it can lead to people-trafficking , prostitution and a black economy in jobs .
In Britain over 100 000 people claimed asylum last year and the great majority of these claims were unfounded .
But it remains profitable for criminal people-traffickers to ply their trade because appeals can be strung out for years and , even when unsuccessful , almost no-one is deported back to their country of origin .
Australia 's problem is also our problem .
We need urgently to face up to the need to secure our borders and remove those who enter illegally .
There is widespread concern . The EU should urgently develop new policies in this area .
We also need to exert severe pressure on those countries which refuse to take back their own nationals .
In fact we need to totally renegotiate the 1951 Geneva Convention and think again .
I salute Prime Minister Howard of Australia 's robust and courageous stance over this issue .
Mr President , the European Parliament is calling upon the Taliban regime in Afghanistan to facilitate the activities of voluntary organisations when it comes to supplying food and urgent humanitarian aid to the Afghan people .
Why are thousands of people fleeing in droves from Afghanistan ?
What kind of regime is it that is governing the country ?
The Christian aid organisation , Shelter Now International has just recently been excluded from Afghanistan and forced to discontinue its activities .
Eight of its employees - including four from an EU country , Germany , two from the United States and two from Australia - have this week been put on trial in Kabul for alleged Christian missionary activity .
The prosecutor is demanding the death penalty .
Sixteen Afghans are also being put on trial in accordance with the same Muslim law and threatened with the death penalty for having converted people from Islam to Christianity .
Mr Patten , Mr Michel and also Mr Solana are acting to protect these people .
Mr President , may I begin by saying that I cannot agree with anyone who suggests that the claims of most of the people who have been processed in the system in the United Kingdom are found to be fraudulent .
I would like to distance myself from statements like that .
It misrepresents the position of people in Britain who do not understand the kind of attitude that we heard here earlier this afternoon .
We are glad that after eight days of sitting under tarpaulins in the hot sun and inside containers , the Afghan refugees are now at least in reasonable conditions on board the ship on a long voyage to Port Moresby in Papua New Guinea .
It has been an extremely tragic incident and terrible to watch and to think of their suffering .
But more than anything it teaches us that the 50-year old asylum-seeking system instigated by the United Nations is not working any more .
It is creaking under the strain of the mass movement of 21 million migrants a year .
The desperation of the people on the Tampa is clear .
To suggest that people take this kind of action lightly is ridiculous .
They take terrible risks with their lives and the lives of their children in order to escape persecution or penury .
They cross the seas in inflatable boats , they cling to the underside of trains like the Eurostar and jumbo jets .
The suffering of the refugees on the Tampa should at least lead all the governments that we represent here to rethink the way that they implement the 1951 UN Convention on Refugees .
Finally , I would say that the first thing we have to try and do is to ensure that it is governments , rather than organised criminals , that determine where refugees finally end up .
Attack on a train in Angola
Mr President , the attack on a train , which caused the death of 260 civilians and injured more than 150 people on 10 August in Angola is unacceptable and deplorable , especially since , in the weeks that followed , several buses also came under fatal attack .
Once again , it was UNITA which struck the blow , thereby continuing to violate the peace agreement signed in Lusaka in 1994 , which made provision , amongst other things , for the disarming of the militant rebels .
Unfortunately , these acts of terrorism are merely one further stage in the civil war that has been ravaging the country for more than 25 years . Above all , however , these extremely violent acts against civilians only serve to postpone even further the prospect of organising the elections planned by the government for 2002-2003 .
When he announced , on 23 August , his intention not to stand in the presidential elections , President dos Santos threw the ball back into the rebels ' court .
He says that he is prepared to hold free and democratic elections , provided that the war comes to an end .
The pause in the fighting and the restoration of a peaceful climate are due , according to him , to Mr Savimbi and his militant movement .
Yet Mr Savimbi , the leader of UNITA , says that he wants to negotiate .
In reality , of course , sitting comfortably on his diamonds , he wants only one thing : all the power .
We are also responsible here , because who is it who supplies UNITA with arms ?
Who is it who participates in this diamond trafficking ?
As for the government , it is not transparent either .
The lack of transparency in the management of petroleum revenue leads us to conclude that public funds have been used to back up the regime .
The Angolagate scandal has revealed the role of Europeans in this affair .
The violence has to stop , and dialogue must be initiated as a matter of urgency .
Angolans must vote for and achieve peace .
The European Union can make its influence felt , and it has a role to play here .
It should be reminded of that fact , and we must vote in favour of this resolution in order to go forward .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again , in this Parliament , we are discussing Angola .
News comes through on a regular basis and is always sad .
The latest report describes an attack on three passenger vehicles in southern Kwanza last Sunday , in which dozens of people were killed . No one has yet claimed responsibility for this attack .
Previous to this , there had been the attack on the train we are condemning today , which caused the deaths of more than two hundred people and for which UNITA claimed responsibility .
Lives have been wasted and innocent blood has been spilled in a bout of violence that we can only condemn .
We condemn UNITA today with the same independence with which , in February , we condemned the MPLA and the Angolan government for persecuting journalists .
More important , however , than condemning those who stubbornly continue to wage war , and criticising both sides , which undoubtedly deserve our criticism for pursuing this path of confrontation , the most important and most useful thing may be to foster peace .
This Parliament can contribute to encouraging all those in Angola tired of war and wanting a better future .
Along with many other Members of this House , specifically Mr Ribeiro e Castro , I signed a proposal to award the Sakharov prize to Zacarias Kamuenho , Archbishop of Huambo and Chairman of the Episcopal Conference of Angola and São Tomé .
I urge all of you to use this gesture as a means to give courage to all those in Angola who wish to see peace prevail .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I fully agree with the words of Mr Rod and Mr Coelho who spoke before me and which , fortunately , stand in contrast to the attempt to take over the resolution that we will be voting on today , an undertaking which we Portuguese have heard about on the radio and in the press , largely due to the honourable Member who will be speaking next - Mr Miranda .

We have watched these terrible events unfold in Angola with profound and heartfelt regret .
The suffering of the Angolans and of these innocent civilian victims of the attack by UNITA or of other events gives us no satisfaction .
We do not see these occurrences as a triumph that should feed the warlike approach of the government and prolong the war .
We must remember the tragedy that Angola has experienced for the last twenty-six years , in a never-ending violent bipolarisation of the country , of which the Angolan people are weary .
This phase of the civil war , we must remember , is the third wave of the war , and each wave has been more brutal than the last .
It is clearly the consequence of UNITA ' s failing to meet its commitments , but it is also the consequence of President dos Santos ' s plan , announced in December 1998 , to use weapons to destroy his old enemy .
This could only lead to disaster and , once again , it is a disaster that we are witnessing .
With your permission , I should like to read from the account of a missionary who returned from Angola a few months ago : " In 2000 , Angola celebrated 25 years of independence .
In 2001 it ' commemorated ' 40 years of war .
There are now three generations of Angolans for whom living in wartime is all that they know .
I lived in Cuíto and Huambo between 1989 and 1994 .
I saw boundless hope etched on the faces of many Angolans , who were crushed by commitments that had never been met .
Now , when it is clear that there is no military solution to the conflict , - not that there ever was ! - people are saying more than ever that arms are the key to peace .
Whilst this is being said and put into practice , young people are abandoning their studies , adults are not working and children are not going to school , hospitals are without medicines and this armed route will not lead Angola to any kind of future " .
Serious incidents are occurring , such as those that we are condemning today .
The missionary goes on to say : " I cannot , however , accept such a conclusion about a country that is so rich in natural and , above all , in human resources . "
This priest , Father Tony Neves , who has a profound knowledge of Angola , finishes with a dream of peace , but warns us that " 25 years after independence , Angola has only two options : peace or total destruction " .
This is what must make us aware of our responsibilities .
We cannot work with the warlords , whether they are involved in diamonds or oil .
We can only rely on those who are fighting for peace without weapons in their hands , those who , inspired by the churches , by Archbishop Kamuenho , by the Interdenominational Committee for Peace , are rising up in civil society . We can only rely on those on the moderate wings of UNITA and the MPLA , such as the former prime ministers Marcolino Môco and Lôpo de Nascimento , such as certain journalists of whom we sometimes hear because of the persecution to which they are subjected , such as certain moderate UNITA Members of Parliament like Chivukuvuku Jaka Jamba , many moderate people in the MPLA and , above all , other small parties in the Angolan Parliament , whose voices are never heard .
Why do we never hear these people , such as Filomeno Vieira Lopes and Mfulopinda Nando Vítor , who have never taken up arms ?
These are the people we should listen to , because Angola does not only consist of the dos Santoses and the Savimbis .
Angola belongs to the Angolan people , and we must listen to the spokespeople of those who are suffering and not always the spokespeople who are doing the killing .
The candidature of Archbishop Zacarias Kamuenho is part of this approach and I urge all honourable Members to ensure that we , as an international community , understand the tragedy of the Angolan people .
The cold war is long since past and it is high time that the international community stopped pouring oil on the flames of Angola and contributed responsibly to peace , to dialogue and to a bilateral , simultaneous and immediate cease-fire .
Mr President , the appalling terrorist attacks that Mr Savimbi ' s UNITA has been carrying out in Angola , first in Caxito , then on a train , and then on cars , schools and hospitals , warrant our sternest condemnation , because they mainly affect the civilian population .
These are some of the most violent and reprehensible terrorist acts in living memory .
I therefore feel that the European Parliament too must express its repudiation of such acts in the most forceful terms , as the rest of the international community and , in particular , the other Community institutions have done by unequivocally condemning such barbarity .
All the same , and if any doubts could possibly remain , these acts have brutally shown the correct nature of the positions that have been successively adopted by the international community which , with a single voice , has called for and is implementing the isolation of UNITA and the imposition of sanctions on it .
That organisation had already given sufficient proof of being largely responsible for the tragic situation affecting Angola and its people , through its rejection of election results , obstructing the disarming of its forces and , more generally , through waging war and not respecting and even blocking the implementation of agreements that they themselves have signed .
Now , however , with such acts of vandalism , UNITA is revealing its true colours even more clearly and there is no longer room for any doubt , however small , as to the nature and the objectives of this organisation .
This is why there are even fewer grounds for holding equivocal positions , particularly where the European Parliament is concerned .
Any positions or initiatives , particularly when formulated by friends of UNITA such as Mr Ribeiro and Castro , which tend to condone , exonerate or divert attention from the huge responsibilities of UNITA in the tragic situation that Angola is experiencing are completely unacceptable .
This applies also , and especially , to those that tend to place the legitimate government of Angola on an equal footing with this type of terrorist organisation .
As a matter of fact , it is now clearer than ever that any path to peace in Angola requires holding UNITA responsible , ensuring its political and diplomatic isolation , ending the diamond trade that sustains it and disarming it for good .
Having said this , I should just like to say a few words about the motion for a resolution that we shall be voting on next .
Its approval , despite the odd provision that is not worthy of adoption and is not essential , would be a positive development in that it would enable the European Parliament to adopt its traditional position of aligning itself with the international community and with the other Community institutions on this matter .
In particular , I would like to emphasise the correctness of the decision adopted by the resolution to call the acts that UNITA has recently been perpetrating ' terrorist ' acts .
This is the right word to describe them and all concomitant conclusions should be drawn from that .
Mr President , I wish to respond to a personal remark which I consider to be unacceptable and , in this context , insulting .
I fully and vehemently repudiate this disgraceful insinuation , and furthermore the quite shameful and unbecoming statement from the benches of the Communist Party , which is more responsible than anyone for the war in Angola , that I am a friend of UNITA .
I wish to state quite categorically that I vehemently condemn the attacks on civilians but I understand the situation in Angola . I do not do favours for the diamond dealers or the oilmen or for Angola ' s corrupt administration , which is largely responsible for what is happening and for the suffering of the Angolan people .
Mr Miranda should be ashamed of what he says and what he does , particularly because he is chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and should be making a more responsible contribution to promoting a cease-fire and dialogue , which is what the Angolan people are asking us to do .
Mr President , allow me to take up the various points which have been mentioned during this debate , and to let you know the Commission ' s position .
On the subject of Mauritania , first of all , we share the concerns that have been expressed regarding respect for human rights in Mauritania .
In recent years we have observed some progress .
This has now come to an end , and we are experiencing a period of sudden backward steps .
Like the Members who have spoken during the debate , we believe that the Union cannot remain silent in the face of the imprisonment of the leader of the opposition , Mr Chbih , in the conditions that we are aware of and in particular in the period leading up to the elections .
Therefore we , like you , believe that steps should be taken to ask for the release of Mr Chbih while the result of his appeal to the court of cassation is awaited , at the same time using this opportunity to remind the authorities of the principles to which the Union is committed with regard to the electoral process .
The release of Mr Chbih and the holding of the elections this coming October are our two priorities .
On the subject of Togo , again we share your concern , both about the imprisonment of a local journalist in May and about the imprisonment of the two leaders of the opposition parties , Mr Olympio in June , and Mr Agboyibo just recently .
All these names and all these facts have been mentioned , in particular by Mr Rod .

We should like to follow up our approach to the Togolese Minister for Foreign Affairs on 17 August , when once again we expressed our concerns to the Togolese government . At the time , I believe that we got a clear message across , to the effect that , from the point of view of the Union , the political parties and the media must be able to continue their activities without restrictions .
So far , our approach has not had any effect .
We believe that the statement made in August by the Prime Minister , in which he mentioned the need to postpone the elections and proposed that the electoral code should be amended , which some Members have mentioned , is not good news and does not help to create a climate which is conducive to the conducting of transparent , free and democratic elections .
On this subject we have noted with satisfaction the statement made by President Eyadema , in which he said that on this point the Prime Minister ' s proposals committed only the Prime Minister himself , whereas he , the President , intended to respect the constitution and abide by the undertakings given under the Lomé Convention .
We are continuing to monitor the political and economic situation and we shall maintain our position , to the effect that we can render assistance to the electoral process by helping the government to create the necessary conditions , notwithstanding the suspension of our cooperation with Togo which , as you know , was decided on under the provisions of the Lomé Convention , which corresponds to what would now be Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
From this point of view , Mr Rod , we are already past the Article 96 stage .
The Union has also responded positively to the invitation from the Togolese Minister for Foreign Affairs to participate in a mission to observe the elections .
If the United Nations decided to take on the task of coordinating such an observer mission , we would not have any objections .
However , the conditions for organising and implementing such an observer mission still have to be determined .
If it is decided to go ahead with such a mission , obviously Parliament ' s participation in that mission would be welcome .
As for human rights in Cambodia , the Commission and the Member States have been officially invited by Cambodia to nominate and dispatch observers to monitor the local elections .
With this in mind , we have sent a fact-finding mission .
The conclusions and recommendations of that mission will be examined by the Council during September , so as to decide whether or not we should organise a Community observer mission to monitor the local elections .
We are also ready to assist in the smooth running of those elections by means of technical assistance projects .
On the question of electoral registration , Mrs Maes , the latest figures available to us indicate that the overall rate of registration is just over 80 % , which is an improvement on the previous figures , though 100 % registration has still not been achieved .
As for the question of how we should deal with the past , which some of you have mentioned , I would remind you that we support without reservation the efforts of the United Nations and of the government of the Kingdom of Cambodia to reach an agreement concerning the court responsible for the Khmer Rouge trials .
On the subject of the Afghan refugees seeking asylum in Australia , we , like Mrs Kinnock , are relieved that a solution has been found which will provide the help and protection needed by those people , men , women and children , who are fleeing from one of the most intolerant of all regimes .
If I have understood you correctly , your speeches were not intended to put any particular third country in the dock , but rather to consider whether , in the context of the present system of international governance , there are any remedies that would enable us to handle this type of situation better .
You are right , we cannot remain insensitive .
We all know that there are other ships carrying other fugitives from misery , often in the most appalling conditions , and that these ships arrive , some of them off the coasts of Europe .
This is not a question of ' the rest of the world ' , from which we can remain detached , any more it is a question of looking at it purely in the light of the problems that it may give rise to elsewhere .
There is clearly a growing malaise in the international community with regard to forced migration , whether it is of economic , political or criminal origin , because this is how we must describe the organised networks trafficking in human beings .
Mr Medina Ortega , we share the desire which you and other Members have expressed for international instruments to be adopted which will be able to prevent and settle such cases , and also your desire at least to update and amend the 1951 Convention so that it can cope with the present situation , which is not the same as it was in the 1950s .
From this point of view , we support the efforts initiated by the High Commissioner for Refugees , which were announced on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of that Convention .
The High Commissioner for Refugees played an important role in dealing with the crisis involving the Tampa , and I believe that we should all encourage the Commissioner to put this type of problem on the agenda of the consultations which , following the Geneva Conference in December , should enable us to update our rules , because that is what they are , international rules .
We must also remember the importance of the protocols on trafficking in human beings which are annexed to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime of December 2000 .
The Community is itself a party to those protocols which , when they come into force , after a certain number of ratifications , will improve the joint framework that we have at our disposal in order to combat such crime .
As far as the Union itself is concerned , and we really are concerned , as I have said , the Treaty of Amsterdam and the conclusions of the Tampere European Council provided the basis for a common policy on asylum and immigration .
I believe that the Union , by means of these instruments and various declarations , has repeated its commitment and that of its Member States to a humanitarian tradition which should take the form of the creation of a common asylum regime which provides appropriate protection to any person who needs it , and which guarantees the principle of not turning people away .
Of course , this will not work without preventive measures in the countries and regions of origin .
We took a step in the right direction here when the Council adopted a certain number of action plans prepared by the immigration and asylum group .
One of these plans is specifically targeted at Afghanistan and neighbouring regions .
If it proves to be ineffective , we shall have to look at it again , and we shall rely on Parliament to point us in that direction .
As far as trafficking in human beings is concerned , we need to strengthen the action taken by the Union , especially in cases where the victims are able to benefit from international protection .
Here too , the Commission takes the view that a more systematic and coherent approach is needed .
We shall shortly be taking action with a view to achieving this , by issuing a communication .
This is all turning into a timetable of action for the Union .
Work has started within the Council .
To be perfectly honest , we think that things are proceeding very slowly , but this is only to be expected given the sensitive nature of these issues from the point of view of Member States .
No doubt we shall need fresh impetus at an appropriately high political level , probably at the European Council in Laeken .
At any rate , that is what the Presidency seems to think .
It goes without saying that Parliament ' s support in this matter will , we are sure , enable us to proceed in the right direction .
Finally , on the subject of the attack on a train in Angola , there is not much that I can add .
Much of what has been said we can all agree on anyway .
Like you , the Commission is very concerned about the continuation of this war , and deplores the fact that these confrontations are intensifying and that , yet again , several hundred civilians have been killed in various regions of the country over the last few weeks .
We are absolutely determined to support the efforts being taken , in accordance with the Union ' s common position , to find a political solution to the conflict in Angola .
I did not get the impression , from your speeches , that you are seriously critical of that common position .
We are therefore working towards implementing it , by supporting any proposal which seeks to support the initiatives being made by the African Union - and there are some - or by African regional organisations such as the Southern Africa Development Community , with a view to developing the systems which have been set up on the initiative of African countries in order to prevent and resolve conflicts .
I would remind you that we are continuing our humanitarian aid to Angola , which is substantial , and that we are consequently ready to adjust the nature and the scale of that humanitarian aid .
Mr President , I was not present at the debate because I was attending the Conference of Presidents , but someone came to tell me that a member of my group , Mr Miranda , was literally the subject of verbal aggression on the part of another Member .
I regard such methods as inadmissible .
It was more than a personal accusation , and that is why , Mr President , I should like you to allow Mr Miranda to take the floor , and to ensure that his restatement is included in the minutes .
Mr Wurtz , you were not present .
First of all , it was Mr Miranda who attacked the other Member and I allowed the other Member to speak briefly in order to reply .
That is the end of the matter because if Mr Miranda says something else and Mr Ribeiro e Castro says something else , we may very well be here all day .

Both gentlemen had the chance to speak on the same subject and the final score is therefore 1 all !

Exactly , Mr President , this is a point of order .
I think that you must have not been paying attention , Mr President , when you said , just now , that I was the first to attack Mr Ribeiro e Castro .
This is not true .
In his own speech , which preceded mine , Mr Ribeiro e Castro referred to me in a completely unacceptable way and you said nothing about it , Mr President .
As you will remember , he said that I have manipulated public opinion , that I have manipulated the press , that I have sought to use this Parliament , and he referred specifically to the fact that I am Chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
What I said in my speech that gave Mr Ribeiro e Castro the pretext for answering in the way he did was simply that some friends of UNITA , specifically Mr Ribeiro e Castro , had gone ahead with certain initiatives .
Mr President , I did not mean any insult by this , because it is public knowledge and widely known that this party , to which Mr Ribeiro e Castro belongs , has clear , public and acknowledged links with UNITA .
This was the precise tenor of what I said and nothing more !
That is why what was said ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I should like to say on a point of order that the President took absolutely the right line because Mr Ribeiro e Castro did not stand up for UNITA ; on the contrary , he signed a motion criticising it .
He criticised it in his speech and the President allowed him to respond to your personal attack .
To my mind , therefore , the President took absolutely the right line .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
Anti-personnel mines
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0542 / 2001 by Mr Van Orden and Mr Van Hecke , on behalf of Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ;
B5-0561 / 2001 by Mr van den Berg and Mr Sakellariou , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ;
B5-0568 / 2001 by Mr Haarder et al , on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ;
B5-0575 / 2001 by Mrs Maes and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ;
B5-0590 / 2001 by Mr Segni , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group ;
. B5-0599 / 2001 by Mrs Bonino et al
on measures to promote an undertaking by non-governmental actors to ban anti-personnel mines .
The problem of landmines is not only a problem for States .
Long after peace has been concluded , and I hope that even in Angola that will one day be the case , there will still be fields that cannot be walked on , because they are full of mines and therefore put innocent people are at risk .
In 1997 , a treaty was concluded banning landmines .
One hundred and forty-nine countries have already signed it .
Many countries have ratified it , but 52 have not and they include some of the largest nations .
One of the major problems is that not only regular armies lay the mines , but that terrorist and rebel movements also use them .
That is why it is necessary that they should be urged to stop using landmines .
It is difficult for an official body like ours to involve non-governmental players in the negotiations , but it is good that we as an official body should urge the countries not to stockpile landmines and that we should support the NGOs that are striving to get the terrorist organisations and rebel movements to forsake the use of landmines .
I refer in this context to the appeal of Geneva , which we have heard proposed here this week in our own Parliament .
Mr President , I think everyone is against anti-personnel mines .
On this point , I should like to express my astonishment that this motion for a resolution is addressed to actors other than states .
If the mines are produced and used , they are produced and used with the authorisation of states , and it would be up to those states to give an undertaking that mines will not be produced or used , and I do not even understand the title of such a resolution .
As far as I am concerned , the only interpretation is that Parliament is thus pledging its allegiance to the great powers and the nation states .
Mr President , I shall keep to the topic .
Landmines kill , every day and in many countries .
Landmines are a lethal threat daily in many dozens of countries .
In Kampuchea alone , over 35 000 people have been injured by landmines and those are the survivors .
Every day , mines are removed and every day new ones are laid .
The anti-landmine treaty of 1997 has been ratified by 19 countries and signed by 141 .
Countries that have not yet signed include Russia , Yugoslavia , but also Finland , which uses mines to defend its border with Russia .
That is , of course , cheaper and helps bring down the defence budget .
We can understand that .
If Finland can use that argument , however , why not other countries too ?
I should therefore like to call on the Member States to force present and future members , as well as countries that receive financial aid from the European Union , to sign the treaty .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of my colleague Mr Van Orden , who is absent today but who for many years has been directly involved in the work of overcoming the scourge of anti-personnel landmines .
Most EU Member States no longer have anti-personnel landmines in the operational armouries of their armed forces .
These weapons have indeed been banned for the past four years .
It is only irresponsible armed forces such as those in former Yugoslavia and armed groups of non-state actors engaged in civil war and insurgency that continue to use these dreadful weapons .
By definition such groups are not party to the Ottawa Convention to ban landmines .
This resolution draws attention to the fact and seeks to find ways in which these groups can be influenced .
This requires very careful consideration as we must take great care that we do not imply any sort of recognition of the legitimacy of these groups or of their actions .
We do not wish to distract EU resources from the priority task of mine clearance and assistance to mine victims .
We wish to bring this matter to the attention of all the states party to the Ottawa Convention that will gather in Managua in Nicaragua later this month .
Mr President , the European Parliament ' s position against anti-personnel mines and in favour of their total ban has already been clearly expressed in various resolutions .
The result of Ottawa is due to the work of certain specialised NGOs .
I believe that at the next meeting of the contracting parties to the Convention which will take place in Managua , the European Union should contribute to ensuring that the Convention is signed and ratified by more countries .
There are 52 which have not signed it and many who are still to ratify it .
It should also contribute to ensuring that more resources are provided for the complete clearing of mines , since mines which are still buried are causing death and mutilation throughout the world , and the parties involved - State and non-State agents - should be forced to reach an agreement on a total ban of these mines .
Mr President , I will end by asking for recognition and support for the work of NGOs such as the initiative launched by the humanitarian organisation ' Geneva Appeal ' and others , which are going to contribute to the disappearance of such a lethal and odious weapon as anti-personnel mines .
Mr President , what are we doing ?
I think that is the question that is being asked and the question to which you are asking us to reply .
Well , first of all we have equipped ourselves with a framework of rules for the Union , and just before the summer recess we adopted two regulations against mines , so that we now have legal instruments on the basis of which we shall be able to take effective and coordinated action .
Then at the end of this month we shall be actively participating , together with the presidency , at the meeting in Nicaragua of signatory states to the Ottawa Convention , a meeting which we believe is extremely important , because we shall of course be discussing the challenges posed by the abolition of anti-personnel mines , sharing the practical experiences of those who have been involved in this action and , as most of you have asked us to do , putting pressure on those states which have not yet signed the Convention .
In our view , the objective remains the same and we are determined to achieve it , by obtaining a universal prohibition on the production , stockpiling , movement and use of anti-personnel landmines .
The achieving of this objective and the removal of the risk to which the millions of mines which still have to be removed from areas of conflict throughout the world expose not only human lives , but also economic activities , is chiefly the task of states and governments .
There is no doubt about that . Unfortunately , it sometimes happens that non-government actors also use anti-personnel landmines in internal conflicts or conflicts between states , and they too bear a responsibility for the suffering and devastation caused to populations and societies by mines
Experience has shown , as you have pointed out , that we need to explore new ways of involving non-governmental agencies in these campaigns against landmines , and of making them subscribe to the objective of a complete ban on such devices .
From this point of view , the Geneva appeal is an initiative with laudable intentions , but we must make sure that any future initiatives of this kind take place in the context of the considerable efforts which have already been undertaken by the international community .
As Parliament knows , the international campaign to prohibit landmines has assumed the form of a worldwide movement which the European Union has supported since the beginning .
This international campaign , in conjunction with a certain number of governmental and non-governmental agreements , has drawn up standards and action programmes which will supplement the international regulations of which the Ottawa Convention is an example .
We would therefore like to see , alongside this international regulatory framework , initiatives being set up to strengthen the action that is being taken within states and civilian society , and we are ready to support them .
We must analyse this Geneva appeal in detail , and encourage those who have instigated it to coordinate their activities closely with the ICBL and with other major agreements , so as to ensure that all the forces that are mobilised towards this objective never run the risk , given the magnitude of what is at stake here , of becoming dispersed .
There is still a lot to be done to consolidate the ambitious demands and objectives that were defined by the Ottawa Convention .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
Drought in Central America
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0547 / 2001 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ;
B5-0562 / 2001 by Mrs Díez González et al , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ;
B5-0569 / 2001 by Mr Sánchez García and Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the Group the Europe Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ;
B5-0574 / 2001 by Mr Mayol i Raynal et al , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ;
B5-0591 / 2001 by Mr Marset Campos et al , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ;
B5-0600 / 2001 by Mr Queiró and Mr Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group
on the drought in Central America .
Mr President , I will not waste part of the one minute I am allowed to convince Members of the extremely grave consequences of the sequence of natural disasters which have taken place in Central America .
However , I will use part of my speaking time to say that this has had short-term consequences .
In brief : one and a half million people are suffering from hunger in the region , not to mention the long-term consequences for sustainable development and the climate .
So far the European institutions have reacted by trying to alleviate the short-term consequences : with emergency aid and with deliveries of food , which have gone some way to alleviating the hunger in the region .
So far we have been incapable of responding to the long-term needs or shortages .
This resolution asks the Commission firstly to take account of these needs when drawing up the 2002 budget .
Secondly , that it implement actions which will serve to accelerate and promote a sustainable development policy in the field of agricultural development , which will serve to prevent drought and the long-term consequences which I mentioned previously .
Thirdly , I refer to section 4 , relating to a policy of cooperation with the region in the long term , which would help to meet the needs which I stressed before .
Mr President , the truth is that the region of Central America has been suffering for too long .
First there were the death squads and the extreme right governments .
Then , with democracy won thanks to the mediation of the European Union , there were corrupt governments ; then there were the catastrophes of Hurricane Mitch , earthquakes and now this drought , which , as has been said , means hunger , misery and death for hundreds of thousands of people .
The European Union must behave with a solidarity which distinguishes it from others , not only by approving budgets for this circumstance , but , as has been said , also for the coming years , by approving important and essential budgets which will eliminate the causes and consequences of this drought .
I drafted the report on the reconstruction of Central America after Hurricane Mitch , and I have seen that the corruption in the area prevents aid from arriving directly .
We therefore recommend that the aid which we grant arrives in the most direct way possible by means of local councils and democratic NGOs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , every day we see horrifying images of new tragedies which desolate the world : people devastated , children dying from hunger and disease , refugees without refuge , immigrants wandering the world looking for an opportunity to live ...
There are tragedies , however , which persist while nobody talks about them , which get worse and fester although they do not make the headlines .
One of those cases filed away in our selective first-world memory is the situation in Central America and the dramatic effects of the drought which has been devastating it for more than three months .
This is a tragedy which is unfolding in a region , as has been said , which is already weakened by constant natural disasters , quite apart from political disasters , and which has a social and economic structure lacking the least resources for resisting them .
El Salvador has declared a state of emergency and Guatemala just yesterday declared a state of public disaster , in a truly desperate attempt to combat hunger .
The drought has destroyed the majority of the crops in the region and hunger is now affecting millions of people , as previous speakers have said .
All of this in an area where an extremely high percentage of inhabitants live in poverty or extreme poverty .
The United Nations world food programme raised the alarm very recently , telling us that if the current situation continues , it will only be able to meet the needs of half of the affected citizens for barely three months .
I therefore draw your attention in particular to the recommendation contained in section 4 which , in relation to that in section 3 , seeks to direct our decisions in the field of development aid towards the objective of combating the structural problems .
Only in that way , by investing in sustainable development in the most sensitive areas of the world , will we be able to prevent and alleviate as far as possible the effects of natural disasters , because we will have invested our aid and our resources in the structuring and strengthening of the population and we will have made them stronger so that they can endure the consequences of phenomena which not even we , in the first world , can prevent .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is time for Europe to be able to give out fishing rods , to show people how to fish , rather than to hand out fish .
Mr President , I agree with what other Members have said .
In any event , we in the European Parliament delegation for relations with the countries of Central America were in El Salvador in July and were able to see the consequences of the earthquakes and of Hurricane Mitch .
In fact there is a very important European Union programme for the rehabilitation of institutes in that area ; at the moment , however , the worst thing of all , which we were informed of in July , is what is happening as a result of the drought .
I believe that we must envisage two types of aid : immediate aid , to prevent starvation , and a more long-term aid , in order to work towards sustainable development ; because the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change believes that earthquakes , floods and droughts are going to become increasingly common , and in precisely the poorest parts of the world , which are least able to endure them .
Therefore , I believe that the European Union must use two approaches : immediate aid , which they requested of us when we were there in July , and more long-term aid , in order to prevent what is happening now from happening again .
We are also concerned about the distribution of aid .
It must be very well controlled by the services of the European Commission that are on the ground , so that it may reach the people genuinely affected .
Some complaints have been made about this .
The Commission is of course well aware of the situation described in this resolution .
The current drought in these countries is certainly the worst since the one caused by El Niño in 1997 .
For the moment , however , we believe it is going too far to compare the situation with the one that followed Hurricane Mitch .
There is constant contact between the Commission and the representatives of the countries of Central America , and we believe , along with the representatives of those countries with whom we are working , that the situation is certainly extremely worrying , but that at this stage it is under control , and is unlikely to continue for very long because the rains will soon be returning to most of the areas affected by the drought .
Although the rains are due to return shortly , that should not prevent us from thinking about the real causes of these crises which , as you have all , I believe , pointed out , are due to cyclical factors but also , and above all , to structural factors , including the falling incomes from primary products , especially coffee , the probably inappropriate nature of agricultural policies , and increasingly difficult access for many rural families to production inputs , not to mention the poverty which is undoubtedly rife in all these countries .
With regard to monitoring , I should just like to say that the Commission and the Union now have a network of antennae which enables us to monitor the food situation in all the regions that are susceptible .
One of these antennae is located in Central America and will enable us to be alerted instantly so that we can intervene if necessary .
The heart of the problem , that is , the structural causes of the lack of food security in the region , is the real problem that we will have to face in the medium and long term , as some of you have pointed out .
One of the most important solutions , as we see it , is rural development , and this is already a priority in the Union ' s action and cooperation in most of the countries concerned , and we would like to see it strengthened even more by the pooling of efforts , whether that means aid to local governments to enable them to concentrate their development policy in that area , something that we can actually do , or whether it means support for the projects of non-governmental organisations or local communities seeking to diversify production and crop distribution and to create family incomes of another kind , or whether it means coordination with other international donors , like Member States , or the Bretton Woods institutions , or , finally , whether it means putting in place programmes to reduce poverty in the countries concerned .
Like you , we are convinced that we shall have to cope with short-term emergencies , but that the problem is a deep-seated one and is one of the fundamental causes that will have to be tackled if we wish to avoid a repetition of the same problem .
Mr President , in the Spanish version of the resolution on the Afghan refugees off the coast of Australia there is an error , and I am pointing it out so that Parliament ' s services may correct it .
In Recital E there is a line missing , since it says ' allow asylum seekers to request asylum once ' and it should then say ' they have arrived in Australian territory ' .
This text simply needs to be modified in accordance with the other versions - I have seen the English , the French and the German .
I point this out so that Parliament ' s services may correct it .
Mr Medina Ortega , I trust you implicitly here because I know that you are extraordinarily well versed in the other languages .
I am sure this will be corrected .
I have already been assured from my right that this will be added in the Spanish version .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Mountain farming
The next item is the report ( A5-0277 / 2001 ) by Mr Ebner , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on 25 years ' application of Community legislation for hill and mountain farming .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the own-initiative report on 25 years ' application of Community legislation for hill and mountain farming has arrived on the European Parliament 's agenda in the run up to the International Year of Mountains in 2002 .
Activities have therefore been planned over the coming year at international , national and local level to promote the sustainable development of mountain regions .
The main objectives of the International Year of Mountains are to create awareness and increase knowledge about mountain ecosystems and their dynamics and operation , to promote and maintain the cultural heritage of mountain communities and the maintenance and sustainable development of resources in mountain regions to safeguard the quality of life of the population now and in the future .
Finally , mountain regions account for about 30 % of the land area and 20 % of the utilised agricultural area in the European Union and 10 % of the population of the EU live there .
I feel that the European Union should also use the coming International Year of Mountains as an opportunity to express the specific concerns of mountain regions and recognise mountain regions as indispensable habitats .
At the same time , the quality of life in mountain regions must be maintained and protected and the constant threat of exodus must be stopped .
This report is also , by definition , the European Parliament 's position on the International Year of Mountains and should be seen by the Commission and the Council as our basic wish list .
Basically I call in this report , which was adopted almost unanimously by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for a comprehensive EU strategy for mountain regions .
The report contains numerous new and , to my mind , practical proposals which I call on you to support during the coming vote .
The Commission is thus called on , first , to submit a communication this year setting out EU actions in connection with the International Year of Mountains .
I think this communication should contain a comprehensive concept for the regions in question with regard to the period after 2006 and with regard to enlargement .
This will , of necessity , include revising Directive 268 / 75 and subsequent amendments .
At the same time , I should like to clarify that the overall concept needed must take account of the principle of subsidiarity .
Despite what are often similar problems and difficulties , it is a fact that even mountain regions differ in their individual characteristics , meaning that there is no universal patent solution .
Common problems can be solved more efficiently by means of a cross-border approach .
My report therefore advocates an approach which takes equal account of the following areas : farming and forestry , transport , tourism , energy and water , regional planning , nature conservation and the maintenance of the common cultural heritage .
Now a few words on individual demands set out in the report .
Agriculture : basically it calls for the second pillar of agricultural policy , the development of rural areas , to be extended , taking appropriate account of the contribution made by farming to the environment and the countryside and the multifunctional character of agriculture .
We need to find common problem-solving strategies in the form of regional conventions , set and update criteria and data on mountain areas and fund practical , mountain-related projects under the sixth framework programme , extend the basic infrastructure needed and provide training and further training so that the population keeps abreast of events and strengthen transport networks in mountain regions , taking account of the principle of sustainability , in order to safeguard these regions as habitats and economic areas and nature areas .
This means , for example , that access roads to farms and alpine pastures must be guaranteed , while bigger roads must comply with criteria of strict eco-compatibility .
Finally , last but not least , mountain regions need special treatment in the run up to enlargement .
The forthcoming International Year of Mountains is an ideal time , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to discuss the specifics of tomorrow 's proposal .
You , ladies and gentlemen , by voting in favour of my report , and more importantly you , Commissioner , and the Commission , by implementing the ideas contained in it can make a fundamental contribution to this development .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
I should like to start by thanking Mr Ebner for his own initiative report .
This is a report which I can wholeheartedly support .
Given that , as Mr Ebner has just said , mountain regions account for around 30 % of the land area in the EU , while in many Member States , such as Austria , they account for as much as 50 % , I welcome and support this own initiative report .
The importance of mountain ecosystems is a cultural heritage .
The maintenance and sustainable management of resources is very important in numerous regions of Europe .
The protection of mountain regions , forests , water , the ecological balance and biodiversity needs to be set out in an overall European concept .
Many mountains straddle frontiers .
Many problems can only be solved more efficiently by means of a cross-border approach and by joining forces .
I must stress that farming and forestry have a multifunctional role in mountain regions and that this will be hugely important in an enlarged Union .
Both the people who live in the mountains and the tourists who visit every year looking for rest and relaxation value this unique natural and cultural landscape , which is why we must create appropriate incentives for people to live and work there .
We must take precautions to prevent the ecological and socio-economic consequences of exodus and depopulation .
Sustainable cultivation by mountain farmers not only provides quality food , it also renders a huge service to mankind as a whole .
The United Nations have rightly proclaimed 2002 as the International Year of Mountains .
I think it is important for Europe to take a stance now and for the Commission to present a communication as quickly as possible , setting out a really clear definition , taking account of criteria such as altitude , gradient and the vegetation which has been cut down so that we can really address the various problems throughout Europe , and proposing appropriate concepts for strategies and development mechanisms .
Mr President , the Ebner report is going to offer the Commission a very good model to follow when producing its communication for the International Year of Mountains 2002 .
However , amongst its many and , I believe , very valuable , proposals , I would like to draw your attention to certain issues which , on this forthcoming celebration of the silver wedding of mountain farming , should receive very special , and in some cases new , attention .
I am referring , firstly , to the role which should be recognised for women in this new multifunctional mountain farming .
For them , a new approach is required today which is very different from their obsolete marginalisation within the traditional CAP .
This proposal appears in section 19 of the Ebner report , but if we want to do it well , Mr Fischler , coordinated approach is required .
Within the new agriculture of the mountain regions , women currently play many important roles , both in relation to agriculture and in relation to tourism , rural development , rural tourism , new technologies and in relation to craft-industry , commercial and economic policies .
I hope you understand , Commissioner , that their potential could be enormous .
Secondly , I would like to draw your attention to the proposal contained in section 22 , which also relates to another of today ' s pressing problems , that of migration policies .
It is proposed that mountain regions where population is decreasing could serve as reception areas for absorbing immigrants , given suitable socio-economic planning .
Thirdly , Commissioner , I believe that compensation measures should be taken to prevent mountain regions receiving less structural aid than they receive at the moment as a result of enlargement .
This must be prevented , because enlargement must not under any circumstances have a negative impact on these areas .
Lastly , I think that small and medium-sized farms should be promoted by means of a modulation of aid that stimulates employment .
Commissioner , I hope that if you really want to provide new impetus and a new strategy for mountain farming , you will take these proposals into account .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank Mr Ebner very much for the work he has done and also for accepting my amendments to the text .
The report speaks for itself : it is complete and exhaustive and also has the merit of setting mountain farming in a wider and more general context of mountain problems .
I think this approach is the right one for achieving a genuine European policy in 2002 : International Year of Mountains .
You see , Commissioner , Agenda 2000 does mention mountain farming , but everything gets more complicated at the implementation stage , for instance when Italian regions give notification of intervention laws for mountain areas , for example on animal husbandry or indeed on natural disasters which have already occurred .
Well , your ' Agriculture ' Directorate is turning into a worthy and legitimate control body . It is beginning a long correspondence made up of requests for minute details .
It will take at least six months or even more for definite replies to come in , frequently stamped on the closing date , sometimes using the competition rules which always seem to deny the particular characteristics of mountain agriculture .
Sooner or later , especially in the Alpine areas of the Union - lucky Switzerland takes care of its mountains without this network of controls - this could lead to an anti-European backlash .
That is why we ask you , Commissioner , to publicise the principles of this report on agriculture and remember , not just occasionally , that the Union has signed the Agriculture Protocol of the Alpine Convention .
Mr President , Mr Ebner , well done !
A good report .
Like under a burning glass , mountain farming shows what happens when you try and master sustainable land management tailored to a particular location .
Your report also has a drawback , however .
It only focuses on this aspect .
It is interesting that the House , or rather those still in it - although they do , after all , represent the majorities - can reach a majority understanding on these numerous excellent proposals and warnings .
It is true of agriculture as a whole that we should have fostered sustainable management in general , but then there would have been no agreement here , so that this acts as an alibi and that is a pity .
However , that should not detract from the usefulness of this report and we shall , of course , vote in favour of it .
We should like , however , to widen this debate to agriculture as a whole in order to achieve sustainable land management tailored to each particular location .
Mr President , apart from what is now the standard generalised wish list in the report , the fact that the new regulation will operate within the framework of Agenda 2000 leaves no room for any hope that the present frightful situation will improve or that the survival of farmers , most of whom run small or medium-sized holdings , will be assured .
As we know , the trend is towards greater liberalisation of agricultural production and the concentration of land and production in the hands of fewer and fewer people , with the result that mountain regions are sinking faster and faster into economic and social stagnation .
All that the proposal to offset the reduction in Community support for these regions by applying national and regional measures means in practice is that the European Union will completely abandon mountain regions and will attempt to shift even the miserable and ineffective support of the last 25 years on to its Member States .
This shift will have a massively adverse impact on countries such as Greece , which have a high proportion of mountain regions and a small budget , with the result that it will be impossible to support these regions from national funds .
In addition , this sort of proposal recommends nationalising the financing for policies formulated by the European Union , meaning that the poorest countries will be forced to apply anti-farming Community policy without any compensation or support measures and pay for it out of their own pockets .
Furthermore , the proposal to reject the removal of the milk quota system in mountain regions on the grounds of reduced competitiveness and high production costs is proof of the total lack of any social criteria and the annoying hypocrisy of the European Union 's environmentally-friendly pronouncements , given that the same restrictive measures are being applied to mountain and industrial livestock farming , while we all know the differences between them as regards both the environment and public health .
What with grim neo-liberal criteria and the profit and competition argument , mountain regions are condemned to stagnation and abandonment .
It is for these reasons that we shall be voting against the report , because we believe that the specific measures proposed , operating within the more general framework of Agenda 2000 and the so-called competitiveness argument will not only reverse , they will speed up the economic stagnation and desertification of mountain regions , with huge economic , social and environmental consequences .
Commissioner , without waiting for 2002 and its International Year of Mountains , we twenty Members who are still here all agree that we should protect hill and mountain farming , which is said to represent 20 % of our land .
I myself come from a region where there are mountains and where transhumance is practised , in our case with flocks of sheep .
It really is an ideal form of farming , especially for the European Commission .
You have the countryside , forests , biodiversity and the environment , you are preventing soil erosion and producing high-quality products , honey , meat and fruit , you have the tourist industry , and you put the accent on quality of life .
Above all , you are not practising productivism , you are not farming intensively , you are not annoying the United States in the world markets in wheat , oilseeds and animal proteins .
Basically , hill and mountain farming is multi-functionalism without the quantities .
It is the Austrian model that the 2006 reform of the CAP intends to generalise throughout Europe , including the lowland areas .
It conjures up a picture of rosy-cheeked milkmaids , accompanied , of course , by Commissioner Fischler , frolicking among haystacks , cow-bells , marmots and alpine pastures , and stroking rare-breed cows , while Mr Bush ' s Texans have a monopoly in the meat market .
So let us say yes to hill and mountain farming , in the hills and mountains , but no to a European farming industry reduced by WTO negotiations to a series of theme parks with peasants dressed up by Mike Moore to look like Walt Disney characters , whose job would be to entertain Anglo-Saxon tourists and conserve the landscape .
Mr President , I want to thank Mr Ebner for a very comprehensive and stimulating report .
We could return to the subject at a later stage in another way and produce some costings and a tighter , more comprehensive proposal as to how we will put the ideals expressed in this report into effect .
We have to consider too that we will have a conflict .
Firstly there is the size of the budget we have and enlargement , which will also lead to an increase in the mountainous area within the European Union , while at the same time we refuse to produce any resources to finance the very idealistic proposals in this report which most people in this House would subscribe to .
In parts of the European Union at this moment people drive two hours to work in their cars , two hours home and live in overcrowded circumstances .
All the utilities are over-utilised while in other areas we are closing down public services .
Roads are under-utilised , we are withdrawing police stations and closing down little churches and schools .
We in the European Union should not make the mistake the Americans made .
We should not abandon vast areas of our countries , where human activity will fade away .
These mountains will not be attractive if there are no villages , if there are no variable scenes of farms and livestock and people living there .
They will not provide the tourist amenities we need in the future .
If we allow this to happen , it will be like what we did in my country 50 years ago when we closed down our railways .
We will regret it in 40 or 50 years from now .
If we lose these areas as habitats for human beings and everything that goes with that then Europe will be so much the poorer and we will regret it .
We should fight within the European Union because individual States have failed .
I was in Scotland during the summer and I have seen the extent to which the Highlands have been denuded of their population .
Britain is much the poorer for that .
If we allow this to happen elsewhere we will have a Europe that will be much poorer .
We should return to this subject later and make firm proposals for the budgetary resources that we , as a Union , could use towards this end .
Mr President , the figures some Members have quoted amply demonstrate that the mountains are the minority of minorities in this House .
We represent only a little over 5 % of the inhabitants of Europe , of European citizens , but , as documented in the annals of the European Parliament over fifty years of the European Union , this is only the third time that the word ' mountain ' and a motion for a resolution about mountains have been heard in this Chamber .
The first time was in 1983 .
The rapporteur then was Mr Colleselli , from Cadore , in the North of Italy .
The second time , fifteen years later , I myself had the honour and the duty of bringing the problems of the mountains to this House , with my report on a new strategy for mountain regions , approved on 23 October 1998 .
My report started from an overall view of the problems of mountain regions , in all their complexity , and concluded that mountain farming was and remains the key .
The Ebner report - and I congratulate the rapporteur on the specific detail he has been able to put into it - takes this aspect further and opens up another horizon .
I can state that he starts precisely from the conclusions of the previous report by indicating that the salvation of the mountains we are all calling for can start from the farming sector itself .
However , we are all aware , once again , that farming cannot do it alone .
That is why there are also proposals in Mr Ebner ' s report which involve the whole mountain world : transport , infrastructure , tourism , the eco-system .
There is another factor we must protect and safeguard ; the vital factor for the mountains , Commissioner , is and remains man .
The average age of farmers in Europe - as you know -is about 50 . Some mountain farmers are over 60 .
That is a dire statistic for the future of the mountains .
We must make mountain farming attractive again , give the farmers confidence , and give them resources .
Above all we must have the courage to recognise , Commissioner , that a specific type of farming called mountain farming exists .
Let us do so with conviction so that the mountains themselves can continue to exist !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . The Commission has always seen hill and mountain farming as a very important and highly interesting subject .
I should like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and , more importantly , the rapporteur , Mr Ebner , for this own initiative report on 25 years ' application of Community legislation for hill and mountain farming .
Starting with the 1998 Santini report on a new strategy for hill and mountain farming and with the International Year of Mountains coming up next year , the Ebner report highlights the importance of mountain regions to the European Union .
In particular , it stresses the importance of environmental protection and the need to maintain natural beauty spots , produce quality products and urgently maintain the cultural heritage .
It also points out that the viability of the countryside in mountain regions goes far beyond agriculture and depends on a multitude of factors .
It is clear from this starting premise that the same questions preoccupy us .
Multifunctionality is also the cornerstone of our new rural development policy .
It aims to promote farming in which all functions and services are recognised , every function which farmers offer our society .
This is an integral part of the European farming model and I can assure you , in response to a number of concerns expressed in the report , that the Commission will stand squarely behind the need to take account of this aspect during trade negotiations at the World Trade Association .
With enlargement impending , the report calls on the Commission to create a global strategy for mountain regions and hill and mountain farming both in the Member States and in the candidate countries .
On this point , I must say , the Commission approach differs from the approach taken in the report .
May I remind you that the new rural development policy only started up last year .
We placed subsidiarity right at the forefront of this new policy , so that the Member States could set their own priorities and include what they consider are the most suitable measures for making the best of their regions and dealing with local drawbacks or difficulties in their rural development plans or Structural Fund planning documents .
This decentralised approach , which also applies to the SAPARD programmes , means that the rural development programme can be properly tailored to mountain regions and can accommodate the differences between them . For example , the Pyrenees need different concepts from the Alps .
This fosters sustainable development which takes account both of socio-economic problems and the environmental challenges facing each of these regions .
Instead of laying down central guidelines , as was recently the case , we should be discussing how best to implement the mountain region policy in detail not just with all the Union institutions and bodies , the Member States , the regions and the local authorities but also with our economic and social partners , non-governmental organisations and scientific circles .
I should like to point out , à propos , that the Commission accepted the second report on economic and social cohesion on 31 January this year . This report raises the question of setting priorities for the balanced and sustained development of the regions in an enlarged Union and the question of covering increased cohesion requirements , to mention just two , and calls for discussion on the subject .
This report offers numerous opportunities to develop regions lagging behind .
The main aim of the Commission 's contribution to the International Year of Mountains , therefore , is to advertise our current development mechanisms more widely .
The Commission will organise a seminar in the second half of the year at Commissioner Barnier 's and my initiative , the purpose of which will be to present and advertise the opportunities which Community policy offers mountain regions .
You and any other interested parties are also invited to attend .
To come back to the report , I should like to emphasise that it is already possible as the law now stands to provide targeted support for hill and mountain farming through compensatory payments , which form and shall continue to form our basic support for mountain regions , and through environmental measures , through aid for forestry , through processing aid and marketing aid or through diversification aid , for example in the tourism sector .
I should also like to remind you , Mrs Rojo , that the instructions for drawing up rural development programmes state that express reference must be made to programmes specifically for women and that each of the rural development programmes must contain a chapter describing specific help for women .
The same rules apply to rural development and the common organisations of the market .
These too take account of the specific nature of extensive farming , especially in mountain regions , either through specific , customised measures such as beef extensification premiums or premiums for sheepmeat or goatmeat production or by giving the Member States additional room to manoeuvre by allowing them to give special support to regions of their choice .
The Commission will address special treatment for farmers in mountain regions in relation to milk quotas , as proposed in the report , as part of its midterm review .
Finally , we should not forget , with reference to the Structural Funds , that 95 % of mountain regions come under Objective 1 or Objective 2 .
These mountain regions can all apply under current support rules and the Member States can tailor the measures needed to individual demands , be it in relation to transport or telecommunications networks , basic public services or support for economic activities .
In principle , this can be complemented by national aid , as Mr Caveri mentioned .
Here too , however , the golden rule is that we continue to require notification a ) because this gives regions the security of knowing that their measures will be seen to be compatible with EU law and b ) because we must not allow unfair competition between individual regions .
I cannot address all the suggestions in the report , but I hope that the seminar organised by the Commission to coincide with the International Year of Mountains will give plenty of opportunity to come back to these suggestions .
In the meantime , the Commission will exercise its powers and right of initiative in order to examine the conclusions of the report in greater detail and continue the dialogue started today .
I am positive that this will allow us to successfully raise the profile of mountain regions and highlight their importance to Europe .
Thank you very much Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed
The vote will take place today , at 6.30 p.m.
Basic education in developing countries
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0278 / 2001 ) by Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on basic education in developing countries in the context of the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on Children in September 2001 [ 2001 / 2030 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , as you suggested , this report is meant to focus on the real opportunity that the UN Special Conference on Children and Children 's Rights which takes place later this month gives this Parliament to focus on a fundamental way in which we can tackle global poverty .
It is an opportunity for us not only to give a profile to this subject but also to call for action .
Let me set out what the targets are : free and compulsory education for all , halving adult illiteracy by 2015 , eliminating gender disparities in primary and secondary schools by 2005 and extending learning opportunities for adults and young people and improvements in the quality of education provided .
We are quite tired of hearing about development targets .
They are set and they are endless .
We know the ' whys ' for all these development concerns .
What we from the Committee on Development and Cooperation are asking is ' how ' we are going to deliver on these targets .
The subject is at the heart of the global strategy that we , in our committee , discuss on poverty .
The EU clearly has a key and central role to play here .
Clear commitments were made at Dakar in Senegal last year .
But neither from the EU nor anyone else really are we getting practical strategies .
I was a teacher myself for 30 years , mostly in primary education so I think I am quite justified in having a passion about looking at the reasons for this crisis .
One in six of the world 's population are functionally illiterate .
One hundred and thirty million - one in five - of the total number of children are not in any kind of primary education .
One terrible statistic is that two-thirds of those are little girls .
Their learning situation is terrible .
Many of will have seen children trying to learn sitting under a tree with not even a blackboard to assist the teacher .
When we talk about information technology we are often talking about children who have never even held a pencil in their hand , never mind being likely to sit at the keyboard of a computer .
In these schools too the quality of their education is often affected by the fact that they are not taught in their own language .
There is a clear link between illiteracy and income poverty .
Average incomes in a country mirror very clearly the levels of access to education .
There is a clear link between child mortality rates and the level of parental education .
A 10 % increase in girls ' enrolment in primary school would bring a substantial improvement in infant and maternal mortality rates .
And yet we see aid from developed countries to basic education being slashed from budgets across the globe .
It is only 1 % of the total .
Developing countries themselves take insufficient interest in the importance of education .
The sub-continent of India spends less than 1 % of GDP on education .
As far as the EU is concerned , I hope the Commissioner will agree that this is not enough .
I hope you are not going to state in your presentation that all of this will be incorporated into existing procedures .
We need an answer from the Commissioner on how we intend to implement the goals .
I would like to hear how he intends to improve coordination of the national indicative programmes for Cotonou and about our involvement in the steering committee working on education in Africa .
I also know that there is a promise of a communication on basic education from the Commission during the Belgian Presidency .
I would like to know when we might expect to see that .
Let me just touch on one or two issues .
Priority for girls obviously , and I suspect that Mrs Junker will speak about that . Last in , first out ; that is what happens to girls .
Girls have a low status and therefore there is no priority for getting them into school .
I would like to see a lot more training in ministries in developing countries and concrete programmes to ensure that we get girls into school .
The impact of HIV is enormous .
There are millions of AIDS orphans in the developing world and in a country like Zambia there are more teachers infected annually with HIV than they are able to train to put in their schools .
These are clearly very critical issues for us to discuss .
Meeting the targets looks difficult .
Is there sufficient political commitment in current circumstances to ensure that we will get all the girls into school by 2005 ?
The reality is , and I hope that people will admit this very clearly at the UN Conference the week after next , that as things are going all of these targets are unachievable .
Meeting the target of universal primary education looks extremely difficult .
I would like to know from the Commission how its work in trying to achieve these targets includes NGOs and civil society and all those people who are involved in the Global Education Campaign .
It is a very successful , active and dynamic campaign .
I would hope that the European Commission is very much engaged with them but I suspect that is not the case .
According to the Global Education Campaign , the targets on education would require USD 8 billion a year .
This is the equivalent of four days of global military spending and 9 minutes of international currency speculation .
Therefore it seems to me that if the commitment was there , we could deliver .
It is a price worth paying .
The current inequities that I have described are untenable and certainly indefensible .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is fair that I begin my speech on behalf of the PPE Group by congratulating Mrs Kinnock on her excellent report and on the passion with which she is defending it .
I believe that the proposals in this report , together with the resolution which we approved at the last part-session in July , represent the best contribution this Parliament could have made to the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on Children , because there is no question , unfortunately , that education is still the great unresolved issue within development cooperation , despite the formal declarations and the commitments given at the various international conferences which have addressed this issue .
The figures on the millions of children not attending school , which Mrs Kinnock pointed out , speak for themselves in this respect .
While it is a grave situation that so many children are being deprived of their fundamental right to education , it is even more grave that , as a result of the violation of this right , millions of people are immersed in poverty and under-development .
Because the key to prosperity and progress , especially in the context of the information and communication society which we live in today , lies in the level of education the people have access to .
The conviction that , by not dealing vigorously with the issue of education in the developing countries , we will not only fail to eradicate poverty , but that the gap between the rich and poor countries will increase , has certainly led us to place education at the centre of the global strategy for eradicating poverty .
In this respect , we have to recognise that the Dakar Conference on education for all represented a great step forward , but it is a step which will take us nowhere if action is not taken and if , in accordance with the decisions at Dakar , we do not quickly adopt a concrete world initiative directed towards creating strategies and mobilising the resources required to provide effective support for the efforts made on a national level - as one of the Dakar commitments states .
The European Union , as the main donor and insofar as it has made solidarity and the defence of human rights an essential dimension of its international action , has the responsibility to promote these strategies in close coordination with the other donors , including the Monetary Fund and the World Bank and with the participation of civil society and , with them , policies aimed at overcoming the obstacles which deny children access to a quality education .
And the European Union has the moral and political obligation to provide the financial resources necessary to achieve free education for all between now and 2015 .
All of this can be done in accordance with the excellent proposals contained in the Kinnock report , which reflect both the practically unanimous feelings of the Committee on Development and the feelings of my group .
However , achieving this objective will also require us to urgently either cancel or restructure the debts of the developing countries in exchange for the funds made available as a result being directed to education programmes .
It will require making the developing countries themselves responsible and encouraging them , through persuasive measures if necessary , to fulfil the commitments given in Dakar and to give absolute priority to education .
Above all , it will require an increase in financial contributions and the allocation of at least 8 % of official aid to development and to basic education , in line with the views of the people promoting the campaign for education for all .
Only through resources which match the challenge we have to face will it be possible to win the battle against illiteracy in the world .
I will end by saying that only in this way will it be possible for millions of children to exercise their fundamental right to education , an education which will allow them to open the doors to progress and one day become free men and women .
Mr President , the report by Mrs Kinnock is one of those which the Socialist Group has followed with the greatest interest and affection .
The text gives figures which are often so scandalous that they should provide little comfort for our consciences , because , at the end of the day , they demonstrate the incoherence of almost all of us who believe that the education of children is important for the success of any development process .
There are plenty of declarations recognising that child education in the under-developed world is one of the main conditions if those countries are to be able to begin to free themselves from the situation of justice and backwardness they are in .
Mrs Kinnock ' s report mentions the numerous commitments made in this regard by the international community on different occasions . The latest was the world conference on education , which took place in Dakar last year .
The report , however , is also a compendium and a condemnation of incoherences and irresponsibilities .
Incoherence and irresponsibility on the part of the developed countries which , despite their promises , have not only failed to increase their programmes in favour of education and care for children in the developing world , but in fact have reduced their efforts in that area .
And incoherence and irresponsibility on the part of the countries of the South which , apart from very few exceptions , are still neglecting the education of their youngest citizens in the face of other priorities such as military expenditure which , in the majority of cases , is still above what is invested in education .
The resolution which we are voting on should not remain , like so many others , as a worthless piece of paper .
This call for coherence and responsibility is a genuine demonstration that our Parliament should promote this issue as a European Union objective .
Furthermore , however , this report should serve as a reference for the action of the Union and many European States , members or candidates for accession , at the United Nations General Assembly which will take place in New York in a few days time .
Glenys Kinnock will be there and will speak out clearly , in the knowledge that we all support her and with the strength which the support deriving from our approving her proposals will give her .
Documents such as this are the best way to respond with specific proposals to a form of globalisation which , since it is mainly focused on the market , is creating inequalities , poverty and exclusion on a world scale and is therefore becoming repellent to many people throughout the world .
I will end by offering our thanks and congratulations to Mrs Kinnock on her work .
It will be important to implement what is expressed here , but we must start by broadly distributing the report .
This will convince and guide many people and will increase the credibility of the European Parliament amongst the citizens of Europe .
It will also contribute to some people outside our territory recovering their confidence in us as well as their own sense of hope .
What does the practice of education in the developing countries teach us ?
Above all , that good primary education is still far from being granted the priority status that it deserves .
Good , free education is essential for development .
Nine hundred million people are still illiterate .
The Dakar objectives are in danger of not being achieved by a long chalk .
For this reason , new impetus is necessary at the highest political level , particularly from Europe , America and Japan .
There is an urgent need for a strategically developed initiative with a realistic timescale and more financial resources .
Indicative programmes must be drawn up for each country .
Up to now , the European Union has paid far too little attention to education .
The argument that other donors are already doing sufficient is simply and demonstrably untrue .
The cause for the shortfall in educational facilities lies not only with the donors .
Many developing countries themselves give it far too low a priority .
It is outrageous that in Africa twice as much money should be spent on military equipment as on education .
If India continues to spend less than 1 % of its GDP on school facilities , of course , development will never come off the ground .
The report of Mrs Kinnock is excellent .
Certainly , special attention will have to be paid to girls , early school-leavers , and also former child soldiers .
The basic rights of children will only be respected if adults draw the right political lessons from failing educational practice .
Mr President , we have , of course , far too little time to discuss Mrs Kinnock ' s excellent report properly .
I share her scepticism about the great conferences where people in expensive suits and large expense accounts meet to talk about priorities that they afterwards immediately forget , while the education budgets of the poorest countries are falling and the number of children condemned to illiteracy continues to rise .
I really have the impression that a number of countries are acting like some governments in the nineteenth century : keep them poor and keep them stupid , then they will be less trouble .
That is , in fact , the strategic reason I can identify behind the manifest neglect of primary education .
That primary education has also had far too low a priority in our own budgets for development cooperation .
Fortunately , fellow MEPs have already said much that is true .
I will therefore restrict myself to a few suggestions relating to that primary education in Mrs Kinnock ' s report , which are particularly pertinent .
That education must be free .
Children must not be excluded because they cannot afford primary education ; otherwise they are condemned to the street , condemned to exploitation through child labour , and so on .
On the contrary , we should actually give scholarships to children from poor families , so that they can go to school , to cover the miles , to pay for their uniforms , etc .
The teachers must also be paid , they must be trained and they must receive a wage that enables them to survive in a decent way , so that they do not have to leave the children to their own devices because they must urgently earn something extra to at least give their own families some food . It is clear that national action plans will need to be put in place .
I expect much more from governments that are aware of the problem , but in that case we must also be prepared to support those governments and increase their administrative efficiency .
We are far too inclined to sit on the sidelines with our expensive specialists and our expensive NGOs , while we , in fact , give far too little support to the meagre educational facilities in those countries themselves .
That does not detract from the fact that I expect the EU to translate all those words into action .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Kinnock 's report is a huge achievement and is to be welcomed unreservedly .
The ACP countries of sub-Saharan Africa are some of the least developed countries .
There are depressing educational deficits here and women and children are deprived of even the most rudimentary basic education .
There are examples , however , which give cause for hope and it is these which I should like to address .
The government of Mali which , as you know , is a bitterly poor country in the Sahel , has imposed an ambitious political programme which courageously tackles decentralisation and comprehensive education reforms .
Children in Mali , boys and girls , are to receive a good school education , where possible in their regional or ethnic dialect .
That is easier said than done , however , because no teachers have been trained in the regional dialects and there are no corresponding curricula , let alone books .
Teachers need to be trained first and books need to be written first ; and that is not something which can be done overnight and it is not something which can cover the whole country straight away .
You only have to think of the nomadic groups in the desert .
They require special schools and special arrangements , to name but one example .
This is an enormous challenge in education policy and is being extremely well supported by numerous donor organisations .
The radio can help , especially in sparsely populated regions .
The numerous local and regional stations which have started up in Mali , as in other developing countries , could easily be used for decentralised education plans , even if the tapes used are produced centrally .
Lessons over the radio have always been a way of life in the Australian outback .
In Africa , customised electronic methods and mobile schools could go a long way towards rectifying the education deficit .
It would be rewarding for the development cooperation of the European Union if we were to be involved in these new methods .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the resolution tabled in the run up to the UN Special Conference on Children and congratulates you , Mrs Kinnock , on your most comprehensive report .
Your report rightly highlights the need for urgent measures to implement the framework for action set out in Dakar .
The Commission has also decided to put development policy , especially the education and health sectors , at the top of its agenda in 2002 .
Child welfare is a fundamental concern and a basic objective .
An objective that we want to pursue mainly though social policies in sectors such as education and health .
Related questions were addressed last year in the Council and Commission declaration on the European Community 's development policy in connection with the fight against poverty .
They also play a pivotal role in the Cotonou partnership agreement .
The Commission has also stepped up support in the education sector and focused measures on basic education , especially primary school education , in recent years .
As a result , the Community has considerably increased the general funds allocated to this sector in comparison with others .
In addition , most programmes to promote primary school education contain special clauses for the benefit of girls , in order to counter gender-based drawbacks .
As far as the specific considerations and recommendations which relate to the Community are concerned , I have the following to say : first , the education sector is instrumental in the strategy to fight poverty , which is the overriding aim of the Community 's development policy .
The Commission shares the view that clear objectives need to be defined , that education aspects need to be included in the fight against poverty and that civil society needs to be involved .
The Commission also takes this standpoint in negotiations with developing countries on strategies to fight poverty .
The Commission is determined to play an active role in these negotiations and to further international development objectives .
Secondly , the Community made a formal undertaking in Dakar last year by backing the vision of the world declaration on education for all based on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child , which states that education is a human right .
This means that the Community has also subscribed to the call for countries seriously committed to education not to be impeded in implementing this objective by a lack of funds .
The Commission shares the view of the European Parliament that better coordination and more complementarity between Community measures and national projects , with the help of the Group of Experts on Education , and more intensive cooperation with UNESCO and the Association for the Development of Education in Africa are of paramount importance in improving the effectiveness of Community aid .
The Commission is therefore stepping up its collaboration with UNESCO , especially by supporting UNESCO in coordinating education for all partners .
The Commission is also involved in the working party set up to implement the framework for action set out in Dakar .
It is also promoting the objectives of education for all in its negotiations on the ACP countries ' strategies for the ninth EDF .
As far as the difficult question of setting up a global fund for basic education is concerned , the Commission feels , given the Commission procedure for programming and implementing aid , that this sort of fund is not a practicable solution .
However , the Commission does not in principle reject the idea of a global initiative , as provided for in the Dakar framework for action , even if the implementation methods need to be discussed in detail .
Thirdly , the question of children 's rights is closely bound up with the gender problem in general .
Education targets for children , especially girls , will not be met until women have an equal status in the family and in the various societies .
The Commission is very firmly in favour of paying particular attention to the education needs of girls in developing countries .
It is currently preparing an action plan on equal treatment for men and women which should deal with this problem .
It is also taking gender-specific questions into account in all special education programmes .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place immediately .
VOTE
The next item is the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Report ( A5 ­ 0277 / 2001 ) by Mr Ebner , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on 25 years ' application of Community legislation for hill and mountain farming [ 2000 / 2222 ( INI ) ]
Mr President , there is a problem with the text at item 11 , page 10 , in the part about mountain wine-growing .
In the Italian text there is a contradiction in the third line from the end where it says that no distinction should be made between the costs of planting vineyards in lowland areas and on mountains .
In fact , the sense of the committee ' s work and , obviously , the sense of the amendments which have been tabled is that the costs of planting vineyards in lowland areas and on mountains should be compared with the costs of hill vineyards .
. ( NL ) An agriculture that is increasingly relying on the world market will try to produce as cheaply as possible , at the expense of the quality of work , of nature , of the environment and of animal welfare .
The least productive regions will be abandoned first .
Those are areas that have been uninhabited over a long period , because it requires more effort to earn a living .
The people who had nevertheless finally settled there , were the outcasts of society .
Often they were ex-convicts , ethnic minorities and losers in the battle for the best land .
The least productive areas where the losers wound up are not only the mountain areas , but also low-lying wetlands , that is , old bogs , the bottom of which consists of peat , a water retaining vegetable material that , when dry , shrinks and disappears .
Farmers in mountains and wetlands now play an important role in nature conservation , recreation and water management .
In a free , unprotected market , they are doomed to disappear .
Then their working and living area will not return to primeval nature , but will go to the dogs .
Mechanising and destroying the landscape to allow it to be cultivated more easily is not an acceptable alternative .
That is why I should like to back the proposed supporting measures , but to register an objection if these are limited to the mountains alone .
. ( FR ) We support the author of the report in her demand that free , compulsory and high-quality education should be provided for all children up to the age of 15 .
However , even in European countries where there are laws to that effect , the free aspect is largely a formality , since it does not include the equipment that children need for school , which penalises children from poorer families , not to mention the overloaded classes and under-equipped state of schools in working-class districts .
These troubles are even more keenly felt in developing countries , even where education is compulsory .
The report claims that solving the education crisis is one of the most effective strategies for breaking the poverty cycle .
This is turning reality upside-down .
Without breaking the poverty cycle , in other words without stopping the pillaging of poor countries and the impoverishment of their working populations , even the most well-intentioned speeches will remain speeches , and millions of children in poor countries will continue to be deprived of even a minimum education .
Our vote in favour of this report means that we agree with the intentions expressed but only subject to these conditions .
That concludes voting time .
Adjournment of the session
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned .
( The sitting was closed at 6.55 p.m. )
Acts of terrorism in the United States
Ladies and gentlemen , I open this extraordinary meeting with the emotion and the sadness that this horrific event , the scale of which would have seemed inconceivable , inspires in us all .
The purpose of this meeting is first of all to demonstrate our solidarity with the American people , who have just been struck by a barbaric act of terrorism , to show our compassion for the victims , for the final toll will certainly be appalling , and to demonstrate our support for all those who are working tirelessly to save what further lives they can .
Yesterday , I expressed this solidarity to President Bush , on my own behalf and on behalf of the entire European Parliament and gave him my assurance that the people of Europe are standing shoulder to shoulder with the United States in the tragic ordeal the American nation is suffering .
When terrorism strikes in a Member State of the European Union we all feel concerned , and these appalling attacks inspire in me the same feeling of disgust and indignation .
Today , we share the pain of the American people .
It is the United States , that great democracy which did so much to help Europe protect its freedom that has just been attacked , but a blow has also been dealt to the sacrosanct values of life and democracy .
The date of 11 September 2001 will remain forever engraved on the memory of humanity .
This tragedy calls for a calm reaction on our part but also for the closest cooperation between all countries that reject terrorism so that the perpetrators of these abominable crimes and those who have supported them can be identified , pursued , arrested and tried and so that blind terrorism can , at last , be eradicated from the surface of the globe .
It also requires the international community to commit itself to finding a peaceful solution to the conflicts that nourish and sustain fanaticism .
Over and above statements , over and above the common response to terrorism that we hope and pray for , all players on the international stage must now shoulder their responsibilities .
From now on resolute action must be the order of the day and I know that the European Union will have to take decisions of vital importance .
I welcome the presence here today of Prime Minister Verhofstadt , Mr Michel , Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs , and Mr Prodi , President of the Commission .
The European Union will have no credibility if it does not establish a common policy on combating terrorism .
The European Commission and the European Parliament have stated this clearly , particularly during our last part-session .
I hope that the Council will study these proposals without delay .
Since the Tampere European Council , some tentative progress has , admittedly , been made with regard to the European area of freedom , security and justice , but this falls considerably short of what is needed .
We must go further .
Although the European Union has made its presence felt on the international stage , in the Middle East , at Durban and even in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , yesterday ' s events are proof , if proof were needed , of the imperative need to establish a Europe of defence and a genuinely common foreign and security policy as quickly as possible .
An extraordinary European Council meeting could provide a timely boost to all these elements for , as we know , history waits for no man .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us now observe a minute ' s silence for all the victims .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
- ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , just over 24 hours ago the United States was hit by an attack of unprecedented scale and ferocity .
At this very moment men , women and children of all ages , of all convictions and of all origins are struggling for their lives , while others are mourning the loss of loved ones and others still are suffering the anguish of waiting for reassuring news about the fate of those who are missing .
Madam President , our thoughts are with our American friends who have been assailed by this despicable and barbaric violence .
We would like to be able to express just how much we share their suffering .
Today , we feel that we are all Americans .
I say that , and let there be no mistake about this , because it is not just the United States and its population that has been targeted , but democracy itself .
Democracy and its values of liberty , tolerance and humanity , which are the exact opposite of blind and suicidal terrorism .
As human beings , as believers in democracy , and as Europeans , we cannot nor will we ever be able to accept this barbarity .
Madam President , the Union that we want to build has its origins precisely in the rejection of the hate , fanaticism and murderous madness that nearly led to the downfall of our continent .
And in the face of these tragedies a comprehensive range of concrete and firm gestures is called for .
The various Member States have taken essential initiatives to come to the aid of the United States of America .
Madam President , on behalf of the Union , and following consultation with the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , and the leaders of all the Member States , I have conveyed our deepest sympathy to President Bush .
As a token of solidarity and sympathy , the Union has decided that on Friday , 14 September a day of mourning and solidarity with the American people will be observed .
The Heads of State and Government of the fifteen EU Member States will be issuing a joint political declaration in the morning .
At 12 noon , a three minutes ' silence will be observed , during which all activity will be suspended .
( Loud applause ) The candidate countries for accession to the European Union are also invited to join us in this act of solidarity .
With this expression of solidarity , in addition to the political decisions which we will be taking in the coming weeks , the people of the European Union wish to express their deep sympathy with the grief , and particularly the pain , which is affecting the American people today .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , an extraordinary meeting of the Commission took place this morning .
We observed a minute ' s silence and then discussed the various political aspects of this appalling tragedy which fall within the direct remit of the Commission .
This afternoon , I stressed before the European Parliament and the General Affairs Council that Europe must demonstrate full solidarity with the American people and adopt a common European position on all aspects of these tragic events .
The Commission is appalled by these criminal , barbaric deeds and has already sent its condolences to the victims and their families and expressed its sympathy for the American people .
Our cooperation with the United States in the fight against terrorism is more essential than ever and must be pursued .
Over the next few days , the Commission will examine the other proposals made in order to be able to take increasingly effective action to fight terrorism .
We are fortunate in that the economic and social structure of our countries is strong and resilient .
Therefore , even in these sad circumstances , we can remain calm and confident , and we will not allow terrorism to divide us or to divide the world in its goals or in its endeavours to achieve them .
We must reflect at this time on the role of Europe .
This criminal action is an attack on all our common values and on freedom itself .
After this event , nothing will ever be the same .
We therefore need to show great solidarity and friendship towards the American people and their government , and the European institutions and governments will work closely with our US and other friends at this tragic time and in the future .
However , there is also a purely European dimension .
The tragic events we have witnessed highlight once again the need for a united , strong , resolute , unified Europe which protects freedom and safeguards peace in Europe and throughout the world , a Europe that acts united alongside countries which share our goals , that acts united to protect and promote the values of freedom and solidarity , the values which are the basis of the democracy preserved by Parliament .
I invite you , therefore , to reflect upon yesterday ' s tragedy .
Our citizens will only be able ensure peace and stability for themselves and for their children if they are united in their actions and if they feel that they can count on Europe .
This is the path we must take to safeguard our people : we must follow it courageously , resolutely and responsibly .
( Loud applause )
- ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , first of all , on behalf of the Council , to express our immense horror , outrage and revulsion at the tragic events which hit the United States yesterday morning .
I wish here , on behalf of the European Union , on behalf not only of its leaders but also of all the citizens of Europe , to reiterate our most sincere sympathy for the victims and their families and for the American people and the government of the United States .
This abominable act , which has caused such pain to the American people , is of course also an attack on the universal values which Europe has always shared with America .
I would like , on behalf of the Council , to solemnly reaffirm here the unfailing solidarity of the peoples of Europe with the American people in defending these values .
We want the United States to be aware that Europe is by its side in combating the evil of terrorism , no matter what form it may take .
We cannot allow anonymous terror to undermine the values of the free and democratic world .
We will stand together in attacking the major threat represented by large-scale terrorism .
The battle against this scourge will be all the more effective to the extent that it is supported by preventive actions and a detailed political dialogue with the countries of those regions of the world where terrorism has its roots .
Yesterday ' s terrorist attack on the territory of the United States is an unprecedented act of provocation and of particularly loathsome cruelty .
Acts of such barbarity , terror and cowardice cannot be tolerated .
The scale of this tragedy demands an appropriate response .
In conjunction with its allies , the European Union will examine all possible means of preventing such acts and of responding to them in an appropriate manner .
The European Union will step up its activity in the international bodies responsible for the fight against terrorism with a view to ensuring that the perpetrators , accomplices and sponsors of acts of terrorism are rendered powerless .
However , our determination should , under no circumstances , fail to go hand in hand with responsible prudence .
At this moment we do not know the identity of the perpetrators , sponsors and possible accomplices of these terrible attacks .
These are essential factors in being able to judge and react in a rational manner with a responsible and meaningful attitude .
We must avoid any type of impromptu action .
While awaiting a response to these questions , our governments have taken the necessary steps to protect their people .
The Council has been informed of security measures adopted as a matter of urgency by the Member States .
In order to maximise cooperation between us , the Council has asked the Justice , Home Affairs and Transport Councils to take whatever measures are necessary to maintain the highest level of security as quickly as possible , particularly in the area of air transport , together with all measures required to prevent other attacks .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council on 27 September and the informal Transport Council on 14 September will evaluate those measures already taken and any that may be necessary to complement them .
The Extraordinary Council of Foreign Affairs Ministers has condemned these acts of barbarity , which are an insult to our common values , in the strongest terms .
We have declared 14 September 2001 a day of mourning in the 15 Member States .
We have asked the presidency to maintain close contact with the United States so as to study with them how best to provide whatever help may be required .
At the request of several Member States , the Secretary General of NATO has informed the Council of the discussions in progress within that organisation .
I can now read to you the declaration by the European Union :
" The Council of the European Union , meeting in special session today , in the presence of the Secretary General of the Atlantic Alliance , expressed its horror at yesterday ' s terrorist attacks in the United States .
The Council stressed its complete solidarity with the government of the United States and the American people at this terrible time and extended its deepest sympathy to all the victims and their families .
We ask all Europeans to observe three minutes of silence on Friday , 14 September at 12 noon and we also declare 14 September 2001 a day of mourning .
These horrendous acts are an attack not only on the United States but against humanity itself and the values and freedoms we all share .
The life and work of our open and democratic societies will continue undeterred .
The Union utterly condemns the perpetrators and sponsors of these acts of barbarism .
The Union and its Member States will spare no efforts in helping identify , bring to justice and punish those responsible : there will be no safe haven for terrorists and their sponsors .
The Union will work closely with the United States and all partners to combat international terrorism .
All international organisations , particularly the United Nations , must be engaged and all relevant international instruments , including those concerned with the financing of terrorism , must be fully implemented .
The Community and its Member States have offered the United States all possible assistance with search and rescue operations .
Discussions are underway to establish what help would be most useful .
Recalling the strong and enduring ties which exist between the European Union and the United States , the Council has asked the presidency to stay in close contact with the government of the United States in order to convey this message of solidarity . "
Following on from that , Madam President , these are the conclusions of the Council , so that you will be in receipt of all the relevant information :
" The Council expressed the profound solidarity of the European Union with the American people and approved a declaration condemning the terrorist attacks in the United States .
The Council was informed of the security measures taken by the Member States .
To ensure maximum cooperation between the latter , the Council asks its Justice and Home Affairs and Transport compositions to take all the necessary measures as soon as possible to maintain the highest level of security , particularly in the field of air transport , and any other measures needed to combat terrorism and prevent terrorist attacks .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting on 27 and 28 September , or earlier if necessary , together with the informal Transport Council meeting on 14 and 15 September , will evaluate the measures which will already have been taken and those which should supplement them .
The Council reaffirms its determination to combat all forms of terrorism with all the resources at its disposal .
The Council also took note of the declaration by the Commission and the President of the ECOFIN Council .
The Council has requested the presidency , the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the Commission submit , as soon as possible , a report on concrete measures that may be recommended to speed up the implementation and the strengthening of the operational instruments of both the Common Foreign and Security Policy and in the field of Justice and Home Affairs .
These measures will be aimed at increasing the capacity of the European Union to fight effectively , together with the United States and all our partners , international terrorism .
As for the Council , it intends to return to these measures regularly in order to ensure , in particular , that all the actions taken by the European Union are coordinated . "
( Loud applause )

- ( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my group ' s sincere thanks to you , Madam President , for having convened this sitting , which gives us all an opportunity to express our deepest sympathy for and solidarity with those families that have suffered losses , with the President of the United States of America , with our colleagues in the US Congress and with everyone in the United States of America .
Yesterday ' s horrendous attack in Washington and New York was not just an attack on the United States , but an attack on the entire civilised world , an attack against every one of us , including those in this Chamber .
It was an attack on our ideals of democracy , human rights and peace .
We are filled with grief and horror in the face of this disaster , a disaster which must never be repeated , and the forces of civilisation throughout the world must now work shoulder to shoulder with the United States to bring those responsible for this attack to account , and we must work closely together to prevent future terrorist attacks .
We must find a way to stop attacks of this kind being planned again , and this will also require a whole new dimension in European and international cooperation .
We must commit ourselves today to launching a fight against terrorism , so that the apocalyptic events in New York and Washington do not mean a global apocalypse tomorrow , and as a Parliament we can be proud of the fact that last week we adopted Mr Watson 's anti-terrorism report by such a huge majority .
For a few hours yesterday I had the impression that the United States ' ability to act had been compromised . The United States is a world power to which we owe a debt of gratitude for fighting against Nazism in the Second World War and thus guaranteeing a peaceful future for Europe and it is a world power which has firmly resisted totalitarian communism , which ultimately led to the collapse of the wall dividing Berlin , Germany and Europe .
On behalf of my group I would like to say that it is in our interest for America to retain its ability to act and to be strong , and for America to remain a good partner and friend to the European Union , and we should work together towards this goal in future .
( Loud applause )
We do not know who the perpetrators are .
There are certain assumptions , but I would counsel against surmising that these assumptions are true .
Above all , should these assumptions be confirmed , I would counsel us all against applying them to the Arab and Islamic world as a whole .
I have never forgotten an outstanding speech given by Anwar al Sadat , the assassinated President of Egypt , on 10 February 1981 .
He said that Islam should never be judged by the misguided and irresponsible actions of people professing to be adherents of this great faith .
Islam is a religion based on tolerance , not fanaticism , a religion based on love , not hate , and it is a coherent religion based on order , not chaos .
We should beware of making generalisations , and we should make it clear that we not only wish to live in partnership with our American friends , but that we also want to live in partnership and , if possible , friendship with those Arab and Islamic countries that are committed to peace .
( Loud applause )
We should commit ourselves today to building an order in Europe and throughout the world in conjunction with all our neighbours - an order in which Europe is strong and united .
That is why , Mr President-in-Office , it gives such an impressive signal that both you and the President of the Commission are here today , a signal that we Europeans are united and strong , and that we wish to coexist in friendship and partnership with all our neighbours , on the basis of human rights , democracy , freedom , social well-being and , above all , peace .
That must be the message we send out today , the day after the dreadful events of 11 September 2001 .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , our group shares the indignation and horror at the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington .
We wish to express our solidarity with the families of the American victims of these horrendous attacks .
We would also like to express our profound sadness to the families of the European victims and all those who have lost relatives , whatever their colour or continent of origin , because this diabolical attack was not only directed against the American people , but also against the Europeans and the other people who live together in the cosmopolitan world of New York , and we must remember that the World Trade Centre is just a few steps from the headquarters of the United Nations .
This is an attack on our common values , on democracy , on the very foundations of our civilisation .
As the late lamented Francisco Tomás y Valiente , President of the Spanish Constitutional Court , who was murdered by terrorists , wrote in an almost posthumous article : " Every time a person is killed , something dies within us " .
Exactly a week ago , this Parliament unanimously approved the resolution against terrorism .
Then it was a European problem for certain States .
Today we can see that the situation has changed qualitatively : terrorism has also been globalised as a result of a lethal combination of fanaticism , cowardice and high technology .
Our film archives are full of horror and disaster movies , with monsters attacking New York and other cities .
What happened yesterday reminds us that we do not need monsters : we humans are monsters when we lose our minds .
And as in Goya ' s painting , ' the illusion of reason produces monsters ' .
We Europeans must play a very significant role in the fight against globalised terrorism , in the fight for common values , for a more peaceful and just world .
We want to fight shoulder to shoulder with the Americans , with our colleagues in the United States Congress , and also with the rest of our allies , in a joint action to resolve the most ferocious conflicts on the planet with perseverance and decisiveness .
We welcome the fact that the Americans , led by their President , despite this cowardly aggression , have so far acted with cool heads , containing their rage , as yesterday Kofi Annan rightly asked them to do .
We would ask the leaders not to change that attitude , not to respond to terror with terror , that we may act jointly , above all in order to achieve something very important , because now is the time to strengthen our alliance with the United States and with all the people of the world who share our ideal of peace , justice and freedom .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , President-in-Office , President of the Commission , colleagues , this is an important place in which to celebrate this important moment .
We in this Parliament are the tribune of the peoples of the European Union and we have gathered here today to declare solemnly our outrage , our sympathy , our solidarity and our common bond in humanity and democracy with the people of the United States of America , and with the people of New York City and Washington D.C.
We witnessed yesterday a profoundly shocking event .
It is a new and low threshold in the tide of human affairs .
We witnessed an act of war - without a declaration of war - by persons , movements or states , as yet , not fully determined , but who acted with a grim and focused determination .
We must make sure that our response is common and not isolated , shared and not unilateral , aimed at our common enemy , which is terrorism , but not at wider forces such as Islam or the wider Arab world , should that be the source whence this monster may have sprung .
This modern apocalypse is America ' s injury , but the wounds are universally shared among the community of democratic nations .
To the people of the United States of America , to its President , its Congressional and civic leaders , and its communities throughout the country , especially the peoples of New York and Washington , to the grieving families of the missing and the dead and to those who have survived the ordeal , we express our sympathy in this hour of hardship and devastation .
New York is a very special place .
It is a multi-cultural microcosm of the whole world .
It is a special gateway between our old continent and the New World .
It was through Ellis Island that in earlier generations , before the spirit of democracy took the deep root it has right across our continent , that our huddled masses , our oppressed and our starving went to find freedom , democracy and opportunity .
It is no accident that when the French Republic gave the people of the United States a gift to celebrate 100 years of that great republic , that they called that statue ' Liberty ' : no accident either that her extended arms should carry a torch of freedom .
When someone touches that symbol , they touch us all deeply , because it is part of our common , human , democratic bond and inheritance .
I remember , as a schoolboy , seeing on television at home a visit by John Fitzgerald Kennedy to places I had never been in our divided continent .
I remember his visit to the great symbol of that gross division , Berlin , with its wall .
I remember as a boy I could understand , although I did not know about politics or international affairs , that when that man said , " I am a Berliner " , he said something deep and meaningful in terms of solidarity at that time .
Today , as the Prime Minister has remarked , we are all Americans , we are all New Yorkers , we are all Washingtonians .
We share the sense of shock and horror .
We share the bewildered outrage , we feel the vulnerability , for this is our common inheritance from yesterday 's barbarous outrage .
We share common democratic values and interests and we stand together willing to fight against terrorism and promote those interests and values .
It is important that we as Europeans say to the Congressional leadership today : ' You do not stand alone .
You are not isolated .
We can make common cause in this matter , and we must do so . '
But , most of all , we stand today in our common bond of humanity as our American friends bravely search for their survivors and for their dead .
Language often fails us on these occasions .
My own colleagues have asked me to invite you , Madam President , in addition to this solemn moment , to open a book of condolence that we might also convey through that , at some appropriate time to the Congress , our interlocutor in US democracy , that in spite of the space which divides us across the Atlantic , we are resolutely united by the bonds of democracy and freedom and in the fight against terrorism .
Our message to them today , in this fight for democracy and against terrorism , is that our only choice is to stand united ; for united we stand but divided we shall fall .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , President of the Commission and the Council , the world today seems much bleaker than it did before Tuesday ' s shocking events .
The horrific images of the brutal and cowardly acts of terrorism on the World Trade Centre in New York and the Pentagon in Washington will stay in our minds forever .
No cause could ever justify such a terrifying act of cold-blooded barbarism .
On behalf of the Greens / European Free Alliance Group , I want to express the deep sorrow we feel for the victims who died in this tragedy and wish to send my heartfelt condolences to the families and all those who have lost their loved ones .
Our thoughts are also with the rescue forces , the firefighters and policemen who risked and lost their lives to save others .
What the world witnessed yesterday - and there are no other words to express it - was a crime against humanity .
As soon as the terrorists are identified , they should be brought to an international court for crimes against humanity and judged accordingly .
This is the time to speed up the establishment of a permanent international criminal court .
In the aftermath of this tragedy , the United States of America should also recognise the need for such an institution .
If , on the other hand , the United States responds with attacks on possible suspect countries , they will not only be killing more innocent people , just like those who died so tragically on Tuesday , but they will also be encouraging further counter-attacks : two wrongs never make a right .
The devastating consequences of a spiral of revenge are nowhere more visible today than in the Middle East .
We should do everything possible to ensure that this attitude is not repeated on a global scale .
I would like to express our deep concern about the situation in the Middle East and call for international efforts to bring the peace negotiations back on track to be intensified .
In this regard , we welcome the clear commitment made along those lines by Belgian Foreign Minister , Mr Louis Michel , in today ' s press and as representative of the Presidency-in-Office of the European Union .
We need to be tough on terrorism , but we also need to be tough on the causes of terrorism .
We need a political response on a global scale to this unprecedented challenge in order to weed out the real roots of terrorism which stem from political , social and environmental conflicts : this concept underlies the report of Mr Watson , which this Parliament adopted last week .
If there is widespread fanaticism , which breeds and supports this sort of terrorism , we can assume that there is something wrong politically .
The European Union is well placed to engage in forms of conflict prevention and conflict resolution which address the causes and not merely treat the symptoms .
That is why we believe a European Union / United States Summit should be held to deal with all aspects of the new terrorist threats , including the social and political causes .
On Tuesday , our sense of security was shown to be illusory .
It became evident that high-tech measures , such as a missile defence system , would be powerless in the face of this new kind of low-tech terrorism .
What has happened in New York and Washington cannot be allowed to ever happen again .
All defenders of democracy must protect our precious civilisation and uphold the civilised rule of law .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , none of us , in fact , have the words to express the feelings aroused by the terrorist attack of unprecedented barbarity with which the United States has just been hit .
The American people is going to have to live through a deeply traumatic experience which is likely to become still more intense as the scale of the disaster they have just experienced becomes more apparent .
In this unimaginable ordeal , they must be able to count upon our unqualified solidarity .
I would add that , if these faceless monsters targeted the United States yesterday , they will be able , tomorrow , to bring terror and death to any region of the world , including , of course , the European continent .
Madam President , my group therefore fully supports the declarations you have made and the steps you have taken on our behalf .
These dismaying attacks constitute a challenge to the whole of the human community , a challenge we are now going to have to learn to take up .
I say ' learn ' because , if we all agree that the guilty parties must be found and punished , we are obliged to acknowledge that , where every other aspect of the matter is concerned , more questions than certainties arise out of the tragedy of 11 September 2001 .
In my view , nothing would be more inappropriate , indeed more dangerous , than to react to this radically new phenomenon with well-worn notions whose limitations have just been cruelly demonstrated .
After an outrage of this kind , there may , in other words , be a great temptation to call fervently for violent retaliation which would , however , have immeasurable consequences .
What is more , you are right , Mr Poettering . It would do no service to the cause of peace to allow criminal fanatics to be confused with entire peoples , a number of whose representatives have , sometimes with much dignity and in a deep spirit of responsibility , indeed just expressed both their radical condemnation of the terrorists and their solidarity with the American people .
Finally , and in more general terms , no one must forget ever again that we are all part of the same world .
Even the strongest nation of all is not invulnerable .
The entire international community is sentenced to confronting together the great problems facing the planet - the oceans of frustration , the great divisions that are opening up and the negotiations that have broken down - and to cooperating as closely as possible in the search for long-term solutions .
That is undoubtedly the decisive contribution that Europe can make to the world in order to join in taking up the challenge to civilisation facing us .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , Prime Minister , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the initial thoughts which we have to express at this time are feelings of compassion towards the victims and of solidarity with the American people .
The terrorist attack of which they have been the victims is not only aimed at themselves . It is directed at the very heart of democracy itself .
Democracies are fragile things , and we are well aware that they have difficulty confronting this type of action .
In the light of history and of experience , however , I remain convinced of the American people ' s ability to come through this ordeal and , at this time , I believe it is important for this House to express its solidarity with them .
That being the case , I should like to thank you , Madam President , for having organised this meeting which my group , in common with others , had requested .
I am glad that it is taking place .
I hope that it will be followed by a debate enabling us to examine the problems posed by international terrorism in greater depth .
Having , on two occasions , had responsibility for leading the fight against terrorism in my own country , I should like to say that there is , to start with , one false notion that it is necessary to get away from : that there are good terrorists and bad terrorists .
There are not ; there are only terrorists , full stop .
( Loud applause )
In so far as it involves a minority trying to use force and violent action to impose its point of view on the greatest number of people , terrorism is never anything other than a manifestation of the fascism and totalitarianism which we have fought in the past and which we must continue to combat resolutely .
However , the fight against terrorism presupposes a state of permanent mobilisation , and it is probably because we have rather lost sight of this idea and this obvious fact that we are now confronted with the tragic situation we see in the United States .
I think that the United States has made the mistake of believing it is probably immune from this type of action .
We in Europe have , unfortunately , already experienced such acts : in Germany , Italy , France , Spain and many other countries .
We know that terrorism is a blind force that can strike anywhere and at any time .
We also know that political will is needed in order to combat terrorism .
This will must be affirmed .
Cooperation is also required .
If each State wishes to reserve for itself the information it has managed to obtain and if there is no real cooperation at all between the services concerned , then we will be heading for further disasters .
If , on the other hand , there is a new awareness on the part of our countries and at the level of international cooperation , if there is the will to pool all the information that may be to hand and if , also , a decision is made to create , in one form or another , a permanent body for cooperation , with the ability to analyse this information and propose the necessary measures , then we shall have the opportunity to oppose terrorism with some success .
I should like , for my part too , to concur with what has been said in this House , firstly by our excellent fellow Member , Mr Poettering , and then by Mrs Hautala and Mr Wurtz .
There would be nothing worse at the present time than to speak in such thoughtless terms as to create a sense of solidarity between terrorists and the Muslim world .
That would be the worst of mistakes and the most stupid thing of all to do .
That is why , of course , none of us can be satisfied with declarations that do not mean very much .
I personally think , however , that I - indeed , our Community as a whole - would consider it to be of great value if Muslim religious leaders at the highest level were themselves to condemn these attacks and in that way demonstrate that terrorists proclaiming a perverted faith cannot possibly be identified with , or thought to share any common ground with , the Muslim religion , which deserves the respect of each one of us .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , I shall speak on behalf of the radical delegation .
I would first of all like to thank the Belgian presidency for their initiative on Friday .
I believe that it is all the more necessary since , while the majority of us feel great emotion and great compassion for our American friends , there are those who are saving their emotion and their compassion for the possible American reprisals .
I therefore warmly thank you .
I believe that we have a reason which has not been mentioned here today , another reason to feel compassion for our American friends , and that is that if it is they who have been attacked today , and not us , it is probably due to the lack of courage of our policy , to its ambiguities and its hypocrisies , which have not been demonstrated by our American friends .
Mr Poettering , you rightly talk about the need to confront the causes of terrorism , and I believe that it is crucial for the European Union to examine its policy over the last fifty years , which has been fundamentally racist in relation to the Arab world and the Islamic world , a policy which has done nothing but sustain the worst regimes in those countries , the worst regimes of Saddam Hussein , of Mr Gaddafi , of Mr Hafez El-Assad in the past and his son today , a policy which has hardly shown solidarity with past and present democrats , such as Mrs Ben Sedrin in Tunisia , Mrs Al-Sadaawi in Egypt , Mr Ibrahimi in Egypt , and so many others who fight for democracy in their countries , and I believe that it is a matter of urgency for our Union to make the establishment of democracy in those countries its political priority , since that is the only way to pursue and destroy the terrorist bases in those countries .
Terrorism does not come from the Moon .
It is born and grows up in those countries which encourage it , which often finance it , and which are responsible for the fact that yesterday we saw the greatest tragedy since the end of the second world war , the greatest ever terrorist tragedy .
I would like to assure the Commission and the Council that I believe our Parliament must completely alter its position .
It has literally been taken hostage over recent months by certain crypto-Stalinists who have pushed it into excessively Palestinian unilateral positions which certainly have some connection with the current tragedy of our American friends .
We must finally have the courage to break the taboos .
We have an historic duty in relation to Israel , but we also have a duty in the present .
Israel is the only true democracy in that part of the world .
We must break the taboo .
Israel must be part of the European Union .
That is the only way to guarantee security and democracy in that country . But it is also the only way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , to guarantee secure borders for the Israelis , and therefore for the Palestinians .
Furthermore , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is intolerable that the democracies of the world continue to be made fools of , and Mr Louis Michel , our President-in-Office , has borne the brunt of this in Durban .
I thank Mr Michel for his determination and for the resolute fight he put up in Durban , but it is intolerable that the Syrian regime should do what it did in Durban .
Our democracies must create and organise themselves into a worldwide organisation of democracies , so that the empty shell known as the UN may recover its original purpose , which is to resolve the great problems of the world .
Madam President , dear American friends , our sympathy is with the many families who are now missing their loved ones .
Our tears are shed today for those who have lost a son or a daughter , a mother , a father , or both .
Our prayers are with those who are still alive but remain in peril .
Our thoughts are with President Bush and the people he leads .
Our hope is that in the pain of these terrible atrocities , the reaction of the American people will be tempered with wisdom .
Even as we weep , we know that this is not a time for hatred and revenge .
This a moment of truth , a time for reflection for all of us .
We only have one world and we are all responsible for it and its people .
World peace is something of which we all dream , but we have learned through bitter experience that it was not enough simply to tear down the wall between East and West .
We have learned that it is not only the superpowers who can acquire the methods and means of mass destruction .
Small , faceless groups intent on destruction have it within their power to destroy our whole world .
The answer is not only improved intelligence and sophisticated security .
The way to world peace is to work for it by respecting human rights and the right to national self-determination for all .
We must fight torture , terrorism and every crime against humanity .
We must take sustainable development seriously .
We must help the poor , the oppressed and the powerless before they become desperate , suicidal terrorists .
Just as terror can never be justified , neither can oppression .
Oppression breeds people who are prepared to take all life before them in the passionate intensity of their hatred .
We must bridge the gap between the West and the rest of the world , instead of fighting each other .
In this way we may remove the raison d 'etre of terrorism .
It is still too early to foresee all the lessons to be learned from Tuesday ' s shocking event but it is not too early to know that Tuesday , 11 September 2001 marked a turning point in history .
Our world will never be the same again .
Our thoughts are with the victims of these horrendous attacks and those who grieve for them .
Let the memory of these terrible events always call to mind our duty to take better care of this world .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , on this tragic day , we wish to express our solidarity and our friendship towards the American people , victims of the most horrendous terrorist crime .
Nor do we forget that many nationals of European countries work in the towers of the World Trade Centre , and that many of them have certainly died .
We have a profound feeling that it is not just the United States , but the whole of the Western world , of which we form an integral part , which has been targeted .
It is not in fact just the United States , but the whole of Western civilisation that has just been the victim of an act of war , of a new war , which is murderous but elusive , because it does not correspond to any traditional criteria .
Some people believed , after the fall of the Soviet Union , that the world was becoming less dangerous , and that was an easy excuse to relax the security effort .
That was a grave error .
In fact , we have entered a new era , in which there is a greater risk from rogue States led by people driven mad and blinded by hate and ideology .
Worse still , more elusive than the rogue States are the statele