Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 30 November 2006 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting
The Minutes of the sitting of Thursday 30 November 2006 have been distributed .
Are there are any comments ?

( NL ) Mr President , as you will remember and as is also evident from the Minutes , we held the debate on World AIDS Day and Europe 's measures in this field on Thursday , which featured the issue of the Global Health Fund and funding .
In the debate with the Commission , it became apparent that Parliament was extremely anxious about the lack of funding ; the reason why it quizzed the Commission about the development instrument - which will be the subject of tomorrow 's debate - was that this instrument was at risk of being looted in favour of the Global Health Fund , with the risk of the same mistake being made twice .
I can inform you that we in the Committee on Development received a letter from the Commission on 3 December in which it still pledges to get the funds for the Global Health Fund from the European Development Fund and to leave the programming of the thematic section of the development instrument alone .
We will continue this debate tomorrow , but it is good to make a mental note of this .
I am sorry , Mr Van den Berg , but I do not understand how what you have said relates to the Minutes of the sitting .
Are you suggesting any amendment of the Minutes ?
( NL ) No , Mr President , I have no comments regarding the content of the Minutes .
You have indulged in a little parliamentary filibustering , but what is done is done , there is nothing we can do about it now .
It will be recorded in the Minutes , of course .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Written statements and oral questions ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
Many Members are listed , but they will not all be able to speak .
I shall have to be strict about speaking times and I would remind you that Members who have spoken in either , or both , of the previous two sittings will not have priority .
Members that did not speak in either the sitting of 13 November or the sitting of 29 November will have priority .
( SK ) As soon as the Commission announced last October that the free movement of citizens from the new Member States would be postponed until 2009 , we voiced our objections in the European Parliament .
We also launched several initiatives , including questions to the Council and Commission , and we subsequently drafted Declaration No 72 , which is still pending .
This declaration is designed to ensure compliance with the original deadline for accession to the Schengen area .
For this reason I regard the decision taken last week on St. Nicolas Day by EU interior ministers , enabling citizens from the nine new Member States to travel freely within the European Union from 1 January 2008 , as a great success of the European Union and a consequence of the intervention by the MEPs .
Colleagues , I would like to thank you for your support .
I am convinced that all countries , including Slovakia , will soon agree upon the strict security requirements involved in temporarily deploying an enhanced version of the current system as proposed by Portugal .
( EL ) Mr President , last week Turkey made a ' Diplomatic move ' by agreeing to open a port and an airport for trade with the Republic of Cyprus .
Their timing was a bit odd , considering that their move was made during the COREPER meeting .
However , the Turkish proposal is nothing more than a clumsy , unacceptable and provocative manoeuvre , whose sole objective is to bypass the obligations undertaken by Ankara towards the European Union and its Member States .
Not only is Ankara persisting on essentially denying its obligations , but also is arrogantly setting conditions aimed at gaining favours in Cyprus .
Turkey 's obligations towards the European Union are very specific and are not subject to bargaining .
Given these facts , the European Union should reject without further consideration these so called Turkish proposals .
I believe that the European Union should unanimously reject this inappropriately provocative offer .
( FR ) Mr President , as I speak , the trial of Mr Vojislav Seselj , the chairman of Serbia 's main party , the Serbian Radical Party , is getting under way .
Mr Seselj surrendered voluntarily in January 2003 , four years ago , when the indictment against him was published .
The indictment referred only to speeches and a political plan to bring all Serbs together in a single country ; that may be questionable of course , but we know what very painful circumstances that country has been through .
Mr Seselj has been held in solitary confinement since December 2004 for granting interviews to Serbian newspapers , but the prosecutor , Mrs Uertz-Retzlaff , speaks against him in the press freely .
Mr Seselj is demanding to see his family ; he should be entitled to do so and to appear freely .
He is demanding to correspond with the Tribunal in Serbian , his native language , which he is also entitled to do , but is being denied that right .
As a doctor and professor of law , he wishes to conduct his own defence , which is a fundamental right .
He is refusing to accept lawyers appointed by the tribunal , whom experience has shown to favour the prosecution .
What does Alphons Orie , the presiding judge of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia have to say about this ?
I quote : the court finds that the accused 's self-representation ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , yesterday , Igor Smirnov , who , 15 years ago seized power with the help of the Russian forces in Transnistria , had himself elected for another five years as the president of an illegitimate country .
The dictator , who holds a Russian passport and was trained by the KGB , claimed 80 % of the vote .
The election was organised by an illegitimate government on territory controlled by foreign military forces ; its result is null and void in terms of international law .
The Smirnov regime will not be made any more legal by the permission given to three weak opponents to take part in a contest the result of which was known in advance , having been decided in Moscow during the summer .
Smirnov 's only serious rival , Mr Shevchuk , the speaker of the Supreme Soviet of Transnistria , withdrew his candidacy at the urgent request of the Kremlin .
The European Union must continue to support Moldova 's territorial integrity .
Our border assistance mission has proved successful where Russia 's de facto veto has paralysed the OSCE 's effectiveness .
The greatest obstacle to the self-determination of the inhabitants of Transnistria is the presence of Russian forces .
We must urgently demand their departure .
( EL ) Mr President , Article 49 of the European Union Treaty , which contains the accession clause to the European Union , specifies the role of the Union 's institutions .
According to the said article , the Council is the body which decides on negotiations .

I direct two questions to this Body and the present European Commission : First , on what legal grounds does the European Commission carry out European Union accession negotiations with candidate countries on behalf of the European Union ?
Second , is the European Commission authorised to express political opinions on critical issues for the selection or non-selection of a candidate country during interim , nonetheless , decisive stages of the negotiation procedure ?
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to bring to your attention the tragic development in the Middle East and the immediate need for swift and effective intervention .
We need to stabilise the region or at least prevent any deterioration which would have unforeseen consequences .
Europe is not absent from that region .
It is present : with its diplomatic action , its development and humanitarian aid , its corporate relations in the Mediterranean and its participation in peace-keeping forces .
However , it did not manage to play an effective role and so we must look into it immediately , because our hopes that military interventions will create a new Middle East with democracy and stability are not coming true .
Therefore , we must look into a new intervention plan ; moreover I believe that the European Parliament can promote the relevant talks , demanding results , which will positively affect the prosperity of both the people living in the region and ourselves of course , because whatever is happening in our neighbourhood should concern us .
Mr President , I rise to speak because of my concern about the interference by Commissioner McCreevy in Irish politics last week , where he made a public statement challenging the Irish Government 's policy with regard to health insurance on the Irish market .
The area he is interfering in is not his responsibility : he has responsibility for the internal market , not for competition .
In addition to that , the policy being pursued by the Government has been approved by the Commission and has recently been approved by the Irish courts .
My only conclusion is that Commissioner McCreevy is assisting his former Cabinet colleague and friend , Minister Harney , in shifting her policy on health insurance and blaming Brussels for that shift in policy .
That is an unacceptable direct interference by a Commissioner in Irish political decision-making .
I would appeal to you , Mr President , to make those concerns known to President Barroso .
I will pass on to you the correspondence I have had on that matter with the President and with Commissioner McCreevy .
I shall communicate your points to Mr Barroso so that he can take the action he deems appropriate , Mr De Rossa .

Mr President , I apologise for not being here when you first called me .
A number of years ago , I , along with other Members of this Parliament , was involved when Europe provided funds for a study into having a ferry service between Ballycastle in County Antrim , Northern Ireland , and Campbeltown in Scotland .
The study was dutifully carried out , proved to be good , and the ferry service started and ran for a short time .
The Scottish Parliament agreed to provide GBP 700 000 , with the Northern Ireland Executive being prepared to provide GBP 300 000 , making a total of GPB 1 million as a seedling grant to get the service up and going .
Now we find that , while the Scottish Executive is prepared to honour its position and to pay the money up front , the direct-rule minister , Maria Eagle , is refusing to honour her side of the agreement .
That is totally unacceptable and wrong .
I have raised this with the Secretary of State and with Commissioner Barrot and I want to pursue it as far as possible .
I see that the Irish bench is waking up .
Mr President , I want to bring to the attention of the Commission - and , if possible , try to get a resolution about - a difficulty that Irish fishermen are facing at present because of an inflexible interpretation of the ' 100 kilometre rule ' , which means that fish must be landed and processed within a 100-kilometre range .
The difficulty is that a lot of the processing capacity in Ireland is not exactly on the shore or on the docks , but further inland .
This creates difficulties in terms of transportation , since road transport counts as part of the 100-kilometre range .
I ask Commissioner Borg to look very carefully at that issue and give us a more flexible interpretation of the rule : both to allow what is a very successful Irish fishing industry to continue , and because it has an impact not only on Irish catches but also on the ability of other boats operating in Irish waters to land their catches in Ireland .
This means they have to travel further , use more fuel , and are being forced to land their catches in other markets , which may not necessarily benefit the European Union as a whole .
( PL ) Mr President , Turkey is under the mistaken impression that last Thursday it took an important step towards continuing negotiations with the European Union .
Opening one single airport and one single port to Greek Cypriots for a year is a joke and yet another example of Prime Minister Erdogan 's arrogant attitude towards Europe .
Turkey is behaving as if the Union were wanting to join Turkey .
In fact it is the other way around , Turkey is asking to join the Union .
If Turkey is doing the asking , it must be because it considers our European civilisation based mainly on Christianity to be superior to its own , or at least to be in some way desirable .
That being the case , Turkey should comply with our conditions and not impose its own .
Given this state of affairs , something more than partial suspension of accession negotiations with Turkey is needed .
The negotiations should be completely halted .
Mr President , I rise to draw attention to the continuing plight of the West Papuan people .
Just a week or so ago was West Papua Independence Day , which is traditionally held on 1 December to mark the anniversary of the Dutch promise to grant independence to West Papua , a promise originally made in December 1961 .
Of course , that independence never came and instead there has been a continuing military occupation by Indonesia for over 40 years , with torture , disappearance , detention without trial and murder of West Papuans at the hands of the military being commonplace .
I am calling on you , President , as well as the Commission and Council , to raise the issue of West Papua 's self-determination with the relevant Indonesian authorities , and for them to do all they can to ensure the withdrawal of the Indonesian military from West Papua and the holding of a free and democratic referendum on self-determination , including all the indigenous West Papuans .
A number of colleagues have put down a written declaration for this session to coincide with Independence Day for West Papua , and I urge my colleagues here to co-sign that written declaration .
Mr President , as colleagues may be aware , the Irish peace process is continuing to inch forward towards the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement , including the restoration of the power-sharing and all-Ireland institutions .
The significance of the DUP 's Ian Paisley 's conditional ' yes ' to power-sharing with Irish nationalists and republicans should not be underestimated .
However , there is still a long way to go and many challenges lie ahead .
It is now important that we get down to the very serious business of re-establishing the political institutions so that local people can make local decisions , free from interference from unelected and unaccountable British Government ministers .
It is also important that the DUP begin the process of engagement with Sinn Féin to resolve other outstanding issues , including that of policing .
I would encourage the EU to continue to show support for the process at this crucial time .
( PL ) Mr President , 25 years ago , on 13 December 1981 , martial law was imposed in Poland .
This led to the outlawing of the Solidarity trade union .
Essentially , martial law involved the use of force , repression and persecution against trade union activists , scientists , artists and indeed all those who refused to be enslaved by totalitarianism in Poland .
Under martial law , when Poland was ruled by General Jaruzelski , violations of human , civil and political rights were commonplace .
Over ten thousand individuals were either imprisoned or sent to internment camps during that period .
Many people laid down their lives in defence of Solidarity .
On 16 December , nine miners were killed as a result of the brutal dispersal of demonstrators at the Wujek mine by special units of the ZOMO Motorised Reserves of the Citizens Militia , and 21 others were injured .
I call on the European Parliament to pay tribute today to all those who fell in the cause of freedom and justice .
I refer to all the victims of persecution under martial law and to all those who refused to be subdued by the use of force and continued their independent activity , thus contributing to the advent of freedom and democracy in Poland .
Mr President , my constituent David Wilson was jailed in 2003 because illegal migrants had hidden in the back of his lorry at a Greek port .
He was charged and sentenced within 24 hours under a fast-track procedure , without sufficient legal advice , with a local shopkeeper as an interpreter , and without advice from the British Embassy .
As he was totally innocent he was acquitted on appeal , but not before suffering the horrendous ordeal of months in prison far from his family and the permanent loss of his job .
He never recovered from that and tragically took his own life last month .
That tragedy would never have happened if the EU 's framework decision on procedural rights and criminal proceedings for people charged in other Member States had already been in force .
That proposal would guarantee that anyone facing criminal charges abroad has access to their country 's consular services and is given qualified legal advice .
That was all lacking in his case .
I would urge the Council to get a move on and adopt that proposal as a matter of urgency .
( FR ) Mr President , I want to express my disapproval at what Mr Kyprianou , European Commissioner responsible for health and consumer protection , said at a press conference on 9 November .
The Commissioner warmly congratulated four food-sector multinationals - which I will not name - on what they are doing to help fight obesity ; he also allowed them to promote themselves by setting up stands at the entrance to the room where the press conference was held .
We must bear in mind that one child in five in Europe is obese and that this number is growing every year because of poor eating habits encouraged by the fast food , fizzy drinks and chocolate bars marketed mainly by those four multinationals .
Binding legislation to provide European consumers with nutritional information would do them more good than eulogies addressed to companies that have contributed to the obesity explosion for decades .
There are other ways of fighting obesity : eating more fruit and vegetables and taking part in sporting activities , which ought to be better promoted .
I can therefore only advise Mr Kyprianou to get together with his fellow Commissioner Mrs Fischer-Boel to assist in reforming the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables in the interests of a healthy and balanced diet .
Mr President , comparing your recent statements on visits to Italy and Ireland , confusion has arisen over your position on the Constitutional Treaty .
Addressing the Italian Chamber of Deputies and the Italian Senate on 9 November 2006 , you stated that there appear to be four possible scenarios for the Constitutional Treaty : retaining the text with an addition here or there ; salvaging the main elements and drafting a shorter Treaty ; re-opening negotiations on certain points ; or abandoning the Treaty and waiting for a better time to renegotiate it .
You also stated categorically that there is no doubt that the text will not be implemented as it stands .
Yet , at Dublin Castle on 30 November , you urged Ireland to ratify the current text of the Constitutional Treaty .
Surely this will be a pointless exercise if , as you said in Italy , there is no chance of the current text being implemented !
Mr President , you leave yourself open , at best , to the accusation of sending out mixed messages or of tailoring your message to suit the audience you are addressing .
As Members of the European Parliament , we have the right to be informed of the clear position of our President on this most important of issues .
As a representative of a small Member State , I feel particularly strongly that all Member States should be involved in the reflection process .
I do not want to see a situation where the larger Member States , such as Italy , are consulted and decide on the future of the Constitution - and indeed Europe - while the smaller Member States are simply told to ratify the text as presented to them .
I would love to hear your views on this , Mr President .
Thank you very much .
I believe that it was made very clear during an interesting debate that took place in Ireland , which you were unable to attend , for very important reasons I am sure .
I am talking about the European Forum on Ireland , at which I had the opportunity to reply to questions similar to yours .
I believe that it was made very clear and that all of the Members in attendance understood , but we all know that it is very difficult to get people who do not want to understand to understand .
I said to the European Council on several occasions on behalf of the European Parliament that every country should try to ratify the Treaty .
That is the European Parliament 's position : to call upon all of the governments to try to ratify the Treaty .
As far as I know , that is also your group 's position , as its leader has often explained .
That , and only that , is what I have said : that every country must try to ratify the Treaty .
Are you still in any doubt , Mrs Doyle ?
( PT ) As the Commission is aware , the air transport service on the Atlantic islands of Madeira and Porto Santo is a public service , with the Portuguese Government subsidising the company that exclusively runs the service .
Recently , however , ticket prices for flights between these islands and the Portuguese mainland rose dramatically , on account of the increase in the price of oil .
This decision by the Portuguese Government is , in our view , a questionable one , as it runs counter to the spirit of the Council regulation governing this form of public service obligation , which is why I have brought the matter to Parliament 's attention .
How come passengers on these flights are being made to pay for the increase in the price of fuel , thereby hampering their mobility , especially now that the price of oil is falling and the euro is becoming stronger ?
What is more , the Portuguese Government and the Community bodies know that passengers on Madeira and Porto Santo have no alternative sea link with the mainland .
This is ample reason for Parliament and the Commission to look into and monitor this measure , which penalises the citizens of one of the EU 's outermost regions .
We should like this matter to be clarified and the situation changed , which is why we have brought it to the Commissioner 's attention .
Mr President , I seek your assistance .
On 17 October I tabled a priority written question to the Commission on the subject of animal testing under REACH .
I did not ask the question for the good of my health ; I asked it so that we could have information , before the vote this coming week , about the number of animals likely to die as a result of the REACH testing process .
I should have had a reply , I believe , by 18 November .
I am told that it is held up somehow in the Commission 's services , which some might regard as convenient for the Commission and an exercise in news management .
These figures are likely to be distressing to those concerned about the testing of animals .
I would seek your assistance in obtaining a response to that question before Wednesday 's vote .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 2 May 2006 , Canada 's annual budget was introduced to Parliament , which recommends 100 % tax reduction on all Canadian produced wines and beers .
This budget is under discussion .
However , such a budget will create unfair competition to European Union wines and beers .
This goes against WTO principles .
Exports to Canada are of particular importance to the European Union .
In particular , in 2005 the European Union exported wines worth EUR 446 million and beers worth EUR 110 million .
The Commission must assume an active role and take the necessary actions to force the Canadian Government to implement its commitments to the WTO .
We have always adhered to the commitments we have made to the World Trade Organisation .
The other nations should do the same .
( ES ) Mr President , on 2 July , more than five months ago now , the presidential elections were held in Mexico .
As you all know , the winner was Felipe Calderón , the current Mexican President .
Since those elections , the opposition candidate of the Left , López Obrador , has failed to acknowledge or accept his defeat and , worse still , the Left has tried to sabotage President Calderón 's inauguration and is still threatening the legitimate government and instigating disturbances , demonstrations and sabotage against it .
I therefore wish to condemn this anti-democratic attitude on the part of the Left led by Mr López Obrador and I also wish to condemn the Mexican Left 's unprecedented and unjustifiable boycott .
The European institutions cannot look the other way , and this European Parliament in particular must support President Calderón 's legitimate government in Mexico .
We in this Parliament must take initiatives to ensure that democracy is respected in Mexico and that the Left acknowledge its defeat and form a democratic and constructive opposition rather than an anti-democratic opposition .
( SK ) I welcomed the report in which the US President , George Bush , announced that he would seek to relax visa requirements for the new EU Member States of Central Europe .
President Bush 's decision to launch this programme is , among other things , a result of long-term pressure exerted by the new Member States .
Their leaders took every opportunity to remind President Bush of the fact that they would like to see the visa requirements simplified or cancelled altogether , thus , enabling their citizens to travel to the USA under the visa waiver programme , just like the nationals of western European countries .
Regarding Slovakia , it should be pointed out that , as a result of reforms conducted by the government of Mikuláš Dzurinda , the country has made substantial economic progress .
There are no longer such pressing economic reasons for Slovaks to violate their visa status and immigrate illegally to the USA .
The facilitation of travel and the cancellation of visa requirements for citizens of the new Member States will have to be accompanied by , among other things , compliance with new , stricter , security requirements .
I believe that President Bush will manage to persuade Congress to accept this programme .
( PL ) Mr President , much has been said in this Chamber about achieving the Lisbon objectives and enabling the European Union to compete with the largest economies in the world such as those of the United States , China or India .
Our discussions have still not had any practical impact , however , and our dreams of high economic growth may never come true as there may be nobody around to help achieve the desired growth .
According to a recent UN report , by 2050 there will be one hundred million fewer European citizens than there are today .
Few children are being born , European society is ageing , and an ever-smaller number of workers is supporting an ever-increasing number of pensioners .
The Lisbon objectives must go hand in hand with an appropriate demographic policy for the Union .
Such a policy could perhaps be modelled on the measures taken by Finland , France and Latvia .
These countries are currently experiencing a baby boom , due to the provision of appropriate incentives and facilities for parents who wish to have children but also wish to be able to support them , and who have been enabled to combine their parental responsibilities with paid employment .
Europe must look to the quality and quantity of its workforce if it is to achieve economic growth .
It is therefore vital to develop a Community policy for the development of European society , encompassing both the demographic aspect and the immigration of qualified workers from outside the Union .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a lot of talk lately on whether Brussels or Strasbourg should be the seat of the European Parliament and the European Union .
Both of these are wrong .
The seat of Europe should be in the city where decisions are taken , and lately the decisions regarding the European Union 's future are being taken in Ankara .
This is the truth .
When great countries , such as England were joining Europe , the terms were set by Europe .
Nowadays , Turkey is the one setting the terms to Europe in order for Turkey to join .
This is unacceptable .
Turkey does not recognise the 25th state , wants one port , then two ports and all of us are just watching , passively .
When shall we finally understand that this policy supports Ankara 's arrogance ?
Can we not understand that this is a rotten apple even before it joins ?
Just imagine how things will be when , tomorrow morning , Erdogan 's Turkey joins Europe with our vote .
Then Turkey will just push us aside from day one .
( PL ) Mr President , the Seventh Congress of the Party of European Socialists was held in Porto from 7-9 December , under the slogan ' A New Social Europe ' .
Many key issues for the future of Europe and the European Union were raised during the congress .
It was recognised that the provision of appropriate and accessible child care was a priority matter , so as to allow young parents to continue in paid employment .
Investing in our children 's future is an investment in our own future .
A great many documents were adopted . Chief amongst them were a resolution laying down ten principles for a New Social Europe , a resolution on the Middle East , a resolution on Belarus and a resolution on a new social democratic energy policy .
The latter seems to me to be entirely relevant and particularly important because of Europe 's increasing dependence on a small number of suppliers of sources of energy .
Mr President , this congress proved once again that the Socialists are the most important political force in Europe .
It is they who are the driving force working to secure Europe 's future .
( PL ) Mr President , 25 years ago , on the night of 12 December , martial law was imposed in Poland .
Tanks rolled onto the streets , the nation was deprived of its freedom , and innocent Poles were beaten and killed .
All this was done by people in authority who were convinced that they knew better than the nation itself what the nation needed .
They believed that maintaining an alliance with a foreign regime or rather , remaining subservient to it , took precedence over the will of the people .
Essentially , what they were concerned about was hanging on to power and all the benefits deriving from it .
These evil individuals were supported by foreigners pursuing their own imperialist ambitions at the expense of an enslaved nation .
I trust the anniversary of this event will be an occasion for Europe to examine its conscience .
Do we really believe that there are no self-styled sages amongst us who think they know what other nations need better than those nations themselves ?
Is it not the case that leaders still reach agreements detrimental to the good of their countries and that the desire for leadership and its associated benefits often takes priority over the good of the nations politicians are meant to serve ?
The life , freedom and dignity of every individual must be sacrosanct for us .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a European citizen and a European politician , there are two things that bother me .
The first is the fact of structural deficiencies in the European Union 's energy policy , of the consequences of which we were once more reminded as recently as the beginning of November .
Secondly , there is the quality of Europe 's relations with Russia .
It is quite obviously negligent to deny our current dependence on energy providers that are not merely foreign but owned by foreign states .
The sad fact is that the next thing to happen is that economic and political interests merge and start to influence what happens on the political level playing field .
We make the claim to adhere , in all our dealings , to the principle that European values must never take second place to economic interests , and that principle is a core element in our Community .
In our dealings with Russia , the expectation of our dialogues on energy being fruitful must not be contingent on our keeping silent about our misgivings concerning the violations of human rights and of freedom of the press .
What must be quite clear to us is that either there will be a Europe founded upon values , or there will soon be no Europe left .
( PL ) Mr President , this is a British Airways frequent flyer card .
I tried to do something with it when recently 100 Members of the British House of Commons protested in connection with the discriminatory treatment meted out to a British Airways employee wearing a small cross .
In my view , action of this kind is unacceptable in Europe , which is founded on a Christian heritage dating back centuries .
I would therefore like to express my solidarity with all our British fellow Members and with all the British politicians and journalists protesting against this situation .
Mr President , F-type isolation prisons for political detainees were introduced in Turkey at the end of 2000 with the aim of psychologically breaking , and subsequently re-educating , the prisoners .
In the last 6 years , 28 people have been killed , 122 have died on hunger strike and there have been thousands of protests from within , as well outside , Turkey .
Mr Behiç Aşçı , an Istanbul lawyer representing F-type prisoners , has been on hunger strike for 251 days .
Mr President , you yourself , much to your credit , took some protest actions a few weeks ago , but the Turkish authorities have been stubbornly deaf .
Mr Aşçı is now very near to death .
I plead with you to communicate directly and urgently with the Turkish Prime Minister and request that he deal with the case of Mr Aşçı personally in a last effort to save the life of a European-minded Turkish idealist .
Mr President , this summer the Russian State Duma introduced two laws allowing action to be taken against Russian and non-Russian citizens abroad .
Authorised by a decision of the President of the Russian Federation , euphemistically named ' special assignment units ' of the federal security services may be used against so-called terrorists or those who have allegedly libelled the state .
Those laws are a licence to kill , and the first public execution of a British citizen was carried out last month when Alexander Litvinenko was poisoned and died in London .
However , the murder was bungled and a radioactive evidence trail stretches from London to Moscow .
Tony Blair 's reaction was to say that nothing must come between Britain 's relations with Russia .
The Russians ' reaction was to say that no suspect , whatever the evidence , will be extradited to Britain .
But the reaction of the world must be to exclude Russia from the civilised community of nations until its international murder squads are no longer operational .
( EL ) Mr President , today is the only day suitable for my speech .
Today , 11 December , marks 60 years from the foundation of Unicef and we are celebrating the International Children 's Day .
The Declaration of the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights of the Child have been signed - even though some states have not yet signed - and the Commission has already presented its Strategy on the Rights of the Child on a European level .
Therefore , we hope for coordinated action throughout the European Union 's external and internal policies , and an effort from every Member State for the protection of the rights of the child , which from what we see is not only threatened by poverty , illiteracy and armed conflicts in countries outside the Union , but is equally in danger within our own civilised countries from malicious attacks by people who do not have collective responsibility .
( FR ) Mr President , on 22 June 2006 the Commission presented a communication in response to the crisis of overproduction in the European winegrowing sector , recommending the grubbing-up of 400 000 hectares of vines in the next five years , that is , almost 12 % of the European Union 's 3.4 million hectares .
I want to draw your attention today to the existence of illegal vine plantations in Europe , which are thought to cover an area of 150 000 hectares in the European Union as a whole .
According to the Commission 's own figures in a March 2004 report , these illegal vine plantations are equivalent to an output of 5 to 8 million hectolitres at a time when European overproduction is put at 12 million hectolitres .
The permanent grubbing-up of these illegal vines would allow a measure of balance to be restored .
Before any decision on grubbing-up is taken , I therefore call on the Commission to determine the precise scale of these illegal plantations .
( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the most important item on the European Union agenda is still energy security and the common energy policy .
However , the formulation and implementation of such a policy is a long-term project .
Germany and Russia have entered into a bilateral agreement to lay a gas pipeline along the bottom of the Baltic Sea , a pipeline that is anything but safe from an ecological viewpoint , bearing in mind the debris from World War II on the sea bed which threatens the Baltic States with dreadful consequences .
In the meantime , the EU is demanding that safe , modernised atomic energy reactors be closed .
Scientists estimate that by the year 2010 there will be a shortage of 3.5 billion kilowatts of electrical energy in the Baltic region .
Where will we get it , how much will we pay for it and will we feel safe ?
Has anyone calculated to what extent the shortage of electrical energy will affect EU competitiveness ?
I invite all Member States , after considering the changes in the energy market , to support Lithuania 's application of Article 37 of the Treaty of Accession to the EU in considering the possibility of extending the operational life of the Ignalina Atomic Energy Plant .
Mr President , I hope you had time to enjoy some hill walking while you were in Ireland .
One of the issues you may not have been aware of during your visit is the deep unease in the countryside about how the Commission is applying on-farm inspections in relation to the common agricultural policy and cross-compliance .
There is a huge gap between what the Commission says it is doing in relation to simplification initiatives and what is happening on the ground in relation to cross-compliance inspections .
The checklist with which farmers are required to comply is very long and confusing .
Allied to that , there is real fear that if you breach one of these regulations , you will face a penalty on your payment .
Consumers deserve to know that farmers meet high standards of food safety and production ; but I would ask whether these unannounced spot-checks of the detailed sort I have outlined are the way to meet that objective .
The Irish Government itself is to blame for the long delay in implementing the Nitrates Directive , with the result that we are now forced to have all the on-farm inspections catapulted into the latter end of 2006 .
Could I ask the Commission to specify exactly what it wants from farmers , and to ensure that all Member States are complying with the rules ?
( LT ) I would like to draw your attention to the work of our fine translators , to the quality of their work .
Lately one hears many discontented voices saying that the quality of translations is declining .
You are no doubt aware , Mr President , that we allot large sums of money for translations and we rightly take pride in the possibility of speaking various languages in European institutions .
I think that one of the problems causing an increase in the amount of complaints about the quality of translations is the fact that in our Parliament the translation quality control system is not appropriately set up and does not function adequately .
Indeed , the quality of translations is usually checked by colleagues , that is , they check each other 's work , which is probably not very objective .
Queries from Members of Parliament are not often responded to by Translation Service staff .
At least I have never received any replies .
I hope that the Parliamentary Bureau will bring this to their attention .
( PL ) Mr President , we should remain constantly alert to the situation beyond Europe 's Eastern border , that is to say , in Russia and Ukraine .
We have focused a great deal of attention on negotiations with Russia recently , but I urge the House not to neglect events in Ukraine .
I would like the House to send out a clear message that we stand shoulder to shoulder with Ukraine and support its progress towards democracy .
In other words , we do not wish anti-democratic processes to develop and gather strength .
Ukraine is a large neighbour of ours and we have an interest in it .
It must not be sidelined .
Accordingly , I believe that every message sent out by this House or by members of other institutions to the Government of Ukraine and , in particular , to Ukrainian society is extremely important .
( PL ) Mr President , next year we shall celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Treaties of Rome .
I believe that this will provide an ideal opportunity for considered reflection and debate on the future of the European Union .
As we recall the fundamental principles underpinning the concept of integration we should be able to find the answer to key questions such as where Europe is headed and what the possibilities for future enlargement are .
Our policy towards the Balkan states , Ukraine , Turkey and also Georgia and Moldova needs to be clearly defined .
The Union should cooperate more closely with these countries and provide stronger support for the changes taking place within them .
The most important issue we have to deal with at present is internal reform of the Union , which involves strengthening the role of the European Parliament and improving the decision-making system .
During the next six months under German Presidency we should also work on a solution to the future of the Constitutional Treaty and the issue of energy security .
Well , that is the last word and it is also the last time that I will have the honour of presiding over the one-minute speeches .
That is why we have been more generous with speaking time , and I would ask the Commission and the Council for their understanding .
I thank you for your patience , but during the final moments of the party there is a free bar , and I would like to take this opportunity to apologise to those people who have wished to speak on previous occasions but have not been able to .
That concludes this item .
European Chemicals Agency - Amendment of Directive 67 / 548 / EEC on dangerous substances ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the recommendation for second reading , by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the Registration , Evaluation , Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals ( REACH ) , establishing a European Chemicals Agency , amending Directive 1999 / 45 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 793 / 93 and Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 1488 / 94 as well as Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC and Commission Directives 91 / 155 / EEC , 93 / 67 / EEC , 93 / 105 / EC and 2000 / 21 / EC [ 07524 / 8 / 2006 C6-0267 / 2006 ( Rapporteur : Guido Sacconi ) , and

the recommendation for second reading on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 67 / 548 / EEC on the approximation of laws , regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification , packaging and labelling of dangerous substances in order to adapt it to Regulation ( EC ) No ... / 2006 concerning the Registration , Evaluation , Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals ( REACH ) and establishing a European Chemicals Agency [ 07525 / 3 / 2006 C6-0268 / 2006 ( Rapporteur : Guido Sacconi ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the days since we reached our understanding with the Council - which was made possible in part by the Commission 's support - I have been wondering what might be an appropriate comparison for this long journey , which , for me , has lasted three and a half years , and which has brought us to this point .
To answer that question , I have had to resort to my passion for mountain climbing : perhaps the most fitting comparison is to say that we have climbed a high mountain - probably , and without any exaggeration , an 8 000-metre peak in the Himalayas .
I have never been that high and I doubt if I ever will , because I am only a moderate climber , but I do know what happens when you reach the top : at that point the exhaustion and the dangers you have experienced no longer count , nor , perhaps , does the disappointment you often feel when you get to the top and the view is restricted because of mist .
It has happened to me so many times : I get up there and I cannot see a thing !
Nevertheless , the sense of achievement is enormous just the same .
It is important to be quite clear about two things : the first is to realise whether you have actually got to the top , and the second is to prepare properly for the descent , which is often no easier than the climb up .
As the lead climber , I should like to give my opinion on these two points .
Have we actually got to the top ?
I really think we have .
We have done so with the package of chapters that we agreed upon in the final stage of the negotiations : duty of care ; animal welfare and , above all , the compulsory promotion of alternatives to animal testing ; the agency ; communication of information ; and adjustment to the new interinstitutional agreement on comitology , thus safeguarding Parliament 's role .
We have had to give up one thing , which is extending the chemical safety report to small tonnages ; that , however , was not a victim of this ascent , but rather an early retreat to base camp , since we have established a review clause that may possibly allow us to reintroduce this obligation in seven years ' time , once appropriate checks have been performed along the whole supply chain .
The reason why I can say that we have reached the top is that , with this agreement , we have above all arrived at a successful solution to that most controversial topic , the purpose of REACH , which is to regulate the substances of highest concern by means of the authorisation procedure .
To check whether we really have got to the top , we have to remember where we started from : a deep and very distant valley .
The Commission 's original proposal in fact stated that all substances subject to authorisation could be authorised on the basis of the principle of adequate control .
We have come a long way since then .
The Council 's common position , which was positively influenced by Parliament , had already cut back the range of these substances , and then , with the 30 November agreement , we took a further step forwards and reduced the number of substances that could be approved under this quicker and easier procedure and , on top of that , we included all substances - even those that will be authorised on the basis of adequate control - in a substitution process .
Where an alternative exists , a substitution plan must necessarily be submitted ; if no alternatives exist at the time of authorisation , the company must in all cases declare the lines of research and development that it intends to pursue .
On this basis , therefore , the duration of the authorisation will be established case by case , and it must be duly justified by the Commission where an alternative exists .
If an alternative should appear during the term of the authorisation , the obligation to submit a substitution plan will come into effect .
What I should like to emphasise is that the Commission will make its decisions case by case on the basis of the agency 's report , which must take account of the opinions of the Committee for Socio-Economic Analysis and the Committee for Risk Assessment , which must also take account of third-party contributions .
It is therefore a highly transparent process that does not depend solely on the applicant 's own declarations .
As for the descent from the summit , I think it is important to choose the best route , since the same grade of climbing difficulty may be a much greater challenge on the way down than on the ascent .
What I mean by this metaphor is that we should adopt the compromise that we have reached , because in that way we can have the regulation published by the end of the year and thus meet the deadline for starting the process to implement REACH by 1 June 2007 .
This is a complex issue , which cannot be resolved by rushing it through : REACH is so complicated that it would be wrong to expect to solve all the problems at the approval stage .
The important thing now is to start implementing it : we have provided for a number of what we might call self-regulating mechanisms and deadlines , which will allow for adjustments to be made as work progresses , on the basis of the practical experience that we have gained .
We have been improving the balance at all stages in this procedure : I could mention the solutions we have found for the problems of small enterprises , or the strengthened health and environmental protection measures , particularly as regards the risks to which workers are exposed .
Overall , I think we can be very pleased with this end product .
I have noticed that my fellow Members in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left have tabled a package of amendments , which are on the whole admirable and are very similar to those that I tabled during the negotiations with the Council and the Commission in order to arrive at the point where we are now .
How useful are these amendments ?
Where will they take us ?
Which peak will we be able to reach in an unlikely conciliation procedure ?
We all know what the real alternatives are : either to adopt the compromise package that we have set out , improving on the common position , or in fact to accept the common position .
Let us be quite open about this : maybe that would be better .
These are the real alternatives that we have , and I am sure that Parliament will make the right choice in Wednesday 's vote .
Mr President , my speech today means that my work is done .
Even the voting list will be short - there is not a lot to do , just two pages , which is a record for REACH , considering that some 5 000 amendments were examined at first reading .
My work therefore finishes here , and it just remains for me to thank all those who , in their many different ways , have taken part in this Himalayan expedition .
A great many have taken part : I have known six presidencies and countless committee chairmen and commissioners , and I was always there as the lead climber , even though there were times when someone tried to pull me down instead of acting as my safety person .
Even so , we have got this far .

Joking apart , I am grateful to everyone , from the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , Mr Florenz , to all the shadow rapporteurs , including those who have voiced their disagreement with this result , to the presidencies , especially the Finnish Presidency , which has really been a crucial interlocutor , to the Commission , which may not have imparted any great bursts of speed but which played a decisive role in the final stages to achieve this result .
Above all , however , I thank the staff who have worked with me : two Italian ladies - one of whom is my assistant , Sabina Magnano - who have played a very important role in this project .
If I could change the name of the report , I would name it after them and all those who have worked with me .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioners Verheugen and Dimas , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Sacconi , the Regulation concerning the Registration , Evaluation , Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals ( REACH ) is one of the most significant legislative projects in the EU 's history .
It will be a giant leap forward from the current control system for chemicals , which is roughly 40 years old .
It will make Europe a global pioneer and forerunner in this area .
For almost exactly three years , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission have been working painstakingly together to have the REACH Regulation adopted .
The negotiating process has seen difficult phases .
It is with no exaggeration that I can say that , but for the keen commitment of all parties to this , we would not be here today .
The drafting of the Regulation by the Council has been a challenge for no fewer than seven presidencies .
I would like to thank all the presidencies that have prepared a basis in the Council for the decision that is now before us .
The political consensus achieved in the Council during the UK Presidency paved the way excellently for the conclusion of talks during the Finnish presidential term .
I am very pleased that the Member States have given their staunch support to the negotiated compromise package .
I also sincerely hope that the various groups in the European Parliament will support the compromise solution as broadly as possible in the vote on Wednesday .
I would , in this connection , like to thank the European Parliament for their splendid levels of cooperation during the autumn negotiations .
In particular , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , and Mr Florenz , Chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and numerous other Members , who have been actively involved in finding common solutions .
I also want to thank Commissioners Verheugen and Dimas , whose personal input in the talks was considerable .
At this stage it is a good time to evaluate the process regarding how the objectives set for the REACH Regulation are to be realised overall .
The regulation will do much to improve the protection of human health and the environment .
The REACH system will improve our knowledge of the properties of substances , make the control of risks from chemicals more effective , and make it necessary to have an authorisation to use the most hazardous substances of all .
The new safety requirements will be the most stringent in the world .
It is in the common interests of European consumers and industry alike to promote the product development of new and safer chemicals .
It is for this purpose that the current notification procedure has been reworked in the proposal .
The REACH system will also mean that companies will have greater responsibility and more duties to discharge , and it will present companies with an opportunity to attend to their obligations under chemical safety more independently than they used to .
There will be a significant increase in the transparency of the control of chemicals with the creation of up-to-date information systems and registers for the European Chemicals Agency , from which the public too will be able to obtain information on substances and their properties more easily .
There will be no other information systems of the kind in the world .
If the effects of substances are to be examined properly better information on their properties will be needed .
The REACH Regulation will put this on a new level by making it possible to use alternative research methods and programmes on a broad basis .
These new research methods are also likely to influence chemicals testing at global level .
Consumers too will be able to obtain more information on the hazardous substances contained in goods and articles .
With REACH a system will also be established which will oblige businesses to give details , if so requested by consumers , on substances of high concern contained in articles .
The matter of the authorisation procedure and substitutions were the last questions that remained unanswered in the negotiations .
The Presidency 's proposal is that the applicant or holder of an authorisation should submit a substitution plan , while an analysis of the alternatives shows that there are suitable alternative options .
The substitution plan should be submitted regardless of whether the authorisation is to be granted on the basis of appropriate risk management or socio-economic benefits .
What is more , the appropriate risk management route was made narrower in scope than the version in the common position adopted , in that it will not apply to PBT or vPvB substances .
With regard to substances that interfere with hormone function , it was agreed that this should be looked at again within the next six years .
I believe that this solution takes balanced and realistic account of the concerns voiced by the European Parliament about the most hazardous substances being substituted .
It is with pleasure that the Finnish Presidency can confirm that there is a package of amendments to be voted on which is based on the outcome of the tripartite negotiations .
I can also confirm the Council 's approval of these amendments .
Regarding other amendments , I hope that the outcome of the talks will remain unchanged .
I hope that at its sitting on Wednesday Parliament will adopt the compromise package on the Regulation as negotiated with the Council .
Then a legislative project of importance both to the public and industry would be one major step closer to its realisation .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate marks the last stage on a long road , a road leading ultimately to a great leap forward for health , for the environment , and - let me specifically add - for the competitiveness of European industry .
I do indeed hope that this great project will set standards for the whole world in terms of environmental and health policy .
We owe our having got so far not least to your House 's great dedication and influence , and we are particularly indebted to Mr Sacconi , who has shown himself to be a great negotiator and to have a tremendous knowledge of the subject .

I would also like to thank Mr Florenz , the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , who has guided us through the trilogue , which was an extremely difficult and sometimes laborious process , as well as Mrs Ek , the rapporteur for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for her valuable contribution and Mr Nassauer , the rapporteur for the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection ; both of them played a key role .

Your House has left its unmistakable mark on the results put before us today , and I would be the first to say that they represent an improvement over that which went before .
That has mainly been accomplished through the strengthening of the approval systems and the offering of bigger incentives for the replacement of those substances for which suitable alternatives exist .
I should also like to reiterate that the use of substitutes for substances where suitable alternatives are available is economically advantageous .
Doing so is not to our detriment but to our benefit .
I am also very happy to see that it has proved possible , in the course of deliberations , to take greater account of the need to protect animals , for one of the aspects of REACH that I really did find problematic was that it would lead to much more use being made of tests on animals , when quite enough of this is being done already , but I can here and now take up Mr Davies ' question from the previous debate and say that the way in which REACH will be implemented will certainly be determined by the end objective of bringing about a really substantial reduction in experiments on animals .
We have improved the information with which consumers are provided , while your House was , at the same time , aware of the need for consideration to be given to the concerns and interests of those on the other side , namely the hundreds and thousands of small and medium-sized businesses that will be obliged to apply REACH .
The belief that REACH would be a problem for large-scale industry in Europe was always a misconception , albeit one propagated by some environmental organisations .
European heavy industry has no problem whatever with REACH , whether with the form in which it was produced then , or with the form in which it exists now , but it has always been problematic for small and medium-sized enterprises , whose ability to compete - indeed , whose ability to survive at all - will be jeopardised if we are not very careful indeed to consider what they can take and what not .
It is for that reason that the changes made are extremely significant , not only as regards the verification requirements for substances produced in small quantities , but also the enhanced incentives for the shared use of data for the purposes of registration and the improved protection of intellectual property rights .
The Commission believes that a balance between competitiveness on the one hand and necessary advances on the health and environment front , on the other , has been achieved , and it is for that reason that it endorses the proposal that is before you today .
It follows that the Commission also endorses the amendments on which Mr Sacconi 's proposal is based .
Permit me to conclude by saying that there is something else on which I am in agreement with Mr Sacconi .
We may well be about to achieve our objective , that being the adoption of this law , but that does not mean - far from it , indeed - that the difficulties have been overcome ; it may well be that we have yet to come up against most of them , for this will be an act , the implementation of which will still demand a great deal of attention , creativity and energy .
I would like to point out that we now have to ensure that the Agency in Helsinki is got up and running without delay , and the main problem with that has to do with the processing of data .
It must be ensured that the implementing regulations are brought into effect soon and that the parties affected should be made aware without delay of what they have to do ; above all , we have to ensure that those who will have to be guided by REACH know how this is to work in practice .
The Commission has already started to do more to prepare small and medium-sized enterprises by supplying them with more extensive information , so that they know just what is going to happen .
Ultimately - since what we are dealing with here is a directive - we must take care that no new problems and complications result from it being implemented in different ways in different Member States , and I ask for your House 's help also in that which now has to be done .
If we continue to work together on this in future , I am convinced that we will surely succeed in creating a model for the realisation of our European concept , combining a strong , high-performing and job-maintaining industrial base with high standards - the highest possible standards for the environment and the health of our fellow citizens .
Member of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a long-term legislative procedure is reaching its completion and REACH is taking its final form .
The Commission , as mentioned by the Vice-President Mr Verheugen , congratulates the Council and Parliament on reaching an agreement .
With this agreement we will achieve better health and environmental protection as well as promotion of industrial innovation and competitiveness .
The Commission supports this set of compromise proposals that were agreed between the Council and Parliament on 30 November 2006 .
I would like to thank the Presidency and Minister Mr Pekkarinen , and of course the European Parliament , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and its president Mr Florenz , and especially its rapporteur Mr Guido Sacconi , for their significant efforts and determination , because of which this proposal had a happy end .

REACH is one of the most comprehensive , inspired and ambitious legislations that have been drafted in the European Union , so far .
It will affect all industry sectors , but also simple citizens in direct or indirect ways considering that chemical products are so widespread in everyday life .
For citizens and consumers , REACH means better information regarding the substances contained in everyday products , but foremost it means that the dangerous substances will be gradually replaced by safer ones .
Moreover , risk assessments will take into consideration vulnerable groups , such as children , pregnant women and the elderly .
Therefore , citizens ' health will improve and environmental damage will be avoided which not only cost a lot to be rectified and managed , but in many cases cannot be restored .
REACH signifies broad responsibility on the part of industry to prevent adverse effects to health and the environment from the production , use and sale of chemical products .
Furthermore , it means that the flow of information to the production chain will be improved so that future users will have better and full knowledge regarding the features and properties of the substances they use .
Therefore , it will be possible to specify more precise objectives for risk management measures , a prospect that will boost workforce protection and reduce health and business problems .
Even though there will be some increase in cost , this expenditure and investment will be distributed over a long-term period , that is , 11 years in the event of registration or longer in the event of a loan .
With the new system , we expect to regain consumer confidence in chemical products and the chemical industry , and moreover REACH will boost competition and innovation , a fact that will both offset and cover the larger part of the initial expenses and investments .
REACH aims at reducing animal testing to a bare minimum .
The agreement between Parliament and the Council on this point is satisfactory .
It emphasises the importance of alternative methods and provides for a 45-day period for public consultation on each test proposal .
Wednesday 's vote will be the final stage of a procedure that aims at achieving the goal set out by the Heads of State or Government during the 2006 Spring Convention , namely the completion of REACH by the end of 2006 .
I hope that we complete the procedure as planned , and the regulation is put into effect so that we can begin to face this big challenge , namely to gradually collect information on thousands of substances that are being used today and so that we can adopt enhanced risk management measures .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , we must begin , and soon , our efforts for the gradual replacement of dangerous substances .
If alternative products exist , replacement must be our first choice .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , REACH has been one of the most important , most extensive and also most complex pieces of legislation to have been discussed in this House in recent years .
I should like to be the first to congratulate Mr Sacconi on the result achieved .
In recent weeks , he has spoken a great deal about his dog , who desperately wanted him to do a little less ' REACHing ' and spend a bit more at home with him instead .
Your dog , Mr Sacconi , must be a terrier , given the tenacity with which you got your teeth into this issue , which meant that it was not always easy for the shadow rapporteurs to get what they wanted .
Thanks to REACH legislation , the 30 000 chemical substances that are available within the European market are once again being mapped out ; the relevant information will be verified and applications will , where necessary , be regulated .
This involves all substances that are produced in quantities of 1 tonne or more annually .
Others give us a different account .
Moreover , REACH replaces a set of very impenetrable legislation that has eventually made the European market unworkable .
What we need to do is to let REACH do what it is supposed to do .
It has proven its worth : 1.3 million people are working in the chemical industry , 27 000 mainly small , but also large , companies work with REACH , or will do so in future ; the turnover involved is EUR 440 billion .
That is what makes it important that we should make this legislative package sound .
The compromise that is now before us is , as I see it , the best compromise we could get after many long and difficult negotiations where extreme views were required to find the middle ground .
The compromise is very precarious , because on the one hand it protects man , the environment and the consumer , and limits animal testing , while on the other , it also offers an opportunity for creating the best possible climate for European industry .
We can tell the Finnish minister that , whilst we are pioneers , we must ensure that our position also bears fruit .
REACH ensures that the responsibility is shifted from the Member States to the companies themselves , which is the most important improvement in respect of the common position .
Other key points to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats are the fact that confidential company data is protected more effectively , registration is better tailored to the Nassauer / Sacconi package - it is just unfortunate that nothing more came of this - and red tape is being reduced to a minimum .
A sound balance has also been struck in the areas of authorisation and substitution .
It is now up to the Commission to ensure that this piece of legislation will also be viable .



on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my supposition is that 99.9 % of my group will vote in favour of this compromise put together by Mr Sacconi ; If anyone could negotiate this difficult path between Scylla and Charybdis it was probably he - he who was always available for dialogue , who tried to achieve compromise even though he always had his own ideas in his mind , and that compromise is one that is acceptable to large sections of this House and of the European public .

What are we talking about ?
We are talking about learning something about chemicals of which we are at present ignorant .
We are talking about our desire to protect nature , and , above all , the health of those people who use chemicals , whether as consumers or as workers with them .
With that end in mind , the compromise is a good one .
A compromise remains , of course , a compromise and nothing more .
The best proof of its being a good one is probably that nobody ends up being really satisfied .
Mr Sacconi is certainly not one hundred percent happy with it , and nor , as a whole , are we , but , even so , I am persuaded that this is the best that we could have achieved .
It is , at any rate , better than many other proposals that I have had sight of , and so , on Wednesday , I too shall be voting in favour and will be doing so out of conviction .
What , though , do we have here in black and white ?
Many describe it as a monster . Of course , it is not one .
The description of ' monstrous ' is far better applied to the forty pieces of legislation that we had before .
This is a compact package , and not one that is easily read by all , but those who make the effort can manage it .
It is also a good thing that we have agreed to review its scope in five years ' time , but what will happen to medical apparatus or other individual products then ?
Does this have to cover them , or would we be better advised to exclude them ?
That would make sense ; it is also right that we have made improvements where the protection of data is concerned .
Whatever the demands of transparency and people 's entitlement to information , data must be protected ; we also have to ensure that there is active support for research projects and that research can still be carried out at universities and other facilities .
All these things are good .
So what is not good ?
What is not good is what is going to happen to small and medium-sized businesses .
Commissioner Verheugen said so , and I am grateful to him for so doing ; if we are not watchful , it is the small and medium-sized enterprises who could end up picking up the tab for our ambitious legislation , and it is time we gave some thought to them .

What I urge Commissioners Dimas and Verheugen to do is to amend the definition for small and medium-sized businesses ; that is long overdue and will help some of them , but I also urge them to set up a helpdesk that will help such firms , translate for them , and actually ensure that they get help , for the ones this legislation will affect do not know to which transition period they are subject , when - and for what - they have to register , or when this or that will start to apply to them .
Let me conclude by saying that , if we are serious about this - and to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten as much as to anyone else , I emphasise the ' if ' - then we will make sure that a good and effective agency is in place without delay .
That will involve money .
That is something that the Council Presidency will have to deal with ; let it tell the Council 's members that that is what we need the money for .
We in this House must do likewise .
My apologies to Mr Ouzký ; normally I stay until the end of any debate in which I have spoken , but I now have a meeting of this House 's Bureau to go to .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it seems such a calm conclusion to such a tempestuous debate .
It is some seven years since REACH was first announced to ministers at the Environment Council .
Remember the fears about all the impact assessments and the wild figures about how much REACH was going to cost and the risk that this would lead to the European chemical industry disappearing from the shores of this continent and relocating in China .
Within this Chamber there have been all sorts of parliamentary tactics to delay and destroy REACH over the years , and here we are with a remarkable measure of agreement all round .
Perhaps in practice we have made some modifications .
We are on the right track .
I have high hopes for REACH .
I hope it will enable us to identify , control and replace chemicals that are detrimental to our health and environment .
I hope it will be implemented without excessive difficulty , particularly for SMEs , at a cost that will not threaten the competitiveness of our industry .
I hope it will stimulate the validation and development of alternative non-animal testing methods .
I hope it will promote innovation within the industry and give Europe a cutting edge in the world .
I hope it will not lead to a transfer of jobs but instead will increase consumers ' confidence , here in Europe and across the world , in the chemicals our industry produces .
I hope that enough scientists will want to brave the dark winters of Finland in order to ensure the European Chemicals Agency is the success we hope it will prove .
I hope this is going to set a lead for the entire world , a regulatory regime that will be a benchmark for governments elsewhere .
I hope the package we have agreed between us , with much assistance from the Finnish Presidency over recent months and of course with the guidance of Mr Sacconi , will firmly steer the industry towards substituting chemicals of high concern by safer alternatives and promote the development of such alternatives .
I hope for all those things , but probably a lot of water still has to flow under the bridge before my hopes will be realised .
There are a lot of imponderables .
How will the European Chemicals Agency really interpret its remit and how will REACH be defined in practice ?
Only time will tell .
I am not ecstatic about the result .
I have accepted compromises that I would have preferred to have avoided .
I would have preferred stronger emphasis on substitution .
It was a terrible mistake that , right at the end of the negotiations , the Council actually offered us the chance to incorporate hormone disruptors - endocrine disruptors - within the socio-economic categories - the substitution categories - and we as a Parliament declined and settled for a review in six years ' time .
That is astonishing !
However , I do not agree with one spokesman for WWF , who recently denounced the final outcome of REACH as a disgrace .
On the contrary , it is very much a step in the right direction and , if our hopes are realised , it may prove to be one of the most significant measures this Union has ever taken , of real long-term advantage both to our economy and our environment .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the original purpose of REACH was to protect people and the environment .
The beneficial effects of increased knowledge and of developing better ways of using chemicals should include economic advantages .
In November , The Lancet published a report showing that 200 common chemicals cause brain damage , difficulties in concentrating , behavioural disorders and lower intelligence .
How are we to obtain a society based on knowledge , innovation and development when we needlessly allow chemicals that reduce intelligence and make it difficult to concentrate ?
Ladies and gentlemen , we have had many long meetings .
Again and again , it has been confirmed that a qualified majority here in Parliament thinks it self-evident that consumer products containing dangerous substances should always be replaced with less dangerous alternatives when these are available .
Again and again , we have agreed that chemical safety reports should be introduced for all low-volume chemicals .
Again and again , we have emphasised the importance of transparency and openness and laughed at how absurd it is that the board that is to take important decisions about the future of chemicals should be secret and have secret financial interests .
We have thought it self-evident that companies should be responsible for their products and have also taken decisions that would give small companies fair conditions .
Now , at the eleventh hour when things are getting serious , a majority of you have chosen not to care about these objectives and , instead , to leap into the German chemicals industry 's unsafe embrace .
In spite of the fact that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety demanded substantial improvements in REACH , the last trialogue only made things worse .
It was the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats that played the chemical industry 's game , but why did the others join in ?
REACH should now instead be called RISK , standing for the registration but inadequate substitution of chemicals .
The last time we voted on REACH , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe came to an agreement with the Right on the registration aspect .
This time , you have come to an agreement on the whole of REACH .
On the previous occasion , Mr Sacconi said that an agreement is like an apple : it must be picked when it is ripe .
After the debate , you gave me the apple .
A year later , it is now a perfectly disgusting and soggy lump .
I have therefore brought a new apple with me to give to you .
Keep it for a few years until the overhaul of REACH , when it will smell putrid and remind you to come to an agreement with another majority .
What would be better by far is if you were to come to an agreement with ourselves on the alternative compromise , symbolised by the core of this apple .
Let us regard this apple core as symbolising a REACH that grows and takes root , a REACH from which we shall be able to reap environmental and public health benefits in decades to come , instead of selling windfalls to the nations of Europe .
It is you who must choose .
Do you want a REACH apple that turns rotten or a core that grows ?
In politics , nothing is won unless risks are taken .
You should dare to take this last opportunity now , obtain a clear majority in Parliament and negotiate openly with the Council .
We can never obtain anything worse than the Council 's common position , but we can obtain something so much better .
One of the advantages of conciliation is that there would , at any rate , be more democracy than is afforded by this rotten agreement reached behind closed doors .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I will not go into the details of the analysis of the REACH compromise that will be put before us .
My colleague Mr Holm will do that in a few moments . For my part , I would like to dwell on just one idea : REACH is both a fine illustration of what Europe could be and a sad confirmation of its contradictions today .
Only a few weeks ago , REACH promised to be the sign of a real ambition for Europe .
The European Union was going to adopt legislation that at last put public health and the environment above short-term economic calculation ; it was at last requiring undertakings to take account of the social cost of their headlong pursuit of competitiveness ; it was at last learning the lessons of the asbestos scandal and , given that the new legislation would also cover products imported in considerable quantities , Europe was forcing world industry to adapt to its new standards .
Europe therefore had a great opportunity , in an area that very much strikes a chord among our citizens , to forge itself an identity of progress by changing conditions here and in the world .
With this in view , many non-governmental organisations , trade unions and elected representatives have worked actively to make this fine project a success .
Many of them are now very disillusioned at the excessive concessions made to the big European groups .
Admittedly , and this is an important point to make , the reversal of the burden of proof remains .
It is no longer up to the authorities to prove that the chemicals used are toxic , but for industry to show that they are safe .
That being the case , what justification can there be for allowing undertakings to continue , even if under supervision , to use substances that are acknowledged to be very dangerous even though less harmful alternatives are available on the market ?
After the terrible precedent of asbestos , this is ethically unacceptable , as is the right given to company managements to keep secret the information they hold on the possible toxicity of chemical substances less than 10 tonnes of which are produced in a year , as is the case of the great majority of them .
Please stop using the financial weakness of small and medium-sized enterprises as a pretext !
My group tabled an amendment requiring large companies to provide SMEs with the information they possess on the substances in question in order to save them pointless expenditure .
That amendment was rejected by the authors of the majority compromise .
One last comment worth thinking about .
This second-rate compromise is not the result of economic weakness in the face of an unequal balance of power ; the bad example comes from the top .
The REACH legislation is too ambitious .
It is not the kind of project that the Commission will be presenting in future , Mr Verheugen , the Commission Vice-President responsible for industry , said back in mid-September .
The most worrying thing is that he made that announcement during a speech on the ' Better Regulation ' initiative , which says a lot about the strategic direction that pernicious slogan indicates .
We have seen its effects in the social field , with the ' Services ' Directive and the Green Paper on labour law , for example .
Now it is the turn of public health and the environment to be affected .
The debate on what has got to change in European integration is decidedly more topical than ever .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I joined the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety just after the last election almost two and a half years ago and saw at first hand the divisions and differences of opinion in relation to REACH .
I must say that I have been highly impressed by the efforts of so many people , and in particular I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , the shadow rapporteurs , the chairman of our group , Mr Florenz , the Commission and the Council , and all who have compromised to bring about this package .
I think it shows the ability of the European Union and its institutions to come together in matters of common interest - it shows that we can compromise and have debate .
If our constituents saw us in this light they would be very impressed .
There is no doubt about the existence of a growing cocktail of chemicals in our daily lives .
Under the current patchwork of legislation , without sufficient information on the majority of existing chemicals , we are unsure of the quantity of chemicals used and the effect on our health and our environment .
This agreement is groundbreaking in terms of regulation which will clearly benefit consumers and our environment through tighter safety controls .
We will be better informed .
There will be growing impetus for companies to invest and evolve in terms of research and development and substitution plans .
In addition to the fine balance attained , I am very satisfied to see the increased assistance for SMEs , the promotion of alternatives to animal testing , community-wide labelling , and creation of an EU agency to manage the technical , scientific and administrative aspects of the REACH system at Community level .
We must be mindful , however , that the aim of this legislation is also to improve the competitiveness of the chemical industry , one that is very important in my own country and creates quite a number of jobs directly and indirectly .
The institutions have worked hard to ensure that the burden for industry , and particularly SMEs , is not too costly , will protect confidential business information , reduce red tape and will not threaten jobs , whilst still delivering a win-win situation for citizens , workers and our ecosystem .
Our big challenge now is to implement the REACH regulation in our respective countries to ensure that it gets proper representation for those who send us here .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to express my appreciation for Mr Sacconi .

It is his guidance that has enabled this House to secure the best possible result from the negotiations , which was difficult enough with a divided Parliament and a Council that held onto its common position for dear life .
The fact that eventually , following tough negotiations , results that we can live with have been achieved in different areas deserves credit .
I can easily see why the environmental movement and the chemical industry are dissatisfied with the compromise , but it is certainly true that in this case , the better is the enemy of the good .
The lack of compromise at second reading would have either led to adoption of a virtually unchanged common position or to a long-drawn out conciliation , with the possible consequence of the entire proposal being withdrawn or rejected .
In this case , something is better than nothing .
I should like to draw your attention to one final point , namely that I think that the Member States should be able to adopt stricter environmental policy than is currently laid down ; this is certainly true if countries such as Sweden and Denmark are set to apply such stricter legislation .
This is why I will be voting for the amendment that was tabled , by myself and others , on this subject .
I should like to apologise , not least to the Commissioner and Mr Sacconi , for my inability to be present for the rest of the debate , a fact occasioned by a vote in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this compromise bears Parliament 's imprint .
This is the second time - the first being when we dealt with the Services Directive - that this House has made the decisive contribution to achieving a solution in an important piece of legislation .
It is good that the solution was found here in Parliament .
Nevertheless , it is a compromise - no other solution was possible at the time , and even mediation would have undoubtedly proved very problematic .
For this reason , the right course of action is to endorse this compromise - although I do so only with considerable reservations .
This REACH regime signifies revolutionary progress with regard to knowledge about approximately 30 000 substances used in trade and industry .
This means dramatic progress for health and the environment in Europe , as the President-in-Office rightly pointed out .
Why , however , I ask him , did he fail to say a single word about the fact that we are not only transferring responsibility for substances to enterprises , but also imposing considerable costs on them ?
Why did he not mention that we are introducing new bureaucratic procedures in Europe , and thus doing the exact opposite of what we proclaim in our soapbox speeches about cutting red tape and achieving the Lisbon objectives ?
I think that honesty requires us to admit that we want this environmental progress but are imposing considerable costs on the business and industrial community in the process .
Time will tell whether , as Mr Verheugen and I hope , the competitiveness of this community can withstand that .
The fact is that , first of all , costs are being mentioned that could have been lower .
The Finnish Council Presidency rejected a relaxation of testing requirements for low tonnages .
Firstly , these tests are expensive , secondly , they are not very useful , and thirdly , they require enormous amounts of animal testing .
It would have been better to revert to the solution found at first reading by Parliament , together with Mr Sacconi - to whom I am obliged for his work .
What comes next ?
The next step is the implementation of this massive piece of work , this Regulation , which takes effect immediately - that is to say , does not first need to be transposed into national law .
A decisive factor in this regard will be the way that the Commission and the Agency deal with those concerned .
I would ask the two Commissioners , in particular , namely Messrs Dimas and Verheugen - who are more acutely aware than others that the organisation of REACH tends to put small and medium-sized enterprises at a disadvantage - to work together with SMEs on implementation in a spirit of partnership , and also to ensure that the European economy can withstand this strain .
( FI ) Mr President , after long and involved discussions , negotiations , committee votes and compromises we are witnessing the shape that REACH is to assume .
The situation that has prevailed hitherto , as has been said here , is one where we simply know too little about almost all the chemicals in the internal market .
Over the decades , tens of thousands of chemicals have come onto the market , and their effect on the environment and human health is unknown .
Our current legislation on chemicals prevents new and better chemicals from coming onto the market , because it supports a situation where it is possible and cheaper to use old chemicals .
This is therefore a barrier to innovation under the Lisbon Strategy .
REACH 's main instrument is the obligation of industries that use chemicals and importers regarding registration .
In recent weeks we have discussed in particular the authorisation procedure and the related substitution procedure .
The European Parliament and its rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , have worked their hardest to improve the Commission 's original proposal and the Council 's common position on the possibility of substituting chemicals that are better for the environment and people 's health for hazardous chemicals and chemicals of concern .
This work has been consistent and we have to acknowledge that it has produced an excellent outcome .
After the vote at first reading not many believed that we would be able actually to achieve a result .
Now we have a good one .
According to the compromise now being discussed , all hazardous substances will be covered by the substitution procedure and the most hazardous chemicals must always be replaced if a substitute chemical is available and its use is financially and technically feasible .
In addition , a substitution plan or research plans must be produced for other substances of concern as a condition of access to the market .
I would just like to comment on the apple comparison .
I myself at least would sooner pick and eat an apple while it was ripe , and I would not wait for it to go rotten .
Similarly , I think it is important to realise when decisions need to be made and when the best moment is to pick this ripe apple .
( SV ) Mr President , the vote on Thursday is the end of a long process with important contributions from many quarters .
I think that we should pay attention to Commissioner Wallström , who put forward the proposal , and to her democratic innovation involving major consultation through the Internet , which did an incredible amount to improve the REACH proposal itself .
We must pay attention to those Members who have spent many nights labouring over this matter and with whom we have had some tough discussions : Mr Langen in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ; the rapporteur , Mr Nassauer ; and a number of others , particularly the main rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , and the Commissioners - both Mr Verheugen and Mr Dimas - who have done a lot of work to prepare this proposal for voting on .




Nonetheless , I stand here with very mixed feelings .
If I had to summarise the way I feel , I would say I felt proud but dissatisfied , to use an expression that has been current in Sweden for the last few years .
For my part , I am proud to have had a part in this work in my capacity as rapporteur for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , when I took three themes as my starting point .
Firstly , the environmental aspects of the proposal need to be enhanced , especially when it comes to substitution .
Secondly , the proposal needs to be clarified .
There were an incredible number of ambiguities and instances of overlapping with other legislation , and we have now removed ' paper and pulp ' and ' minerals and ores ' , these being important areas that do not , however , belong in this proposal .
We have also simplified REACH - a move that has been very advantageous to small companies .
I believe that the ' one substance , one registration ' proposal will be very significant in the future .
My point of departure was , then , that enhancement , clarification and simplification were good for European industry , European consumers and European citizens .
I believe that the quest for a strong policy that takes account of both the market and the environment is a very important success factor .
I am disappointed on three counts .
Firstly , I think that we could have taken the opportunity to have given consumers clearer information and , in that way , met increasing environmental and consumer demands .
It would have been possible , as we had done the job and assumed the costs .
The compromise before us is not as advantageous as it might have been , and that , I think , is very sad .
I should like to know how the Commission and the Council are to respond to the demand for a 0.1 % limit . Is it the car that is to be regarded as being in some degree dangerous , or the dangerous component in the car that is to be regarded as being to some extent dangerous ?
It is important to clarify these matters .
The demand for substitution is a further issue .
Why could we not have gone a step further when it comes to what we call CMR substances , which cause cancer , are mutagenic and affect reproduction ?
My third question concerns duty of care .
This has existed in European law on damages since Roman times and is not by any means an innovation .
I think it would have been helpful to have had duty of care not merely explained as a principle in the recitals , but incorporated into the legislative text .
Unfortunately , we have not brought these matters to a conclusion .
I have a fourth issue to raise , namely that it is important for the developing countries now to be given the opportunity to use this information , so that no obstacle to trade is created .
To summarise , then : I am proud but dissatisfied .
The main job is still to be done and , to quote something said by an American a couple of weeks ago : ' We did not cross the Rubicon in order to sit there fishing ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , the real work starts after the vote .
Mr President , Christmas has come early for the German chemicals industry because , by supporting this incredibly watered-down compromise , Parliament will be giving the industry an early and unexpectedly large Christmas present , rewarding them for the relentless lobbying which has successfully torn the guts out of this proposal .
Thanks to that lobbying and to compliant politicians , both from the Council and among members of the PPE-DE Group in particular , dangerous substances will remain on the market for many years to come , even when safer alternatives already exist .
I think that is going to be hard to explain to European citizens .
It is a scandal that they will have waited 20 years in total for rules that will continue to allow hazardous chemicals to be used in everyday products , even when substitutes are readily available .
It is also completely unnecessary : the second reading in the Environment Committee gave the rapporteur a clear mandate to push for mandatory substitution for all chemical substances of high concern when safer alternatives exist .
And yet that was given away , negotiated out of existence .
Not only that , but the whole legislation will be shrouded in secrecy .
It is completely unacceptable for key personnel in the agency that will implement this legislation to be able to keep their names and their declarations of interest confidential .
That is outrageous , and it is extraordinarily ironic , too , that it comes at precisely the time when we are supposed to be convincing European citizens that the EU is open , transparent and accountable .
How can we possibly be claiming that , and yet agree to confidentiality here ?
In the view of my group , Parliament should have rejected the compromise deal and continued to press for a deal via a full second reading and conciliation .
There is nothing in this package that we could not have achieved through conciliation , and much that we could have won .
Instead , we have had a process that is untransparent , undemocratic and very easily manipulated .
My group has put forward two alternative compromise packages .
That is not unrealistic , as some have said .
In fact , what we are proposing is weaker than what Parliament adopted in first reading , but it is still stronger than the pale and weak compromise on the table now .
It is based precisely on the bottom lines that a majority in Parliament have supported all through this process until the very last moment , but then chose to give up as a concession to the rest of the PPE .
So , when you , Mr Sacconi , ask us what other mountain we want to climb , the answer is : the one that has been on all of our maps from the very beginning of this process , the one that you told us we were climbing , which you were leading us up so well and so masterfully , until at the very last minute you lost your step , you lost your footing , you took a wrong turn and now we are all put in peril .
One final point on animal welfare .
During the first reading in the Environment Committee , I tabled a completely non-animal test strategy , which was adopted .
It did not survive the subsequent plenary vote , but it did send a very strong signal that we want much greater emphasis on non-animal alternatives .
The promotion of non-animal tests is now one of the objectives of the REACH regulation , and that is hugely important .
It must not just be a gesture ; it must be turned into a legal commitment to replace animal tests much faster than we have been doing .
Animal tests are not only cruel , they are inefficient , they are outdated and they are frequently misleading .
Replacing them as fast as possible is not just an issue of animal rights : it is an issue of human health and of human rights as well .
( SV ) Mr President , my father worked for more than 20 years in the heavy chemicals industry in Sundsvall in northern Sweden .
Sometimes , he came home in the evenings with pain in his arms and legs .
Sometimes , he was almost completely paralysed and had difficulty moving them .
According to the doctor , he was suffering from acute metal poisoning .
My father is now retired , and a number of the heavy metals by which he was affected are now banned . However , millions of workers are still affected by chemicals in European workplaces .
According to a Finnish study , 32 million EU citizens are exposed every day to carcinogenic chemicals in their workplaces .
It is for all these workers that we need a strong REACH .
As has already been mentioned in quite a few very good speeches made earlier in this House , we also need a strong REACH for the environment and for all those of us who are consumers .
That , however , is precisely why I am so disappointed that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and also the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have caved in to the chemicals industry and to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
This proposal fails workers , consumers and the environment .
Mr Sacconi , you probably know better than any of us what workers are calling for .
Workers want to see a strong REACH in which dangerous chemicals are substituted when there are better alternatives , to give just one example .
Yet you have abandoned the basic principle .
Is that because power and loyalty to the PPE-DE Group are more important ?
I do not know .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left cannot support this proposal .
Why ?
Let me give some concrete examples . This compromise contains no chemical safety report for low volume substances .
This means that thousands of chemicals will continue to be distributed without our knowing what real risks they present .
There is no legally binding duty of care and , in the light of this , we need to remember that the basic idea behind REACH was precisely that there should be such a duty and that , specifically , the burden of proof in connection with chemicals should lie with companies and not with the authorities .
Big companies will be able to keep the facts about the chemicals they use secret once the PPE-DE Group has had its demands accepted for an enhanced intellectual property law .
Small companies , which will not be able to benefit from increased transparency , will be the big losers .
The obviously legitimate demand that the Member States should be able to have more far-reaching legislation has not been approved , either .
Above all , what should have been a gain in terms of public health and the environment now rings hollow , namely the substitution principle .
This principle , which states that dangerous chemicals must be replaced when there are less dangerous alternatives , is now so restricted that it is only a very small number of chemicals that will be phased out .
As a result , we shall still be surrounded by thousands of dangerous chemicals that are carcinogenic or toxic for reproduction or that have endocrine disruptive effects .
We in the GUE / NGL Group want to save REACH .
We have therefore , together with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , submitted a common REACH package involving amendments requiring stronger wording in all these areas .
In order to minimise the number of animal experiments , we also call for efforts to implement completely new animal-free methods involving ' toxigenomics ' .
The demands we are making are not unreasonable , since a good deal of them were supported by a majority of this House a year ago .
In conclusion , we shall , on Wednesday , be voting on what is to be the world 's most comprehensive chemicals law .
There is still a chance of saving REACH , and I would call on you - especially you Socialists who claim to protect workers and the environment - to throw this PPE-DE Group agreement in the waste paper bin and to vote in favour of saving REACH .
( PL ) Mr President , the debate on the REACH regulation has long been generating many emotions and disputes .
Feelings have run even higher as a result of the outrageously long list of amendments tabled , in excess of 5 000 , and also because the true aims of the REACH regulation have now become clear , namely to promote the interests of the large chemical concerns that can draw on huge financial potential and the support of scientific research , which has simply become a tool enabling these globalised concerns to make even greater profits .
Behind the façade of fine-sounding slogans about protecting health and the environment , the big players are trying to do away with small and medium-sized enterprises .
They are focusing in particular on those from the new Member States of the Union that have so far been the driving force of Europe 's economy .
We are sceptical , too , about compromises that only postpone the elimination of smaller enterprises , thus depriving many people of jobs and the opportunity to better themselves .
( DE ) Mr President , rapporteur , Commissioners Verheugen and Dimas .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am very grateful that we can now say that a compromise has been reached in the end .
The kind of things I have had to listen to over the last week : ' Mr Florenz is an extension of the Chancellery ; he is trying to enforce the will of the German chemicals industry ; he even broke off the negotiations ' : all nonsense .
I was simply aiming to generate the pressure needed to bring the various camps in Parliament closer together - namely the health and environment policy-makers on the one hand , who are rightly very committed , and the economic policy-makers on the other .
That was the problem that was not so easily solved .
I believe that we have reached a decent compromise on this .
Everyone grumbles , everyone is dissatisfied , and , ultimately , that is the result of this compromise .
Anyone who does not like that should not be participating in the parliamentary process .
After all , things are not as simple as many of my fellow Members in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - whom I otherwise hold in high regard - may believe .
There are various camps in this world , and that is why the debates we have held on the White Paper over the last three years have always been controversial .
In my 18 years in this House , I have not experienced this as strongly with any other report as with the one on REACH .
We have even seen some completely ridiculous proxy wars , and the atmosphere has not always been free of tension .
One thing that has always been clear , however , is that we have a real pillar in the form of the fact that REACH has never been called into question by the industry .
I am very pleased about that .
I should like to remind the two Commissioners that they have announced their intention to withdraw 40 old directives and regulations that have now been superseded .
I shall check that they do .
This is the challenge they face , in addition to the implementing regulations - and it is something they do really have to do , in order to give us an advantage and to enable us to thin the jungle in this field .
The three-step procedure - registration , evaluation and authorisation - is spot on .
The industry will have to show that it looks upon the release and disclosure of data to the Agency as part and parcel of modern economic policy rather than an end in itself .
I am convinced that , where there are better alternatives , these will also be joined by environmentally friendly ones in future , subject to economic viability .
These are precisely what we want to promote .
It is my belief and hope that this will not harm the industry but , quite on the contrary , will promote motivation .
An important factor all along has been our focus on producer responsibility .
This is not an end in itself , but is something that the industry must do in future .
The matter of imports remains unresolved ; this has not been sufficiently regulated , in my opinion .
To conclude , one contentious issue is that of the disclosure of data .
We need a political debate over how much of their know-how enterprises have to divulge .
We obviously need consumer protection , but we also need to protect our enterprises , who provide our employment from Monday to Friday .
Mr President , last month The Lancet , the leading UK medical journal , published a report which spoke about a silent pandemic amongst children developing neurological disorders from exposure to industrial chemicals .
There needs to be a lot more research on that .
But we now have a chance to act on chemicals , and we should seize that chance .
The compromise package agreed by Parliament and the Council is a very good one .
I want to pay tribute to the skill of Mr Sacconi , our chief negotiator , who worked in an extremely transparent and collaborative manner throughout these negotiations .
I reject the accusation that it was untransparent .
He always reported back to his shadows and to the committee , and people were kept informed , much more informed than on other pieces of legislation .
People have said that the compromise does not go far enough , that it falls short of perfection .
It is not a perfect compromise .
The Greens and the GUE / NGL Group have said that they will not support the compromise , which does not surprise me .
However , the point of politics is not to grandstand or to reject compromises and go down in glorious defeat and remain politically pure , but to make a difference and to bring about real change that affects real people .
That is what this legislation will do .
I heard people talking about mountains , but they are going to take us up mountains in the same way as Sisyphus pushing a great big rock up the mountain .
We would never get agreement and therefore nothing would ever happen , and back down the mountain we would roll .
I saw the majorities obtained in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and there was no majority to get anything better than what we have on the table this evening .
I agree with Commissioner Verheugen , who spoke about the need to make this legislation implementable , and I look forward to hearing what he is going to be doing and how we are going to work with the chemical industry and governments to ensure it works properly .
By voting ' yes ' to REACH this week we can start to implement the legislation to get the agency up and running .
I do not want to hang around waiting for miracle solutions some other day .
I urge colleagues to vote ' yes ' this week and make a difference , not just worry about making headlines .
( FR ) Mr President , on 20 September 2003 , before we started our work here , Mr Chirac , Mr Blair and Mr Schroeder wrote to the European Commission asking it not to undermine the competitiveness of the chemical industry .

Intervention , and of course pressure , at that level was unprecedented in our codecision history , and I have to say that at that moment the die was cast : REACH would fall short , far short of the aspirations set out in the White Paper , for example , back in 2001 .
It is of course out of the question for us to handicap this sector , which is one of the most competitive and dynamic in European industry .
We have always , each one of us , listened to its concerns .
REACH will be workable .
Witness the less stringent registration procedure for substances produced in quantities of one to ten tonnes , the strengthening of the future Helsinki agency , the affirmation - it has been said many times - of the one substance , one registration ( OSOR ) principle to facilitate the exchange of information between undertakings .
It is also important to limit data input costs .
Indeed this is essential for small and medium-sized enterprises .
There is also this possibility of an opt-out , duly justified by the applicant .
These are considerable steps forward and I would have been delighted with them today if we had not capitulated on the principle of substitution .
What remains of it is not even a dilution ; I would say rather it is an illusion , a selective , case by case , gradual substitution , including for substances that are carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to reproduction , if there are proper controls - and I am quoting the text here .
In particular , REACH is also a blank cheque for endocrine disruptors - plasticisers , insecticides , flame retardants , all of which are among the most lethal chemical agents for human health - a blank cheque signed by our Parliament , whereas the Finnish Presidency was agreeable to making substitution mandatory here .
I find this utterly astonishing .
Europe has turned its back on its own people .
Try explaining to them today that we are not withdrawing from the market a substance that is a health hazard , especially if a safer alternative exists .
I am ashamed , too , of the European authorities ' refusal to listen to the two million doctors , to the authorities and leading experts of the scientific world who are constantly drawing our attention to this silent pandemic created , among other things , by chemical pollution .
I have read the same article in the Lancet as Mrs McAvan and Mr Schlyter .
So our meeting with People 's Europe this Wednesday 13 December will feel like a let-down , to put it mildly , and all those who , like me , are taking the risk of combining health and sustainable employment instead of continuing to treat them as incompatible in so sterile and obsolete a manner , now have only one or two minutes to express their disappointment .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the image of a mountain has been used many times today .
All I can say in that regard is : the mountain laboured and brought forth a mouse .
This is a shaky compromise - no amount of glossing over can hide that fact .
Looking at the starting position at first reading , Parliament has quite clearly given way .
This compromise is a Christmas gift to the European chemicals industry , and the imprint of the German chemicals-industry lobby is clearly visible .
The European public is not being told why Parliament has given up the substitution requirement .
REACH will offer no incentives for replacing chemicals of particular concern with safer alternatives .
The heart of substitution has been sacrificed on the altar of the chemicals industry .
This is indeed shameful , because human beings , nature and animals will continue to be test subjects in a large-scale experiment in future .
It is particularly shameful because chemicals do not even need to be replaced when there are feasible alternatives .
Not even catch phrases such as ' substitution plan ' or ' appropriate controls ' can hide this fact .
This is a will-o ' -the-wisp , an eyewash , as European industrial toxins are turning up where they have no business being , namely in the blood of babies and adults , in mothers ' milk , in drinking water and in the fatty tissue of polar bears .
We are also deceiving ourselves if , like one of the previous speakers , we believe that research is being carried out into the very neurotoxic substances that feature in the alarming brain study to which she refers .
Nor will there be any compulsory testing in this connection .
These substances will continue to circulate on the market , therefore , even where there are feasible alternatives ; that is what is really shameful .
This compromise also makes a mockery of transparency .
The fact that members of the European Chemicals Agency can keep their names and financial interests secret is not only absurd but also signifies the disempowerment of consumers , who will continue to grope around in the dark .
Not only are they exposed to the risks , they cannot protect themselves from them either .
There is only a very small number of chemicals about which consumers can find out information - and only after going through a lengthy individual process .
This is the age of the Internet , yet we have not managed to allow consumers to access this information online .
We are talking about substances causing neurological and hepatic disorders , of all things , and they are not allowed to know anything .
REACH is a sham , therefore .
Parliament started out a tiger , but ended up a bedside rug .
( EL ) Mr President , the subject we are discussing has nothing to do with the primary objective of REACH .
It is common knowledge that hundreds of chemical substances contribute to occupational diseases and deaths ; however the only thing that was pushed forward after a series of amendments and anti-scientific criteria , were the interests of the businessmen of the chemical industry at the expense of employees ' health and the environment .
Essential provisions were removed , so that there would be no need to control or evaluate the effects of 90 % of chemical substances .
In essence , it allows the discretional implementation of the regulation depending on corporate requirements .
The agreement between the PPE-DE Group , the Socialists , the Liberals and the Finnish Presidency takes one more step in the direction of bypassing any opposition and competition , in favour of the prosperity of big business .
They increased the limits for not declaring substances .
Long-term effects on employees and the environment are left uncontrolled and the Member States are prevented from enforcing stricter regulations .
At the same time , any changes or replacements will be easier for the major companies , whereas small- to medium-sized enterprises will be unable to handle the cost and thus shrink in size .
Therefore , it accommodates sector build-up in favour of the capitalists whose position as European Union type monopolies in the international market will be strengthened .
( PL ) Mr President , this decisive vote on the REACH regulation is taking place in December , when many parts of Europe are longing for snow and concern is being expressed about the current high temperatures .
It is high time for us to take more measures aimed at protecting the environment and human health .
The hard-fought compromise on REACH is a major step in that direction .
Many concessions had to be made and many contradictory interests reconciled in order to attain it .
For example , the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises had to be reconciled with those of large industrial concerns and the interests of poorer countries with those of richer ones .
In addition , the interests of ardent defenders of the environment had to be reconciled with those of supporters of a more aggressive economy .
It is worth noting that this debate is being held and this important regulation adopted in an enlarged Union including ten new countries .
( SV ) Mr President , the European Parliament could have chosen to follow a more environmentally friendly line and to have stood up to the Council in the negotiations on the Chemicals Directive .
However , the big political groups have chosen to give way to the Council by accepting the very poor compromise that is on the table .
The compromise cancels the substitution principle and , in practice , favours a single interest , namely that part of the European chemicals industry that is out of date and does not plan for the long term .
That is unacceptable .
What is most surprising is that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament chose to support this compromise .
The truth is that the PSE Group has shown remarkable complaisance .
It has caved in to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and to the short-term special interests of the chemicals industry .
The compromise favours the out-of-date part of the European chemicals industry , while Europeans and Europe 's modern industry are among the losers .
The June List will therefore support what is proposed by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .

Mr President , our rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , spent a lot of his speech , like a mountain goat , going up and down mountains , taking us with him and telling us that when you get to the top you feel exhilarated .
I have to tell him that most of us feel exhausted .
However , he has led us gamely through 140 articles , 17 annexes and nine appendices of the REACH proposals , and he can feel justifiably exhilarated to be bringing us towards a new , coherent system to identify and manage the risk of chemicals .
It has been a long marathon .
I am not sure whether you can have a marathon going up and down mountains , but if you could , it would probably take the nine years it is going to have taken once we come to April 2007 and put this in place .
We have come a long way and we have had high ambitions , although not all of them have been met .
That would explain some of the outbursts that he may have sensed behind him .
However , what we have been seeking is to get the best possible ambition met .
But we have to strike a balance - a balance between strong environmental and health protection , phased but comprehensive gathering of data on all chemicals , legal certainty , protection of intellectual property for businesses and minimising the need for animal testing through data sharing and the promotion and validation of non-animal test methods .
That is a compromise , and that is where we are .
At the heart of that compromise is substitution , and the authorisation procedures with their mandatory substitution plans will phase out chemicals of very high concern where safer , viable alternative substances and technologies exist .
Research plans will be required where they do not exist .
We have made progress .
I congratulate the Finnish Presidency on helping towards that .
I regret that the British Government pulled the rug from under the feet of the Finnish Presidency at one point , otherwise we might have achieved a little more .
As has been said , the future is implementation .
The future is what the market will do with this .
I believe that the market will respond and lead the way as manufacturers , retailers and consumers push for safer alternatives .
We will be looking to competitive business to provide those greener products that consumers want .
We will also see movements towards non-animal testing through the three-year review that will come from the agency .
It will soon be Christmas .
The best possible Christmas present is a REACH-free 2007 .
It will not be REACH-free in the Commission , but we will have a REACH-free agenda in Parliament .
All the runners in this marathon deserve at least that respite !
( FR ) Mr President , we know that chemical products can be dangerous and have catastrophic effects on health and the environment .
It therefore seemed obvious that this text ought to be exemplary , leaving behind economic pressures and political divides .
That is why , today , I am dismayed that the long debates have resulted in a compromise that falls short of our expectations and of what was voted for in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Yes , I am dismayed , and what dismays me in particular is that the principle of substitution , where alternatives exist , has been weakened by the proposal for a substitution plan and a socio-economic report , both of which will delay the replacement of dangerous substances .
I hope the Agency will be resolute on these matters .
Likewise , I agree with the European Trade Union Confederation .
It is very disappointing that the chemical safety report will be mandatory only where production exceeds 10 tonnes , as this will not make for transparency on thousands of substances and will not allow risk management plans to be adopted .
Finally , the subtleties expressed over CMR substances , implying that they are less dangerous than might appear , leave me perplexed .
I am also dismayed that part of European industry has not immediately wanted to rise to the challenge of innovation and improve its public image .
I say part of European industry because I know that some have already anticipated REACH .
That is why , today , I can only hope that if the consolidated version of this regulation is adopted on Wednesday it will be implemented with the utmost stringency and the utmost transparency .
I will close by thanking Mr Sacconi , whose task was not an easy one .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , rapporteurs , I hear my fellow Members express their disappointment .
However , the compromise that is before us this week is in my view an acceptable agreement , since it has been reached on the basis of reciprocal concessions .
I would like to highlight the work of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in this regard .
So far as substitution is concerned , this had to be included in the debate on authorisation , as it is ultimately aimed at eliminating highly dangerous substances .
Mandatory substitution was a fine objective , but not a realistic solution from a technical point of view .
I can see one consequence of the compromise that has been reached here : undertakings will have to compete to develop substances with safer properties .
Those that discover such alternative substances will therefore occupy a more favourable position on the market and the search for alternative substances will therefore become a challenge for them .
I believe Article 137 of the compromise , on review , is important .
An evaluation of the application of this mammoth piece of legislation after the first few years is essential .
We will in fact already be in a position to assess how far we have come .
At the same time , I think it will give us an opportunity to clarify the treatment of certain products , the intrinsic properties and uses of which have been known for a long time , such as lime and batteries , on which we have just adopted legislation .
I do not believe these products are dealt with adequately in the present text .
The fact that substances present in the natural state are treated in the same way as substances that are entirely artificial is a matter of particular concern to me .
Another thing that concerns me is how this legislation will be put into practice by SMEs .
When I last spoke in this House , I said we would have succeeded the day we adopted a system that was balanced , simple , effective and that enterprises could use .
I rather doubt that we have achieved that .
For that reason , I would like the Member States , trade associations , and NGOs , too , to create a climate that will allow SMEs to meet the requirements of this legislation , thereby helping to achieve its objectives .
Moreover , since this legislation applies to imported products , it will have to gain acceptance in third countries , which will also have to begin to design and develop chemical products that do not harm human health or the environment .
I believe this is an extremely important point .
Finally , I hope that , at the forthcoming round of World Trade Organisation talks , where it might be expected that the European Union will raise non-tariff customs barriers , the EU will promote REACH as legislation necessary for the survival of the human race and the natural world .
( FI ) Ladies and gentlemen , my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , for his long and exhausting ascent to the top of the mountain .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has tabled two different proposals on REACH .
One is that which the Greens are actually promoting ; the other is the amendment that we had kept up our sleeve , which contains the improvements now adopted by the Council , but not the things that actually made it worse that were done on the last night of the negotiations at the request of the Conservatives and against the wishes of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Our alternative compromise is thus the summit of the mountain without the fog that clouds Mr Sacconi 's pleasure .
Two weeks ago in the Council , Finland managed to make the first small move in the direction of hazardous substance substitution , as called for by Parliament , when agents that interfere with hormones was added to the list of chemicals for substitution .
I was flabbergasted when this step was blocked by the Conservatives on the last night of talks .
Moreover , information on the identification of chemicals was classified as a trade secret .
Throughout the debate on the chemicals legislation the Conservatives have been acting brutally and unscrupulously like messenger boys and girls for the chemical industry .
Ladies and gentlemen , I understand everyone who wants a final decision now .
The content of the proposal tabled in my name has already been approved by the Council .
It merely lacks the adverse amendments made on the last night .
You who have already voted for the strict substitution procedure and wish to rid our living environment of the most hazardous chemicals , if you are to be consistent , you will support this proposal and dispel the fog at the summit of the mountain .
Our citizens will be asking what you did to protect their health from hazardous chemicals .
( EL ) Mr President , these past days the lobby of the chemical industry is celebrating .
It achieved at least 90 % of its goals .
It has changed REACH completely .
From the Commission 's initial proposal , only a few things have remained .
Yesterday 's opponents have become the most loyal supporters .
The principle of substitution has essentially been undermined at the expense of public health , the environment and the employees of the chemical industry .
Today 's compromise essentially means the Socialists have adopted the views of the European Right and of the chemical industry .
It is far behind the initial Commission proposal , but also far behind the things we voted for , both at first reading and in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Even though I respect them , I honestly cannot understand why Commissioner Dimas and rapporteur Mr Sacconi were celebrating .
Until yesterday they were supporting and promoting completely different things .
Congratulations Commissioner Verheugen .
You managed to kill REACH .
( PL ) Mr President , chronic malnutrition in the world has been reduced by half since 1945 , despite the significant population increase .
Average life expectancy has gone up .
Energy is being produced and consumed more efficiently , enabling us to protect the environment .
This is all due to the development of industry and science in the 19th and 20th centuries .
It follows that we should not support unduly severe or expensive regulations in our search for solutions that are good for people and for the environment .
Tightening up the provisions on registration and authorisation will burden industry with enormous costs .
It will mean cutting expenditure on innovation .
Less innovation will result in us and our children being exposed to more dangerous substances in our daily lives .
That is how things stand .
It is not rigid environmental bans and orders but technical and scientific advances that will guarantee a healthier and cleaner future .
More widely available authorisation , assessment of the social and economic factors as part of the authorisation procedure , and a more flexible procedure are the great advantages of the compromise reached on 30 November .
We shall therefore be voting for it to be retained .
( CS ) It appears , then , that REACH is a done deal .
Instead of concentrating on innovation , our businesses will now have to wade through a dense , 600-page regulation .
Europe as a whole has once again moved towards lower competitiveness , so that here in Parliament we can once again moan about the failure of the Lisbon Agenda .
Any competitor from a country not covered by the ridiculously named REACH will now find it even easier to compete with regulation-burdened Europe .
REACH is a gift to our competitors .
It is also a gift - and a rather expensive one - within the EU for the large companies and for the larger , wealthier countries .
Whereas the costs entailed by the regulation can be borne by giant German companies , they will wipe out medium-sized businesses in the Czech Republic , for which the costs will exceed their average profits .
Even though SMEs employ some 80 % of the population , they will be destroyed by REACH , especially in the new Member States .
REACH will thus become a sophisticated weapon in the competitive struggle within the EU and an instrument with which the big and wealthy will be able to dominate the small and poor .
Hence the sudden , oh-so touching agreement on this pathetic regulation .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioners , representatives of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , if we manage to approve the REACH compromise this week , this House will have proved for the second time during this term that it listens to the laments of the people and that it is capable of taking its responsibility in very extensive and complex technical matters and of helping bring those matters to a good end .
The negotiators had a very difficult task to contend with and I should like to extend sincere congratulations on the agreement reached .
I am delighted to note that an agreement was reached at second reading .
Everything had , after all , been said and it was time to bring matters to a close and to let those who have to put these ideas into practice in the field go ahead and do just that .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats have always been reluctant to unilaterally back one or the other lobby .
We have continually endeavoured to strike a balance - a balance between the ambition to increase health and environmental protection , on the one hand , and to maintain a competitive edge and prevent unnecessary administrative burdens , on the other .
As I see it , we have done a reasonable job of this .
That nobody is 100 % satisfied is inherent in the nature of a compromise such as this one .
I take the view that , with the package on which we are to vote on Wednesday , we have improved on previous texts that we drafted and voted on during the course of this legislative procedure on many different fronts .
In the area of licensing policy , we are certainly making progress , both in terms of conditions under which licences for dangerous substances are granted and in terms of the duration of these licences .
The protection of intellectual property has been reinforced , which was necessary , and unnecessary tests on animals are being banned .
I am persuaded that the large undertakings will know what to do with our compromise text , but am not so sure about the smaller ones , and in this respect , we in the Group of the European People 's Party are relying on the implementing measures and the necessary accompanying measures ; if the Commission has something up its sleeve in this respect , I should like to find out shortly .
Having weighed everything up , we will endorse the package , because we know that in 11 years ' time , we will have drastically renewed chemical substances policy and will have made it transparent .
Europeans will live with fewer health risks , and we are relying on the fact that the competitiveness of industry will not be impaired but rather strengthened .
Naturally , undertakings pay a price , and not a small one .
Most people in society , however , are asking for more health information and more health protection , and this is something that is only set to increase .
In time , a REACH tested label can become a commercial asset instead of an economic handicap , and , as has been said here before , our legislation will be able to become normative at a global level .
We must in any event set down to work by , inter alia , launching sound information campaigns directed at the consumers .
( NL ) Mr President , after nearly four years and thousands of amendments , REACH is finally a reality .
All credit , of course , to our rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , who has managed to bring all this to a very good end .
The result is something we can be proud of .
Replacement has become one of the REACH objectives .
REACH is not just about knowledge of thousands of chemical substances , but also about the replacement of 2 500 dangerous substances .
It is high time dangerous substances , over which there is much disquiet , were finally prohibited .
The increase in the number of cancer patients , allergies and fertility problems in humans and animals are associated with dangerous substances .
The vast majority of people working in the chemical industry are doing everything they can to exercise utmost care when dealing with dangerous substances , but it does not , unfortunately , go without saying that everyone will do so .
Of course , I have sympathy for industry 's view that replacement cannot be done overnight .
It is a good thing that the new agreement allows for a little more flexibility .
It is now being examined on a case-by-case basis how long a licence for a dangerous substance can last .
This is progress for producers .
A study plan must be drafted in order to develop safe alternatives that benefit the environment as well as innovation .
It will be an enormous challenge , in the next few years , to remove the most dangerous substances from the production process and from products .
REACH has brought about this innovation that benefits both our competitiveness and the environment .
Everything , of course , now hinges on effective implementation and what matters is to ensure that the small and medium-sized companies can be part of the change .
A first review is planned in seven years ' time , at which point we will be able to examine whether it is still possible to include more substances within the scope of REACH , and we will be able to consider whether the hormone deregulating substances can still be included within the scope of replacement regimes .
That is when , hopefully , care duty will also be given the necessary attention and when information duty to employees and consumers can be further improved .
Until such time , this is what we will have to work with , and I think an excellent compromise has been brokered .
( FR ) Mr President , with REACH , together we , including Mr Sacconi , our rapporteur , have raised tremendous hopes that our environment can be rid of the persistent , bio-accumulative and toxic chemical substances that are poisoning our health and the natural environment .
The plan to regulate chemical products awakened environmental and social consciences in Europe and even beyond our borders .
As a result , the massive amount of dialogue with civil society - trade unions , NGOs , undertakings and manufacturers - will have brought some agreement on the necessity of improving public health and the quality of the environment and of providing the public and workers with information on the chemical products that surround us .
Sadly , despite an encouraging message from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the current compromises will weaken this REACH project .
How can we explain to our fellow citizens that we will not be holding manufacturers responsible for spreading toxic substances , but that it will be consumers and workers who handle dangerous substances who will have to bear that responsibility ?
How are we to explain that Parliament advocates the substitution of carcinogenic and mutagenic molecules and endocrine disruptors but is not making it a systematic requirement ?
And what are we to say about the lack of transparency of the information on the most dangerous substances ?
We find that unacceptable and incomprehensible .
Even if many small and medium-sized industries and enterprises have taken on board the added value of green chemicals , the heavyweights of the European chemical industry are refusing to change .
They continue to influence our work despite the financial burden on our health system of the growth in pathologies , which Mr Nassauer , incidentally , completely overlooks .
A great responsibility rests on us today and we must vote accordingly .
The Greens ' amendments will strengthen REACH , make it meaningful and prevent it delaying the substitution of the most dangerous products indefinitely ; Mr Sacconi recognises this .
Finally , I will say that this compromise may be a great step for the chemical industry , but it will remain a climb-down for our Parliament .
I noticed that some colleagues were signalling that there was no interpretation .
It was not a mistake on the part of our interpreters .
In her contributions Ms de Brún usually uses Irish , which is not yet an official language in this House .
That situation will change next year .

( EL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the two Commissioners and Parliament for breaking an amazing record : with this report , I mean the draft law , they have managed to attract more lobbyists than any other time .
A reporter , outside this room , told me that he has not seen so many lobbyists in Strasbourg before .
I , for one , will not assist these lobbyists with my vote .
They are preparing a party after Wednesday night 's vote .
It is true .
Can we accept the lobbyists ' product as a reality , which only serves their needs ?
And in essence , who is to gain from this ?
Only major industries of major countries .
Can Greece or the Czech Republic cope with the terms set out by this draft law ?

I am very upset by the letter that Mr Verheugen sent to Mr Barroso 25 days ago , in which he interfered with Mr Dimas ' responsibilities .
Ever since , I have been very suspicious as to whether this entire matter could stand up to any serious criticism .
And it does not .
( DE ) Anyone who remembers the time when , on 13 February 2001 , Commissioners Wallström and Liikanen presented the White Paper , will have an idea of how far we have now come .
I should like to express my particular thanks to the two Commissioners for increasing the focus on our jobs and the competitiveness of our economy under their responsibility and in their time .
I had always assumed that the Council President , too , was firmly bound by the Common Position .
Mr Sacconi has done a marvellous job but , to listen to the speeches in this House , one could be forgiven for thinking that the Communist Group and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance were in the majority .
What nonsense ; they do not even have 100 votes in Parliament .
Therefore , this compromise , which enjoys the support of several of the groups , is a good one - even though it does not meet my expectations in all respects .


To Commissioners Verheugen and Dimas , I would say that it is important that the implementation of this Regulation does not turn into a huge bureaucratic monster , but instead really sets an example of better lawmaking . Ease of use is essential to this end , as Mrs Roth-Behrendt pointed out .
If we ask ourselves today what we failed to achieve , I would say that the issue of how to deal with substances in imported articles is the most difficult .
No one can offer a solution to this issue .
What is the good of having extremely tough legislation if the substances enter the EU in imported articles and businesses relocate from the EU ?
The compromise is responsible because of the way it has been constructed .
Not all the tests for small and medium-sized enterprises were necessary , and it would also have made sense to simplify the system by setting exposure and use categories .
It is regrettable that this did not happen .
Nevertheless , we shall support the compromise , and I hope that this European chemicals legislation will become a guideline for chemicals legislation worldwide .
That is the challenge facing us .
If we succeed , we shall have secured jobs in the EU and improved rather than weakened the competitiveness of our industry .

Mr President , first of all I would like to pay tribute to Mr Sacconi , who did his utmost to come up with this good legislation .
I started following the REACH debate as an Observer three years ago .
It is more than encouraging to see that there has been an acceptable outcome to this long process .
Coming from a new Member State , I am satisfied to see that my amendments have been built into the text .
The Hungarian-British initiative should also be mentioned here as a relative success for my compatriots .
Hopefully , Parliament and the Council will approve the final version in December , but it is not the end of the process .
In seven years ' time the state of the legislation will be reviewed .
It will be a good opportunity to involve the substances in the 1-10 tonne range in the chemical safety report in order to ensure the safe use of such substances , as I and other Socialist colleagues proposed earlier .
( CS ) Former Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin once said : ' We meant to do it better but it came out as always ' .
This is a case in point .
These rules , which in their current form work against the Lisbon Strategy and in favour of the big corporations that have come to terms with them in the hope of market dominance , are damaging to SMEs .
Furthermore , the principle of data sharing , which is a good thing , is curtailed by the fact that there are no sanctions whatsoever in this area .
The rules will threaten jobs in countries like mine and will have a knock-on effect in other sectors .
I believe there are some people in the Chamber who will be happy with these rules .
Aldous Huxley once said that happiness is like coke - something you get as a by-product of the process of making something else .
Something similar will happen in this case , in the sense that while our group , as Mr Langen said , appeared to have a majority , it will take only a few more rules of this kind before we actually do have a majority .
Mr President , well , we are at it again .
In my view , Mr Sacconi is not so much building a mountain as digging himself an enormous hole .
May I say at this festive time that I hope he mixes his martinis as enthusiastically as he mixes his metaphors .
Whatever he says , we are talking of the regulation of over 30 000 substances , policed by another army of self-important inspectors who already suck at the teat of the overtaxed and over-regulated taxpayer .
The extent of the regulation is bound to take the focus off relatively few instances where serious action is needed .
Yet again , we British see in this directive the advancement of the abandonment of the presumption of innocence , with no redress for damages for British businesses , not to mention the horrific experimentation on millions of animals , whatever you may try and persuade yourself .
I certainly beg my British federalist colleagues , all of whom support this misguided legislation , for once to get up off their bellies and strike a blow for our own national civil law and against the sovietism of this place .
We all know the effect of Russian sovietism on Russia 's own and the global environment .
( PL ) Mr President , chemical substances are part of our environment and can be found all around us .
Rapid industrial development in the 20th century has meant , however , that our daily use of these substances has become not only a necessity but also a pleasure .
Many of these substances do not genuinely improve our quality of life , though , as they are hazardous and harmful to our health .
It is difficult to imagine life without chemical substances .
That is precisely why we must insist on greater transparency and information about the substances contained in products used by human beings .
The REACH system should be based on the principle of prevention and precaution .
The need for the consumer to be assured that a particular product is not harmful must be central to the new legislation , and the responsibility for providing that assurance must rest with industry .
Any producer wishing to place a new product on the market or retain an existing concession must be able to prove that the products for which he or she is responsible are safe for human beings and the environment .
The compromise reached goes a long way towards responding to these expectations and therefore deserves our support .
Nonetheless , like all compromises , it gives some cause for concern .
In particular , I have reservations about the provisions concerning sharing information , as this will significantly weaken the position of around twenty-five thousand small and medium-sized enterprises in the European Union .
The attempts to extend the patent period , initially to 15 years and eventually to 12 , are detrimental to innovation as they strengthen the economic dominance of rich companies .
The longer the periods , the less the pressure on companies to seek new solutions and undertake new research .
In conclusion , despite its many positive features relating mainly to health issues , the REACH regulation does not treat economic entities on an equal footing .
Nonetheless , this compromise does deserve our support .
( SV ) Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking our rapporteur and my colleague , Mr Sacconi .
I think I have caused him a few problems throughout the whole process by constantly asking for more : more substitution , more information , the registration of a larger number of chemicals and more sheets guaranteeing the safety of chemical products .
Guido , thank you for the work you have done and for not losing your sense of humour each time I came up with demands .
I also want to thank everyone else with whom I have cooperated in the course of the work on REACH .
Together , we have worked hard in order to obtain just such a strong REACH .
However , there has been some extremely strong opposition , especially from the political Right here in Parliament and from the chemicals industry .
The compromise that has now been reached must be judged a success in the light of this tough opposition , in spite of the fact that it does not live up to the demands that I really do think should be made in terms of substitution and information .
That is because politics is the art of the possible , ladies and gentlemen .
You cannot obtain everything you want . It is a question , rather , of getting as far as possible down the road you want to travel , and that is what we are doing by means of the compromise that is on the table .
It is the best we can obtain , and it entails much better rules than the rules governing chemicals that exist in Sweden and the EU at present .
REACH places the responsibility for testing chemicals on importers and manufacturers .
We shall obtain more knowledge of , and information about , chemicals , and compliance with the call to replace dangerous substances would improve the current situation .
There is nothing to suggest that we should obtain a stronger REACH by delaying the process .
The fact that Germany will be donning the presidential mantle after the New Year and that the German Government , eagerly cheered on by the German chemicals industry , have been the great opponents of a strong REACH is one more reason for avoiding delay .
We Swedish Social Democrats will therefore be accepting our share of responsibility tomorrow and voting in favour of the compromise .
We have got as far as we can now , and we must not put what we have achieved at risk by delaying the process .
In seven years ' time , when REACH is up and running , we shall , however , be able to come back and demand that it be further tightened up .
( DA ) Mr President , the chemicals reform has now been designed in terms of total harmonisation , which prohibits the Member States from introducing better protection of people 's health and of the environment .
Thirty-eight Members have tabled amendments calling instead for a minimum directive to be proposed so that the Member States might provide people with the better protection that voters might wish for .
We have asked for the roll call in order to see who is assuming responsibility for , for example , more cases of cancer and allergies .
We now have a list of 150 unwanted substances in Denmark .
They are substances that have harmful effects on health and the environment , and that list can scarcely be maintained in a system involving total harmonisation .
Protecting the environment and people 's health is viewed as distorting competition in the internal market .
REACH prohibits us not only from banning dangerous substances , but also from warning against them , and REACH will entail further animal experiments on substances that we already know are dangerous or superfluous .
What we shall thus be voting on on Thursday is a reform that also involves the killing of animals .
The compromise can only be defended if its rules are minimum ones .
Couched in terms of total harmonisation , the proposal is too feeble for us .
Mr President , politics is the art of the possible .
We should support this hard-won compromise package before us , which will need an open-minded and very honest appraisal at the seven-year review stage .
After three and a half years , 700 pages of draft proposals and thousands of amendments , it was never going to be easy , with such a complex piece of legislation , to find the right balance between health and environmental objectives while maintaining the competitiveness of European industry .
Current chemicals regulation is very confusing and inefficient , covering 40 different directives that are more or less independent of each other .
Witness the saga of the zinc risk assessment that has taken 15 years , to date , and is still not complete .
REACH will rationalise this system and will register , evaluate and authorise chemicals that were never previously tested for their impact on human health .
While the legislative debate is coming to an end , the serious challenges of implementing REACH and setting up the agency are only just beginning .
When it comes into force next year , companies will assume new and , in many cases , onerous responsibilities related to the substances that they manufacture , import , distribute or use .
This will be particularly challenging for companies that do not already have the expertise to deal with chemicals legislation , especially downstream users of chemicals and the thousands of SMEs that will need to live and survive , Commissioner Verheugen - but I would also add ' thrive ' to that list - under REACH .
However , the Commission , the competent authorities and Member States , the agency and we here in the European Parliament have a role to play in ensuring that REACH is implemented smoothly and effectively .
The Commission is still developing technical guidance and IT tools that will enable industry and authorities to implement the legislation effectively from the start .
National helpdesks also need to be set up , either by the competent authorities on their own or in conjunction with industry .
These preparatory tools must be in place well before the REACH implementation deadline in order to ensure all the necessary support structures are fully operational .
I agree that this REACH directive will have a very positive influence on standards worldwide .
Thank you to all concerned .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to extend the warmest of thanks to Mr Sacconi for his excellent work .
Without doubt , REACH is by far the most difficult dossier in this parliamentary term .
I am convinced that our rapporteur achieved the best possible result in the negotiations with the Council and the Commission . The negotiations within Parliament , too , were a very difficult task .
Anyone who has been listening closely will have noticed that hardly any of the political groupings share the same opinion within their own ranks or represent a clear line .
One can tell from the criticism that has been expressed how difficult it must be to push a compromise through , even within Parliament .
Like Mr Sacconi and many other Members of this House , I have always advocated strong worker protection and also strong environmental and consumer protection .
I would prefer a stricter compromise - incidentally , I made the same comment after the first reading and during the discussion at first reading .
We now have to decide , however , whether to endorse the compromise - as my group and I shall be doing - or to adopt the Common Position .
I do not believe that the amendments tabled with the aim of tightening up the Common Position stand a chance of achieving a qualified majority .
We launched an attempt to go beyond Mr Sacconi 's compromise back at first reading , and did not even achieve a simple majority .
Looking at the positions of many Member States , I wonder what those MEPs are expecting who say that this compromise is a gift to the German chemicals industry .
Looking at which camp is in the majority in the Council and knowing that , on 1 January 2007 , Germany will be taking over the Council Presidency , I ask myself what expectations , if any , we can have of mediation under the leadership of the German Council Presidency .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur and Parliament once more on this result ; and I believe that this compromise is a small step in the right direction .
( EL ) Mr President , finally after many years of procedures and negotiations we are very close to adopting a regulation on chemicals .
Of course , the regulation may not be perfect , but it is very good .
In the future it can be improved , as has been done with several community directives and regulations .
I would like to congratulate Mr Sacconi , because in essence this regulation provides for the protection of human health and the environment and this protection will increase over time ; moreover , I imagine that , in future , all the substances that cause the concern of most of my colleagues today will be replaced over time .
It is very good that the regulation provides for control of dangerous substances , where possible .
It provides for substitution , which must take place , and in cases where there are no substitutes it provides for research plans , which is also very important .
I would like to remind you that the science of chemistry has offered a lot to the improvement of human life on earth .
And this was achieved thanks to innovation .
In essence , this regulation calls for the same thing over time ; innovation so that new , better and less dangerous or completely harmless substances can be created to serve man .
Once again I would like to congratulate Mr Sacconi , because he managed to create a regulation for chemicals , which should not be judged with impatience .
Do not expect to see perfection as of tomorrow !
Over time we will see an essential improvement of public health and the environment .
( PL ) Mr President , one of the main provisions of the draft REACH regulation is the principle of substitution , which remains within the competence of industry .
This principle could unlock the significant potential for innovation of both the vital chemical industry and the end users of its products .
Nonetheless , there is considerable scope for the interpretation of certain provisions such as those appearing under ' suitable safer alternatives ' .
The provision concerning enterprises ' research and development plans may also prove problematic , as those enterprises that do not have their own research establishment may be exempted from it .
There is therefore a danger that some small and medium-sized enterprises that do currently have their own research establishments may close them down , and will therefore not be required to submit the aforementioned plans .
The question arises as to who is responsible for seeking substitutes , the chemical industry or the end user , or whether the responsibility is shared .
This in turn raises concerns about the nature of intellectual property law in relation to current patent law , which unfortunately is not as good as it could be .
The carefully formulated principle of substitution is the most logical response to the use of hazardous substances .
The procedures contained in the regulation aimed at stimulating innovation in the search for new and safe substances are certainly needed .
( DE ) Mr President , the French philosopher Voltaire once said that all fanaticism is dangerous .
I believe that this debate is a good example of the truth of this statement .
The words of my fellow Members from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , of those from the Union for Europe of the Nations Group or even of the extreme left give me the impression that only losers could endorse a package such as this .
Yet let us compare the advantages of REACH with the disadvantages . It must be made clear in this regard that REACH represents a step in the right direction for us all : greater environmental and consumer protection , but also greater competitiveness .
Rejecting REACH would undoubtedly be detrimental to all sides , therefore .
For this reason , it will now be up to us to communicate this properly .
Indeed , to look at the media , one would think that there were no winners .
Our skill will now be judged on how effectively we can change this impression .
After all , in the final analysis , human beings , animals and even the environment are the big winners from this legislation .
We should continue to work on it , therefore .
In this regard , I must also remind the media of their duty , which is to communicate a true image of this new legislation , particularly at the present stage .
The second stage will consist of getting the implementation of this image right - which will also be very difficult , as we know the scenario : the EU is always to blame .
From the point of view of legal form , however , this legislation is a directive and therefore needs to be implemented by the Member States , who will have to implement and also apply it correctly .
All parties really face great challenges in this regard .
The appeal goes out to us , too : let us create a strong Agency for all this , so that we have uniform rules rather than another patchwork of 25 or 27 different regimes .
We have considerable work to do , therefore , and hopes for a REACH-free year in 2007 are unlikely to be fulfilled .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us see how far we have come with the project before us today .
REACH will change our relationship to chemical pollution considerably , by reversing the burden of proof , first of all ; then by systematically providing information all down the line .
A previous speaker mentioned the asbestos scandal .
We are well aware that a scandal of that kind would be impossible with the text we are voting on today .
The public needs to know that .
There are all these gains , it is true , but there are of course also things with which we are not satisfied , or not satisfied enough , starting with natural substances : I would have liked us to be a little clearer , as it may cause problems .
I do not think a natural substance is really a chemical substance .
As regards imports , I would also have liked us to have more guarantees that we can impose similar standards on importers .
Then , obviously , there is this major issue of substitution .
Like many of you , I , too , would have liked substitution to be automatic , systematic and immediate .
At first reading , I voted in favour of all the amendments to that end , but I noticed that we do not have the qualified majority .
If Mr Sacconi had not managed to reach this compromise , we would be taking a great risk , at the vote on the second reading , of not having this principle implemented .
After all , it must be said that the compromise does include the principle .
What is in question is not the principle but its gradual , progressive implementation , - inadequate in my opinion - but the principle exists for all dangerous substances .
Let us not therefore overlook the effort our fellow Member has made and the victory we have achieved on that front .
Now , having established the principle , we are going to have to see that it is adequately implemented .
That will depend on the Agency 's resources - financial resources , human resources - on pressure from the public and on the amount of money that will be devoted to research .
Furthermore , on this point , we want the Commission to be particularly proactive in ensuring that this compromise leads to all the progress we are hoping for .
( HU ) After three years of debates , we have reached the point where we can give a final judgment on the draft law known as REACH .
Several options are on offer for the vote on Wednesday .
One : we could support the Council 's common position .
Two : we can reject the entire proposal .
Three : we can accept the compromise package , and thus bring REACH into existence .
The first and most important question is whether we need new legislation at all , or whether the laws currently in force are adequate for resolving our concerns for environmental protection and human and animal health , and ensuring that the desired amount of information is made available .
In other words , do we need new legislation in order to find out more about the 30 000 chemicals which surround us every day ?
The answer is a resounding yes .
We need new , comprehensive regulations , within the framework of which the large-scale , often postponed review of chemicals can be carried out .
The other important question is whether the compromise that has been reached is good enough .
Are the solutions that have been reached better than those of the first reading , or has the legislation simply been diluted and further weakened in the course of the six ' trialogues ' ?
Let us address these questions one by one : what were our most important goals after the first reading ?
We wanted a stronger and stricter substitution , and we have got it .
We wanted to make stricter rules governing manufacturers ' responsibility , and we have made them .
We wanted to restrict animal testing , and we have done so .
We wanted a stricter , but practicable registration , and we have achieved it .
We wanted the OSOR principle to prevail and to support SMEs , and this too , we have achieved .
All in all , we can say that the compromise package is much better than the one put forward at first reading ; we have fought successfully for a stronger and even stricter REACH .
Ladies and gentlemen , for these reasons , the conclusion cannot be other than to support the compromise .
( DA ) Mr President , there are approximately 100 000 chemicals on the market .
We have no knowledge of by far the majority of these chemicals at present .
We do not know what effects they have on the environment and on health .
That , clearly , is completely unacceptable , but it is a state of affairs that we are now tackling by means of REACH , for REACH introduces two basic principles .
Firstly , we are reversing the burden of proof so that , in the future , it will be up to the industry to show that a substance is safe before it can be given permission to market it , whereas , at present , it is up to the authorities to show that a substance is dangerous before they are entitled to ban it .
The second basic principle , and the absolutely most important one , is that the most dangerous substances of all - those that give people cancer and allergies and that affect people 's reproductive ability etc - are to be substituted .
If there is an alternative substance that is safer , it must be used instead of the dangerous substance .
That is a very important basic principle .
It is also gratifying that , in future , less use will be made of experiments on animals .
Implementing REACH would lead to far fewer such experiments .
In the short term , there would be quite a few experiments , because we should need to use some data that we do not have at present , but , in the long term , REACH would result in far fewer experiments because of the introduction of compulsory data sharing , which is definitely also an aspect worth including .
All of us have been influenced in this business by many different interest groups .
That much is obvious .
There are major interests at stake , and things could not be otherwise .
There have been the green organisations , on the one hand , and the chemicals organisations and their industry , on the other .
The question is , what is the nature of the compromise we have obtained ? Has the game ended in a draw , as I saw one newspaper article assert ?
No , it has not .
We have ended up not with a draw but with a compromise , in which it is clearly the green interests that have won .
It is clearly environmental and health considerations that have won .
In the past we had an open stable door , with the result that a variety of chemicals could , without further ado , be placed on the market and used as one saw fit .
That door has almost been closed .
The door is not completely secure inasmuch as there is still a small chink in it . In an ideal world we should , of course , have sealed this , but we do not live in an ideal world .
We have achieved a compromise , which is good for the environment and people 's health .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioners , members of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we are in the midst of a long debate on the greatest legislative initiative this Parliament has ever had to come to grips with .
My compliments to Mr Sacconi on his work .
As the previous speakers have demonstrated , the text may be voluminous , but it remains open to a very broad interpretation .
This proposal bears the clear imprint of Parliament .
There has been a marked change in the world of chemicals and the faith in their safety since Seveso and Bhopal .
The fact that all the previous speakers welcome the compromise only with reservations is proof that it is relatively balanced .
Now , however , the Council and the Commission are called upon to start up a functional , powerful Agency as quickly as possible .
This will cost money and generate red tape .
The Agency is the key to the functioning of REACH .
The recruitment of sufficient numbers of the relevant experts represents a challenge .
The Agency must work quickly , accurately and without making mistakes so as to improve the reputation of REACH as a model for other states and associations of states .
In my opinion , the issue of intellectual property has been sufficiently regulated .
We shall have to monitor carefully whether we can live with the present form of substitution in the long run , and we shall have to monitor just as carefully the strain the legislative procedure puts on small and medium-sized enterprises .
Only when all aspects are equally successful will REACH have met the requirements arising from the Lisbon process .
REACH must not degenerate into a typecase that is still not full even after two or three decades ; Europe will have to be judged on its implementability .
With regard to the overlapping fields , I would make a plea for the deletion of medical devices , as these rules are congruous and adequate in themselves , and leaving medical devices in would mean incalculable delays in the authorisation of medicinal products .
We shall consider in due course whether the present function of REACH is adequate , and whether the rules are too strict or too lax .
We must not use comitology to withdraw from involvement in further developments , but rather must monitor application regularly and with a critical eye .

( ET ) I would like to greet our rapporteur Mr Sacconi and congratulate him on his good work and his cogency during the numerous negotiations .
The path that led to this result has been far from easy , but in the end everything we desired has successfully been achieved , by which I mean not only instruments for authorisation and substitution , but also , to a certain extent , compulsory registration .
The legislative framework of REACH is one of the most substantial ever created by the European Union ; it may even be one of the most voluminous of any debated in any parliament anywhere in the world .
REACH serves a greater objective in Europe , and in the future will set a good example for the rest of the world .
When one considers the Commission 's recommendation and the Council 's initial position , Parliament 's report has come a long way .
What is , perhaps , most important is that the substitution process will come to include all dangerous substances that are prohibited or have a limited validity permit , with the obligation to plan substitution or , if that is not possible , to develop alternatives .
The law 's achievements are the result of active work in Parliament over the last three and a half years .
My own country , Estonia , was not one of the negotiators in the initial phase of the process , but I followed the process that led to the compromises with great interest , and so I would like to emphatically congratulate Parliament for the compromise that has been achieved , and say that I really do hope that the national parliaments will follow our example .
I hope that the compromise package will be accepted at Wednesday 's vote in the same form which was agreed upon during the preliminary work .
This would improve the quality of life of the citizens of Europe and serve as a stimulus for small and medium-sized enterprises to create jobs with new and high standards for environmental sustainability , which would make our industrial sector more innovative and competitive .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Borrell , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteurs and all those involved in the lengthy and difficult drafting of this text .
Certainly it contains more positive than negative points but I deplore the fact that no chemical safety report will be required for the 17 000 substances produced in amounts of one to ten tonnes .
There is no doubt that the compromise we reached on the authorisation chapter represented a last-ditch effort at reaching an agreement .
In relation to CMRs , however , substances that are carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to reproduction , the process of proper control , which has been retained , is acceptable , apart from the fact that the agreement , which stipulates that the presentation of a research and development plan will be obligatory without at the same time extending the obligation to implementing any such plan , weakens the text .
Consequently , a revision will be needed in six years .
In the general context of the increase in certain types of cancer and reduction in fertility , surely we have a collective ethical responsibility to follow the precautionary principle , especially in relation to hormone disruptors ?
In spite of the improvements made to the Commission 's text , let us remember that REACH will allow the European chemical industry to keep its place as leader on the world market , that REACH will make a quite new contribution to restoring the confidence of consumers and that the changes to REACH will make it possible to improve the weaknesses in the system .
Mr President , the ball is now in the court of the Commission and the Member States , who will have to see to it that the Agency is operational as soon as possible .
Mr President , in the course of this debate , some speakers from the GUE / NGL and Verts / ALE Groups used some intemperate language in relation to Mr Sacconi , members of the PSE Group and others .
It obliges me to put some political realities to them .
Firstly , the Sacconi package is better than the current regulatory system that we have in place .
It is better than the Council 's common position .
If they succeed in defeating it by amending it and the possibility that we end up back at square one , then effectively that puts the GUE / NGL and Verts / ALE Groups in the pockets of some of the dirtiest and most backward chemical industries in Europe .
We want to make progress in this Parliament , not go backwards .
The strength of Europe and of this Parliament is in identifying the threads of consensus on an issue .
I think that Mr Sacconi , his staff and all the other Members of this Parliament who have participated in this process have successfully identified the thread of consensus and built on it and we have made progress in regulating the chemical industry in Europe .
We do not all have everything we would like ; but as long as there are divergent views on how we can achieve a clean , healthy environment in Europe , on how we can control these things , we will have the democratic process to help us to find a solution .
I heartily recommend the Sacconi package and congratulate him and all associated with it .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , finally after a lengthy and extremely difficult procedure , we are facing a solution regarding the regulation on registering , evaluating and licensing of chemical substances .
The said regulation is a unique opportunity for all of us to achieve a high level of public health and environmental protection , both for us but also for future generations .
I would like to express my support for the solution that Mr Sacconi achieved , to whom we owe congratulations .
Maybe we did want more strict rules or a regulation with broader applications .
What we must note though , is that the primary goal is to activate as soon as possible the control system for dangerous substances , even if there are still issues that need redefinition in the future .
By adopting REACH , the existing legal framework on control of dangerous chemical substances will be strengthened in order to protect the health of European citizens , while at the same time it will boost competitiveness of European industry through innovation and research for the development of safer chemical substances .
REACH is a new , realistic proposal , which we all ought to support by continuing to work on improving it .
We should not send REACH back into the hallways , where it was for so many years , in order for it to become more environmentally friendly and more socialist in nature .
( CS ) The negotiated compromise is neither a disaster for European industry , nor a wasted opportunity to improve healthcare for half a billion Europeans .
It is indicative of the desire among MEPs and the EU-25 to find balanced solutions that represent ways forward , rather than barriers , and for this they deserve plaudits , not criticism .
The regulation , in this administratively streamlined version , will undoubtedly bring fresh bureaucracy , for which the Union will be criticised .
This is a clear levy that Europeans will have to pay for getting what they want , namely more detailed information on chemicals in products .
We shall see how this influences consumer behaviour .
I am certain that such information , which costs a great deal of money , will provide fresh impetus for European research into developing useful substitutes and , where the regulation does not provide for substitutes , will safeguard the gradual , natural elimination of various harmful substances from products .
Doctors will continue to carry out strict checks on dangerous substances and rightly so .
Nothing comes for free , however , and industry is therefore right to defend itself against higher costs .
We still cannot overlook the influence on competitiveness and unemployment in the Union for which politicians such as ourselves - and not doctors or industry - are responsible .
One serious shortcoming that I should once again like to highlight is the fact that the new system is solely European , and not global .
Accordingly , despite its undoubted benefits , REACH will place the tightly regulated European economy at a disadvantage in the context of liberalised world trade .
Indeed for this very reason , it offers consumers no protection from the dangers concealed in products from third countries , especially given that the unemployed will buy cheap products , legally or otherwise .
I therefore call on the Commission and the 27 Member States to ensure that European regulations match our ambitions on the world stage , because this is our political responsibility .
It is our duty to try and raise environmental , safety and social standards in manufacturing , both in the Union and in third countries .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Sacconi for accomplishing such a long , hard and difficult task so well .
I would also like to thank the Finnish Presidency .
I am delighted it was under this Presidency that we finally managed to complete the intense work on the development of this regulation .
It has taken a very long time , eight years to be precise , and the fact that nobody is entirely happy with the outcome actually means that the REACH regulation can be adopted .
The chemical industry feels that REACH is overly favourable to the environment .
Environmentalists allege that the regulation was written to suit industry .
This suggests that a compromise was reached which is feasible in view of current social and political conditions .
I wish to make only two further points .
Firstly , if we cast a critical eye over the REACH regulation , we are bound to recognise that this is a single document replacing the 40 different regulations currently in place , and that it will enable us to effectively protect human life and health .
Secondly , this regulation is a distinct improvement on what has existed to date .
If we resolve to continue improving and amending it in the future , I believe we should adopt it .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the EU is often referred to as an incompetent , useless institution that , following enlargement , has become incapable of taking the important , effective joint decisions that are vital for Europe .
I firmly believe that today 's debate and the vote on Wednesday on the REACH Directive will be evidence that the exact opposite is true .
The drafting and adoption of the REACH legislation represents a step of both Europe-wide and worldwide significance .
With this legislation , Europe will be creating clear , transparent and fair rules for registering , assessing , authorising and , where necessary , restricting the use of chemicals .
In their final form , these rules will result in the greater protection of public health and the environment , and will enable the European chemicals industry not only to survive , but also , in my view , to strengthen its position in the world .
This is because , through the REACH legislation , it is Europe that will in future determine the rules , standards and trends for the chemicals industry throughout the world .
As with all legislation , REACH represents a compromise , in this case between representatives of the chemicals industry , consumers , environmentalists and animal welfare groups .
It also represents a compromise between the representatives of large chemical firms and SMEs .
Speaking as an MEP from the Czech Republic , a medium-sized country in which SMEs dominate chemical production , I am sure that , once the initial costs have been absorbed , the REACH legislation will enable the consolidation and further development of these SMEs , including the creation of more and more jobs .
I shall therefore be voting in favour of the REACH Directive in Wednesday 's vote .
( HU ) Fellow Members , allow me to congratulate the rapporteur and all those who have helped and perfected his work with their questions and their support over the past years .
I would like to underline that for us , representatives from the Eastern European states , this is a legislative project that in two important instances expresses our own proposals made in committee debates and successfully incorporated into Parliament as well .
One is the Maltese-Slovenian proposal , the other the Hungarian-British , so-called OSOR initiative .
This in itself makes possible savings of 10 billion Ft for Hungarian small and medium-sized enterprises .
This is further proof that we have managed to harmonise the health and environmental protection considerations with the small entrepreneur 's cost-bearing capability .
Therefore , I would like to welcome this compromise .
As a member of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I am especially pleased that the requirement of providing consumer information was finally built into the compromise proposal .
I believe this will be very important to all participants , since this will allow us to assess the results of REACH .
I sincerely hope that all the work we have accomplished in the course of lawmaking will not be undone during implementation .
My congratulations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , regarding all the positions that have been voiced , even the most critical ones , and those who are preparing to vote for the common position , without supporting a package that improves it , I should just like to say that there is freedom in this Parliament and that we shall remain on good terms as before .
There is , however , an argument that I have to demolish .
Somebody spoke of hundreds of dangerous substances that would be freely released on the market , and someone even said that 90 % of dangerous substances would be authorised : in other words , the compromise puts in place a kind of licence to kill .
All this distortion is supposed to have happened during the last night of negotiations .
That is not true .
I can only give you an estimate , because only REACH will tell us the actual numbers , but the most reliable estimates say that roughly 2 500 substances will be subject to the authorisation procedure .
With the compromise , there should be less than 200 substances that can be authorised on the basis of adequate control - which is not a licence to kill , but involves a risk assessment .
In any case , because of the way in which we have restructured the compromise , even for these substances a substitution plan must necessarily be submitted where an alternative exists , or a research and development plan where there is no alternative .
Nobody , therefore , can deny the fact that all substances that are authorised will be included in a process that sooner or later will lead to their substitution .
If anyone was thinking that substitution would be made compulsory by decree , they would be voting on something that I have never put forward , either at first reading or in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
What I really cannot accept is what has been said about the negotiating process having been non-transparent and undemocratic .
I met the shadow rapporteurs before and after all the negotiating rounds ; I kept them informed ; and , right up to the last round , there was very broad agreement on the negotiating mandate that I took to the negotiating table .
Lastly , I should like to thank my friend Carl Schlyter for having returned the apple from a year ago .
I shall eat it tomorrow .
He , however , kept it , and he showed me something in a glass jar that is a real ecological disaster in the making .
Still in the fruit and vegetable department , I should like to tell you something that I was taught by my old trade union negotiating master .
He was an old worker who had been through a lot and had made plenty of sacrifices .
He told me , ' You must not be like a walnut , which is hard on the outside and soft inside ; you have to be like a peach , soft on the outside and hard inside . '
That is the negotiating line that I follow .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for a very interesting and very open debate .
There has been some pretty frank talk here .
The discussion showed that there is still a range of views on REACH in Parliament , and why should there not be ?
In my opinion , it is very understandable and natural that that should be the case .
On the other hand , the debate showed that very many Members of Parliament are prepared to seek the best outcome possible in this situation through compromise .
It appears that the wish that I expressed in my first speech will come true in the vote the day after tomorrow on Wednesday .
It would seem that there is now a sufficient number who desire a compromise .
I am certain and convinced that the result of these compromises is that we in the European Union will have the most progressive legislation on chemicals in the world .
After the voting has taken place , the serious work will then begin : the Regulation 's implementation .
The practical work will start on the control of the 30 000 chemicals now on the European markets .
I believe that this work will mean that we will be doing our children , our grandchildren , nature , the environment and everywhere we live a great service .
With these words , then , once and for all I want to thank the Members of Parliament , and the rapporteur especially , as well as the Chairman of the Committee and our partners more generally in Parliament and the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make just two brief comments .
Some of the participants in this debate , who I can no longer see here at the moment , have expressed the criticism that the REACH project would reduce the level of protection for employees in the chemicals industry .
I can state conclusively that that is pure nonsense .
REACH cannot reduce the level of protection in the chemicals industry .
The relevant provisions on worker protection remain in full force .
REACH does not permit anything that was previously prohibited .
Quite on the contrary , employees will no longer be expected to deal with a whole string of substances for which they were previously responsible .
At all events , therefore , REACH brings about a clear improvement in the safety of employees in the workplace .
Therefore , I must reject unambiguously this argument on the part of Members of Parliament who are acting as though they are representatives of workers ' interests .
My second point is that many speakers have rightly pointed out that the important thing now is to implement REACH fully as well as transparently , resolutely and with the avoidance of unnecessary red tape .
This requires an endless number of initiatives , projects and measures - I could list them all to the House , but there is not enough time .
I have already spoken to the Chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and offered to visit the committee in February and present a detailed report on the measures the Commission has either already taken or plans to take with regard to the implementation of REACH .
At the same time , I should like to attach particular importance to answering all the questions that have been asked here about support for European SMEs and a relaxation of the requirements imposed on them , and about the many hundreds of thousands of employees affected .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I have listened carefully to the speeches of the distinguished Members of the European Parliament and I appreciate the positive and constructive contributions and the well-intentioned criticisms .
The Commission supports the compromise amendments , which , on the one hand , aim to make significant improvements in the protection of human health and the environment and , on the other , to enhance innovation and maintain economic growth .
I believe that one of the most important elements of the agreement we have on the table , as Mrs Corbey underlined , is the substitution of the most dangerous substances with safer alternatives when these are available .
I can say that in certain aspects this compromise is an improvement compared with the original Commission proposal , for example the authorisation in general is stricter .
I can fully support making it obligatory for companies ' applications for authorisation to include substitution plans for substances of very high concern - manufactured or imported - if the companies have identified the availability of suitable alternatives .
I can also fully agree that these substitution plans should be key factors in the decision to grant authorisations and in any further revision of such authorisations .
The vote last October in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety may have raised hopes for an even more ambitious result , as Mr Bowis said .
Like many of the speakers this evening , I would also like to stay at the top of the mountain and would have preferred certain issues to have been dealt with differently in the final deal .
For example , as Mr Davies and Mrs Hassi have underlined , the rules on substances which disturb the hormone system - the so-called endocrine disruptors - could be stricter .
Mrs Lucas and others do not accept that the possibility to keep the scientific names of new dangerous substances confidential for six years would be beneficial to the overall deal .
This denies consumers the right to know which substances they are dealing with and it also makes it more difficult for users to identify the substances in various databases .
Last but not least , as Mrs Ek , Mrs Ferreira , and others have suggested , the obligation to provide a chemical safety report for the most dangerous substances in the lower production volumes would have been useful to further enhance worker protection .
Nevertheless , as Mrs Roth-Behrendt underlined , a compromise is a compromise and this compromise package is a marked improvement for the protection of health and the environment if we compare it to the current situation .
The Commission can fully support the compromise package and I sincerely hope that Parliament will support this package during the vote on Wednesday .
Throughout this process the Commission has done its best to facilitate agreement between the Council and Parliament and to find balanced compromises .
We very much welcome the convergence developed between Parliament and the Council and fully support this agreement so that REACH can be enforced by June 2007 .
Once again , I am grateful to Mr Sacconi and the shadow rapporteurs for their efforts to achieve this compromise .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Community Customs Code - Customs 2013 programme ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the reports :
by Mrs Fourtou , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the Community Customs Code ( Modernized Customs Code ) C6-0419 / 2005 , and
by Mrs Fourtou , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing an action programme for customs in the Community ( Customs 2013 ) C6-0158 / 2006 .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection as well as the other committees involved , and in particular Mrs Fourtou as rapporteur for the reports to be discussed tonight .
The modernisation of the European customs environment is an essential contribution to attaining the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
It is a must if we want the European Union to remain an attractive place to do business and maintain the external competitiveness of EU companies .
In this context , it is crucial to deepen the single market by making the EU a fully-integrated customs territory .
This reform is also critical if we want to live up to the challenges of globalisation and reinforce the role of customs in protecting our citizens and companies from security and safety hazards such as counterfeiting , dangerous goods or the devices of international terrorism .
The modernised Community Customs Code will provide the legal framework for the development of a simple and paperless environment for customs and trade based on the best use of information and communication technology .
The present Community Customs Code was adapted in 1992 .
Since then , it has undergone only limited changes .
This means that the Code has not kept pace with the radical changes to the environment in which customs and traders operate , particularly in respect of the rapid and irreversible adoption of electronic data exchange .
The Customs Code has to be adapted to fit the electronic environment .
In addition , it is commonly held by customs authorities and traders alike that current customs procedure and processes are unnecessarily complicated .
They also do not reflect the changing focus of customs work , moving from the collection of declining customs duties towards the application of non-tariff measures . This includes , in particular , security and safety measures , the fight against counterfeiting , money laundering and drugs and the application of sanitary , health and consumer protection measures .
With your support , the proposal for a modernised Customs Code on the table tonight , together with the proposals on the Council table and e-customs , will make customs work better , faster and more cheaply .
Let me once again and now more specifically turn to Mrs Fourtou and the Committee on the Internal Market for their detailed and most valuable assessment of the Commission 's proposal for a modernised Customs Code .
I know there is unanimous support in the Committee on the Internal Market for the rapporteur 's recommendations .
Progress in the Council is complementing your work .
I am pleased to report that on 4 December the Competitiveness Council showed a keen interest in the key elements of the reform .
Ministers gave strong support to the Commission 's proposals on the single window , on centralised clearance and on customs agents , while inviting the Commission to pursue the work to implement these in an acceptable manner for all Member States .
I would like to thank Parliament for its constructive contribution to the debate on these three issues , but I must also inform you that in at least one of them the Commission 's position remains unchanged .
Thus it is the Commission 's firm opinion that the accreditation of professional customs agents is not a matter for the Customs Code .
There is a future for the profession in an open competitive market , through self-regulation and the recognition provided by the status of authorised economic operator .
Though there is no debate on the e-customs proposal tonight , I would like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur Mr Heaton-Harris and the Committee on the Internal Market for its full support for an extremely ambitious Commission proposal .
It is indeed challenging to propose that all Member States and the Commission commit themselves to developing common electronic systems for customs proposals by an agreed date .
Let me stress that the firm support from Parliament is more than welcome in order to convince Member States that , despite budgetary constraints , they need to develop their customs IT system in a Community framework .
I am confident that the Council will acknowledge this step and the proposal can soon be adopted .
I very much appreciate the efforts of the European Parliament and particularly those of Mrs Fourtou to come to an agreement in a single reading on the Customs 2013 proposal .
This will definitely ensure the continuity of the programme activities as of 1 January 2008 .
The speedy adoption of Customs 2013 shows that there is a broad agreement across all the institutions on the obvious need to guarantee the effective functioning of the internal market in the customs field .
Indeed , the customs environment is undergoing major changes .
The Customs 2013 programme will be an essential instrument to ensure efficient cooperation and coordination between all customs administrations .
It will facilitate the introduction of new trans-European computerised systems , reinforce networks between customs officials and promote and establish common training modules .
Once the two customs proposals under debate and the e-customs proposal are finally adopted by both Parliament and the Council , they will enable the customs services of the EU to meet the major challenges .
They will facilitate international trade , foster simpler control and will more effectively protect the internal market and the health , safety and security of our citizens through more efficient control .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ' modernised Customs Code ' , ' paperless Customs ' , ' Customs 2013 programme ' , these three reports that we are discussing in this session demonstrate the growing importance of customs and their role in the European Union 's desire for competitiveness and efficiency .
These three reports are closely linked but , in the interests of greater clarity , I shall first present the modernised Customs Code and then move on to the Customs 2013 programme .
The Customs Code - as you said , Mr Kovacs - dates from 1992 .
It was legitimate to modernise it in order to adapt it to the evolving range of tasks undertaken by Customs and the radical changes that have taken place in international trade .
It is a matter of rationalising customs procedures by laying the foundations of customs clearance systems that are accessible and interoperable within the European Union .
That is why this proposal is accompanied by a proposal for a decision on electronic customs , for which Mr Heaton-Harris is the rapporteur .
The new Code includes 200 articles and we have concentrated on the principal points , or at least the most controversial points , that is , the customs representative , the authorised economic operator , centralised customs clearance and comitology .
Article 11 is concerned with the customs representative .
Until now , national legislation has made it possible to reserve the right of representation to a professional category .
In the context of the Single Market and the electronic environment , however , there is no longer any grounds for this monopoly .
Furthermore , some businesses are able to have an integrated service that takes care of customs formalities .
The right to customs representation , therefore , must be open to all .
Nonetheless , in many Member States , using a customs agent is traditional and remains very useful for small businesses .
That is why , without wishing to retain a monopoly , the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted an amendment that , among the criteria for the status of customs representative , provides for recognition of the existence of practical standards of competence or professional qualifications in order to satisfy those Member States for whom the abolition of this monopoly is difficult to accept .
We have not yet found the ideal solution and this question will certainly be raised again at second reading because certain delegations within the Council are still expressing reservations and going so far as to demand regulated access to the profession .
The authorised economic operator was introduced into the Customs Code by means of Regulation 648 of 13 April 2005 , known as the ' security regulation ' .
This statute is not yet properly in existence because the provisions for its implementation have just been adopted by the Commission .
The Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection has introduced a clarification , making a clear distinction between the ' customs simplification ' Authorised Economic Operator , and the ' security and safety ' Authorised Economic Operator .
Centralised customs clearance is a facilitation that , in principle , has been well received but the Member States are wondering about the collection of customs duties .
The Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection has adopted a fairly radical position in demanding that electronic customs clearance operations should be free of charge and that customs-offices should be open 24 hours a day .
Indeed , in the interests of fair competition between national customs authorities , the rule must apply to all .
It is necessary , however , to ensure that there is harmonisation of the checking processes .
Finally , the provisions in the proposal make constant reference to comitology .
This procedure is necessary because reference needs to be made to experts to establish the provisions for implementation of the Code .
In accordance with the new interinstitutional agreement of July 2006 , certain provisions of the Code are subject to the new procedure for comitology with scrutiny .
Therefore , having sought the opinion of the European Parliament 's legal service , we have adopted , in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , amendments that are aimed at adapting the comitology procedure corresponding to the different articles .
The Committee on International Trade adopted amendments for the codecision procedure for certain provisions that would normally fall within their competence by virtue of the strengthened cooperation procedure .
We considered , however , that its position was contrary to that of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection and we had to reject those amendments .
Those then , very briefly , are the main points of the report and , as I said just now , it is very closely linked with the report concerning the Customs 2013 programme .
Reading the mid-term evaluation of the Customs 2007 programme has demonstrated that this programme is well adapted to the needs of administrations and that it plays a crucial role in helping participating countries to share their experiences .
This evaluation recommended strengthening the activities carried out in the field of training and information exchange .
The programme has a budget of EUR 322.8 million over a period of six years and its aim is to help the customs administrations of the participating countries to encourage legitimate exchanges , to simplify and speed up customs procedures and to ensure the safety and security of citizens and the financial interests of the Community .
The amendments adopted in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection are in line with the work of the Council and I wish to thank the Finnish Presidency in particular because , in order to satisfy the European Parliament 's legitimate budgetary demands , it has on many occasions negotiated with Member States and defended our position .
Therefore , we shall be able , I hope , to conclude this matter at first reading .
The reports concerning customs are eminently technical and complicated .
That is why I wish to thank most warmly the various people I have spoken to within the Directorate-General for Taxation and Customs Union who have always responded to my every request and allowed me to tackle these subjects more easily .
I thank also my fellow Members and the Chairman of our Committee for their help and support .
At a time when trade is speeding up , when organised crime and counterfeiting threaten our security and our market , customs and economic operators need our full support .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , Commissioner , I wish to congratulate you on the important work that you and your services have accomplished in the interests of modernisation of customs legislation , which is a necessary condition for the good functioning of our internal market .
I should like also to warmly congratulate Mrs Fourtou who made some very useful proposals for improvement .
With regard to international trade , I shall make three comments concerning questions of competence between committees , comitology and , lastly , the parliamentary dimension in international trade .
I think , Mr President , that there must be an end to rivalry over competence between the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection and the Committee on International Trade or , at the very least , these rivalries must not delay the adoption of European legislation that our internal market so desperately needs .
It is not sensible to deny the link between international trade and the issue of Community customs .
At a time when Europe is being closely watched , I regret that Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure has been violated in respect of strengthened cooperation between committees , because the amendments voted for unanimously by the Committee on International Trade have been brushed aside in an irregular manner and will not , alas , be put to the vote in plenary .
I am delighted , however , that our amendments have brought to light an abusive use of comitology procedures by the European Commission .
I hope that , in the end , it will be forced to use the new comitology procedure with scrutiny , which came out of the interinstitutional agreement of July 2006 .
On that subject , it will be important to clarify the use of Article 194 ( c ) , and the European Commission will have to assure us that it does not intend to modify the Community Customs Code according to an international trade agreement concluded by it under Article 133 of the Treaty on European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , at a time when the failure of the Doha agenda harms the rules of international trade , we must protect our producers and our consumers from security and safety problems thanks to border controls .
In this context , never has the parliamentary dimension of international trade been so important , particularly in relation to the functioning of Community customs .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by expressing my sincere thanks to all my fellow Members who have cooperated on this difficult dossier ; above all Mrs Fourtou , who has fought her way through this complex set of rules with great success .
The rapporteur for our group , Mr Heaton-Harris , unfortunately cannot be here today , and so , as the coordinator with competence for this dossier , I shall be speaking on his behalf and that of the group today , if I may .
The Community Customs Code is an extremely important project , which will remove persisting hurdles in the European internal market and , particularly with regard to piracy and intellectual property , has global significance .
For example , it enables centralised clearance at an enterprise 's headquarters , which is important to the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , in particular .
I think that this report on the Modernised Customs Code helps to simplify existing customs procedures and will also help to improve the competitiveness of European enterprises .
I should like to focus on just a few points .
From the outset , one critical point was Article 14 on authorised economic operators , about which Mrs Fourtou has spoken .
I think that the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection has reached a good compromise on this , one which gives these persons greater freedom in the performance of their activities .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will therefore withdraw its Amendment 57 and support the compromise reached in the Committee on Internal Market .
This compromise makes clear that we want our enterprises to enjoy greater freedom , and we should also communicate to the outside world that the regulations of the Modernised Customs Code have been drawn up for our enterprises and in their favour .
The Community Customs Code will not be an obstacle to greater competitiveness .
Finally , I should like to highlight and champion the amendment to Article 125 that was tabled by Mr Heaton-Harris on behalf of our group .
This article enables Member States to introduce simplifications beyond the scope of the Customs Code , within the framework of bilateral or multinational agreements .
The old Customs Code already included the possibility of closer cooperation , and so this possibility is already being used in practice .
It would be detrimental to our enterprises if we were to now abolish this framework , and I believe that that also accords well with the thoughts of Mr Audy .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I have the feeling that , with regard to this issue , disputes amongst MEPs , as such , have been kept to a minimum , particularly with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats having withdrawn its Amendment 57 .
I believe that Mrs Fourtou and the Commission 's services in the TAXUD Directorate-General have done a wonderful job and have explained an issue that appeared to be complex in a very clear fashion , but we still have a few amendments that the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection is insisting on presenting .
I believe that the first group of amendments raises no difficulties , since it involves adapting the comitology proposals to the new comitology agreement between Parliament and the other institutions .
With regard to the other amendments , there are still certain issues outstanding , such as the issue of representatives at customs .
A significant proportion of Members of this House , at least , believe that customs activities require a degree of professional dedication and cannot be replaced with an abstract freedom to carry out customs activities .
There are too many considerations of a personnel nature , including security considerations , which make this a legitimate profession that must be maintained and must not be eliminated on the basis of a liberalisation theory that has nothing to do with reality .
The amendments presented by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on the economic operators authorised and also , particularly for consumers and citizens , on free electronic customs processing and the twenty-four hour provision of these services , also seem to me to be positive .
I believe that it would be a good thing to simplify customs procedures , which are usually very complex and which hinder the internal market .
I - like the Socialist Group in the European Parliament in general - am therefore in favour of the amendments presented by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I believe that Mr Audy is absolutely right to raise the issue of comitology , but I believe that , in accordance with the reports that we have received from the legal services , the only possible solution is the one adopted by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and that the problem is not one of confrontation amongst committees but , rather , one of our all having to adjust to this situation , in view of the current reality .
I do not therefore believe that there is any kind of problem between the two committees .
In short , Mr President , we are in agreement with Mrs Fourtou 's report ; I believe that we could reach an agreement very quickly amongst the three institutions in order to approve the two reports , and we hope that this Parliament will approve the amendments from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs without any great difficulty .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I should firstly like to offer my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Fourtou , for the splendid job she has done .
In general , there is no rule without its exceptions , and that is a good thing .
Our European Union does not consist only of Member States that should be covered in full by the Community 's customs regulations .
The EU also consists of territories that , for historical and other reasons , have in different ways been forced to place themselves outside the Community 's harmonisation of indirect taxation .
Such territories include the Åland Islands , which belong to Finland , the Channel Islands , the Canaries , Agios Oros in Greece and the overseas French departments .
It is important for both the European Union and its territories that trade between them be able to take place as smoothly as possible .
Because these territories are very different even from each other in terms of their trade with the European Union , it is important that it be made possible to introduce special exemptions for them .
This would benefit the European Union and our efforts to achieve the objectives in terms of the Lisbon Agenda .
Special arrangements for these areas would not disrupt trade within the Community , and we should , of course , all benefit from the smooth flow of trade and from the fact that unnecessary bureaucratic obstacles had not been erected .
I am therefore pleased that , in its report , the committee has taken note of this need and adopted a pragmatic approach .
My hope now is that the Council and the Commission too will meet Parliament half way on these points .
Bilateral arrangements too must be possible in certain cases .
It is important for the EU to respond to the population 's special needs and not to get hung up on standard solutions that are appropriate for many but not for everyone .
I am pleased that the reform of the Customs Code can also help strengthen people 's confidence in the EU , which has , of course , seriously wavered recently .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the European Parliament and Council Regulation laying down the Community Customs Code is a document amounting to a thorough modernisation of the Customs Code in force since 1992 .
This modernisation is required in view of the radical changes that have taken place in the area of international trade .
Accordingly , the regulation aims to simplify customs legislation and procedure .
It is designed to benefit commercial entities and customs administrations , to reduce the cost of customs formalities and to respond to commercial challenges involving safety and protection , detecting counterfeiting and money laundering and also protecting health and the environment .
The new Community Customs Code goes beyond simplifying certain procedures .
Fundamental changes in Customs legislation have been undertaken in a number of areas .
This document is inextricably linked to the report on computerisation of Customs procedures .
The decision taken by Parliament and the Council concerning an electronic environment for customs authorities and traders provides for the creation and application of safe , interoperable and accessible electronic customs systems which should simplify and improve flow along the supply chain and also customs procedures .
The third proposal establishing an action programme for duties in the Community ' Customs-2013 ' intensifies cooperation between customs administrations and their officials .
Trans-European information networks are provided for , to facilitate the completion of customs formalities in the internal market and allowing products to be taxed according to national and Community tax legislation within the market .
This programme plays a key role in the harmonious operation of the internal market and the management of the Union 's external borders .
It also contributes to attaining the Commission 's objectives for the years 2005-2009 and the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
( FR ) Mr President , a codification is a moment of intelligence : one moves away from law to which one is subjected to law that has been thought out .
I am therefore very pleased about the reports on customs codification by our fellow Members and friends , Mrs Fourtou and Mr Audy , particularly because , since 1919 in the case of Germany , 1934-35 for France , 1938 for Mexico , and so on , we had lost our codifying ambition .
Here , of course - let us not be naïve - we are codifying the customs rules simply because of pressure from the United States after 11 September , who want customs that are no longer to do with budgets but with security : hence the addition of control by authorised economic operator , by customs representatives , and so on .
Beyond this little codification , however , we shall have to think of a customs codification that is legally equal to the challenges of globalisation .
Since maritime law was codified at Montego Bay in the 1970s , and since International Trade Law was codified at Marrakesh in the 1990s , the 21st century will have to devise a customs codification at the only level appropriate to international trade , that is , at global level .
The place for working towards this model of a global code exists : it is the World Customs Organisation in Brussels , in partnership with the World Trade Organisation in Geneva .
The sources of inspiration for this model code exist too : it is the Tokyo Convention and the Brussels Convention on customs value and rules of origin .
There remains the purpose of this model for a customs code , that is , a revolution in customs technology , so that we can move out of the current archaic system and have customs duties that can be adjusted , reimbursed , subsidised and negotiated .
Adjusted according to the production cost differential between one country and another ; reimbursed , in the form of a customs credit offered by the importing country to the exporting country ; subsidised , in favour of exporting countries of the South , who would receive a customs credit supplement ; negotiated , finally , in the stock exchange like the protectionist pollution quotas .
In this way we shall at last achieve a reconciliation between international free trade , which is necessary and national social protection , which is equally necessary .
This is the marriage of David Ricardo , the free trader , and Friedrich List , the protectionist .

( SK ) To begin with , I would like to thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Fourtou and Mr Heaton-Harris , for their work in drafting these technically demanding reports .
From the very beginning , the Customs Union has been considered a cornerstone of the European Community .
The Customs Code is a practical instrument that ensures smooth trans-border trade , and it should therefore take into consideration the new challenges of a globalising economy .
The creation and subsequent implementation of a modernised Customs Code is a logical and essential prerequisite for the effective development of the European market .
The proposal reflects efforts to create a customs and trade environment based on improved effectiveness of customs clearance procedures through information exchange , elimination of the administrative burden , and facilitation of trade at European and international levels .
In this age of technology , an electronic system offers new opportunities for the quicker and more effective implementation of commonly recognised standards .
The proposal offers a unique opportunity to overcome existing discrepancies between the customs systems of Member States , as it will ensure enhanced interoperability of national systems , which we have so far failed to encourage adequately .
At present , security-related issues are becoming a priority , and the proposal therefore also focuses on this area .
It includes specific measures to secure external borders , as well as data protection .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that these proposals will be accepted during the vote .
If they are not , we would paradoxically be blocking the free trade that we are actually striving to facilitate .
( PT ) Mr President , to whom I extend my warmest greetings , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I naturally welcome this initiative and commend the rapporteurs on the quality of their work .
This initiative is of the highest importance , given that the code currently in force dates back to 1992 .
It must be modernised to reflect the changes that have since taken place and must address those changes .
There are two aspects that strike me as crucial .
Firstly , this new code will help boost international trade because simplifying the processes may lead to an increase in the competitiveness of European businesses , and thus to stronger economic growth .
To this end , opening up to new technologies - as well as placing greater value on those technologies and even enforcing their use - represents a highly significant step that should help strengthen the competitiveness of the European economy .
That being said , there is a second point that must be highlighted , which relates to the nature of the current functions of customs .
Security needs to be increased at various levels to protect public health , to ensure food safety and to combat crimes such as money laundering , counterfeiting and fraud more effectively .
In other words , consumers must be better protected .
I should like to conclude by saying that this proposal is a positive step towards safeguarding more effectively the interests of Europeans both as manufacturers and as consumers .
As such , we naturally endorse the proposal .
Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for her work on this issue .
I wish , however , to talk about one specific issue regarding customs policies .
The single biggest problem currently facing the EU in relation to its customs policies is the unwillingness of the Turkish Government to implement the Ankara Protocol .
Turkey promised the European Union 18 months ago that it would do so and that , accordingly , Turkish ports and airports would be open to Cypriot ships and air traffic .
Turkey has failed to honour this political commitment , which is a central element of the Turkish accession negotiations to join the European Union .
Last week , Turkey offered to open one port to Cypriot traffic .
This offer was not even given in writing to the Finnish Presidency , and , even so , it falls well short of the commitment given by the Turkish Government that it would implement the Protocol .
It is now very likely that up to eight chapters of Turkey 's accession negotiations with the European Union will be suspended some time this week , which is the recommendation of the European Commission .
On a broader level , Turkey faces the real possibility that EU accession talks may be fully suspended in time if it does not implement the Ankara Protocol and open up Turkish ports and airports to Cypriot traffic .
( EL ) Mr President , I consider the speech of the previous speaker quite useful and definitely well timed and I would like to endorse everything he said .
However , I will not just stop at what he said ; I would like to refer to the main subject of today 's discussion by saying that technology , the Lisbon Strategy and the logic behind the common market force us to modernise the Customs Code .
The delicate position of the customs representatives and their particular professional nature necessitates the specification of certain criteria for the proper performance of their activities , without these criteria having a negative effect on the internal market or the free transportation of services .
This is the equation we have to solve .
Therefore , we have amended Article 11 of the new Customs Code , so that there is no numerical limitation in this particular profession , the recognition of customs representatives throughout the European Union Member States is established and , of course , there is free competition in the sector , in general .
On the other hand , several of my colleagues , including me , have insisted that the criterion of practical standards or professional qualifications for individuals who wish to become customs representatives must be precisely specified .
This is because the usefulness of the profession will be acknowledged as well as the considerable services they offer to companies as well as to the customs authorities , and primarily it will ensure the safety and protection of the public 's interests .
Therefore , I believe that with the proposal submitted today by the European Parliament we achieve a proper balance ; in that context I would like to thank Mrs Fourtou for her efforts to arrive at this useful compromise within the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that if we wish to create a common market according to the provisions of the Lisbon Strategy and become a considerable competitive power on a global scale , we have no other choice but to effectively meet these trade challenges and adapt to the rapid technological developments .
To this purpose , not only do we have to eliminate bureaucratic customs procedures but also amend the laws that govern them , in depth .
Even though our goal is to simplify commercial transactions between Member States while at the same time safeguarding security and protection of European citizens , such a goal would not be feasible without the presence of customs representatives , namely specialised professionals with certified knowledge .
Therefore , I consider it necessary to issue accreditation to the right individuals using the most commonly accepted criteria .
I consider that customs brokers provide the necessary guarantee of knowledge and experience for the execution of customs operations and therefore they must be considered accredited customs representatives .
Let us not forget that they exist as a profession in the vast majority of Member States and they serve an important role to the benefit of all financial agents and especially for small- to medium-sized enterprises whose activities are of vital importance to European growth .
To conclude , I should like to stress that modernising the Customs Code cannot in any way be identified as deregulation of the labour market of serious professionals who historically have proven their effectiveness .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union 's customs system should serve two main purposes .
Firstly , it should protect the Community 's economic and financial interests and secondly , it should facilitate legal trade exchanges and the acceleration and simplification of customs formalities .
Unfortunately , despite the existence of the Customs 2007 Programme and the allocation of almost EUR 150 million , these aims have not been fully achieved .
One only has to consider the negative impact on the Community market of large-scale smuggling of alcohol and tobacco products , and recently also of liquid fuels .
Not only does the scale of this organised smuggling destabilise the internal market , but the Union 's budget also suffers as it is deprived of the hundreds of millions of euro it should obtain from customs duties .
This state of affairs also has an impact on the trade in foodstuffs .
Products often appear for sale on this market at prices significantly lower than the cost of production , which indicates that the customs system has been evaded .
This happened recently on the poultry market in Poland , and over the last two years there have also been problems with frozen strawberries from China .
The second purpose of the customs system , namely facilitating trade exchanges , is not being fulfilled .
This is particularly obvious along the European Union 's eastern border with Russia , Belarus and Ukraine .
Tiresome procedures , corruption and queues of vehicles stretching back for miles all contribute to making it unattractive to export goods from the European Union .
I very much hope that the EUR 323 million allocated for the implementation of the Customs 2013 programme will allow significant improvements to be made .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the honourable Members for their valuable contributions to the debate and for the positive attitude towards the Commission 's proposals .
The Commission has given appropriate consideration to Parliament 's 58 amendments to the Modernised Customs Code and has found the majority - as many as 32 - acceptable , 9 acceptable in principle or in part and only 17 unacceptable .
I would point out that those amendments which the Commission finds unacceptable are related to the key issues that I highlighted earlier and that are commonly debated by both Parliament and the Council .
I must reiterate that as regards customs representation - Amendments 14 , 19 and 57 - the Commission maintains that the accreditation of professional customs agents falls outside the scope of the Customs Code .
The Commission fully recognises the role played by customs agents in the world of trade .
These agents , like any other economic operator , should have the right to exercise their profession in another Member State , and professional competence in one Member State should be recognised in another .
This is a basic feature of the single market and essential in an electronic environment .
The Commission is actively working with the professional associations , like CLECAT and CONFIAD , listening to their concerns and trying to find a satisfactory solution .
The proposed change offers substantial benefits to business in general , such as increased competition between customs service providers , and opens new and wider business opportunities for customs representatives beyond national borders .
On comitology , I believe that our legal services have come to conclusions that are not too dissimilar .
There are indeed a few articles where the Commission considers that the regulatory procedure , its scrutiny , should not apply , but in most cases our institutions ' respective analyses are converging .
I should like to clarify why the Commission cannot support certain amendments .
The first I should mention is Amendment 21 , which suggests that in Article 22 ( 1 ) , the words ' administrative and criminal ' be deleted .
All Member States impose criminal penalties in customs matters and apply , even if they are not always described as administrative penalties , measures of an administrative nature intended to penalise non-compliance with the customs rules . There is , for example , the withdrawal or suspension of authorisations in case of serious misuse .
Such administrative measures play an essential role in the uniform and proportionate application of customs legislation .
It is therefore necessary that Article 22 ( 1 ) , continues to refer explicitly to both administrative and criminal treatment of infringements .
The Commission cannot agree with Amendments 23 and 25 relating to customs fees .
The Commission 's intentions are simply to limit , as far as possible , the charging of customs fees ; in particular , such fees should not be charged for the drawing-up of electronic declarations .
On the other hand , we find it inappropriate to prevent the collection of fees where attendance of customs staff is requested beyond the normal office hours .
We hold the view that customs fees are only legitimate where customs render a service that goes beyond their normal mission .
I should also mention Amendments 30 , 40 and 41 , which aim at granting benefits to railway companies .
The Commission cannot accept them , because they are going against our efforts to build up a level playing field for all transport operators , be they road , inland waterways or air transporters .
In fact , the original proposals are likely to have been misunderstood and I am confident that once further explained their rationale and fairness will become obvious .
In conclusion , I can assure you that these issues can and will be urgently and seriously addressed .
The Commission is confident that , given the spirit of openness and cooperation that has marked the consultations to date both in Parliament and in the Council , practical and appropriate solutions will be found so that the Modernised Customs Code can enter into force as planned in 2009 .
With regard to the customs 2013 programme proposal , I confirm that the Commission fully supports all the amendments proposed by Parliament .
I hope that the report by Mrs Fourtou will be adopted tomorrow by a large majority .
Let me finish by repeating that the strong support by the European Parliament for the e-customs proposal will certainly be acknowledged by the Council and speed up the adoption of the proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Prevention of injury and promotion of safety ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Sinnott , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a Council recommendation on the prevention of injury and the promotion of safety C6-0238 / 2006 .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , may I first express my thanks for all the hard work done by the members of the committees concerned with the Commission 's proposal for a Council recommendation on the prevention of injury and the promotion of safety .
Let me acknowledge in particular the effort made by Mrs Sinnott in respect of this important initiative .
I should also like to express my thanks to the Austrian Presidency for hosting a conference during its term , which also contributed to this issue .
The Commission started to support actions in the area of injury prevention under the former EU programme on injury prevention and has continued its support under the current public health programme .
Injuries represent , as you know , after cardiovascular disease , cancer and respiratory diseases , the fourth most common cause of death in the Member States .
Every year , some 235 000 EU citizens die as a result of an accident or violence .
Over 50 million citizens seek medical treatment for injuries and 6.8 million of those are admitted to hospital .
Injuries , unintentional and intentional , are estimated to be the main cause of chronic disability in young people , leading to an enormous loss of life-years in good health . Among people over 65 , accidents and injuries are also a major cause of death and disability and are often the trigger for a fatal deterioration in health .
Areas that have attracted less attention in the past include home , leisure and sports accidents , as well as accidents in vulnerable population groups , such as children , adolescents and elderly people .
Research shows that more than 50 % of serious accidents are preventable and that reduction by one quarter should be a realistic target over the next 10 years .
But , of course , it is of the utmost importance to have reliable information on injuries in Europe in order to plan actions .
Injury information is also essential for evaluating the outcome of all our efforts and actions .
The Commission has set out a Community action plan on injury prevention and safety promotion in its communication ' Action for a Safer Europe ' .
Member States are encouraged to create similar national plans for injury prevention .
Such plans should serve as a framework for actions that engage relevant partners and stakeholders .
They should define institutional responsibilities and should be based on good practice and safety promotion .
The Council recommendation on the prevention of injury and the promotion of safety is a first step towards combining the efforts of the Commission with those of the Member States for actions for a safer Europe , in order to reduce the individual and societal burden of injuries .
Through such a joint approach , through learning from each other 's experiences , we can have faster and more effective results .
We hope and expect that the situation within the Member States in relation to accidents and injuries will improve significantly in years to come .
Once again , I would like to thank the rapporteur and the committee . I am looking forward to a very interesting debate .
rapporteur . - Mr President , injuries can take or change a life in a split second .
They can be accidental , inflicted or self-inflicted .
Injuries cause the death of a quarter of a million people and result in 65 hospital admissions every year .
The challenge , when dealing with something as widespread , serious and preventable as injury , is to save lives and preserve health .
For that reason I felt both challenged and privileged to work on this report .
In this report , which particularly focuses on injury data collection , I have recommended that to promote safety and prevent injury we need better-quality data .
It is not helpful in terms of prevention to know the overall number of road fatalities .
We need to know what it was that made the fatal difference .
Was it the condition or type of vehicle ; was the victim the driver , a passenger or someone walking along the road ; were drink , speed or bad weather conditions involved ; what was the road like ?
That is the type of breakdown we need in every area of injury if we are going to save lives .
We cannot hope to closely examine every injury but we should and must create a system of data collection that more closely examines the injury determinants of all fatal and seriously disabling injuries , to prevent them more effectively in the future .
That is my approach in the report , which the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Food Safety strongly supported .
Gathering such information may seem difficult , but in reality a great deal of information is already in place : insurance companies have detailed data on accidents ; police have data on violent and self-inflicted harm .
We must identify the experts in injury reporting and work with them to get the information that can be studied to truly prevent injuries and promote safety .
The Commission document allowed the injury and safety surveillance system a place within all future health programmes .
That would surely allow the system funding , regardless of whether it proved effective or beneficial .
We feel strongly that a real initiative to prevent injury and promote safety is so important that it needs to be put on its own stream within the health programmes .
We need to think about that again in more detail when we consider the health programmes themselves .
That means that this particular recommendation should not yet be linked to the health programmes but should be considered alongside them .
That is why the Committee on the Environment took out all mention of health programmes from the document .
The Commission laid out seven priorities to which we have added injury and safety in the workplace , and we have also stressed domestic violence among women and children .
One change I ask that we make is to take out Amendment 4 , which we will vote on separately tomorrow .
That suggests : ' Domestic violence against women is the main cause of death and invalidity among women between the ages of 16 and 44 . '
Domestic violence against women and children is clearly a crime and I strongly support amendments that have highlighted that .
However , a recommendation to produce higher-quality data cannot itself include inaccurate data .
The statistic this amendment presents on the main cause of death is inaccurate .
As recently as October a Eurostat publication said that transport accidents and suicide were the main causes of death of women in that age group .
Because we want to make injury surveillance more comprehensive we include mention of risk-taking behaviour , drugs and alcohol , gender considerations , social and environmental condition .
Self-harm is also emphasised because of its increasing incidence .
We have also made additions to the list of high-risk groups to include the young , the elderly , disabled people and women .
The list is not exhaustive .
I support the amendments on needle-stick injuries and injuries to healthcare workers .
We know the solution to them .
They are easily preventable and therefore completely inexcusable .
It is clear that injury places a heavy burden on the economy .
For me , however , it is a question of injured people and their families .
In my opinion , the real key to preventing injury and promoting safety is the value we place on the human person .
If you have a Renaissance masterpiece you handle it with far more care than a magazine poster .
We need to return again to people and their value as the central issue .
Some injuries will happen - we cannot prevent them all - but with better understanding of how they happen , resulting in safer products and practices , we can reduce their occurrence .
However , we will not have a serious effect on the level of injury until people realise that every person matters and that the loss or disablement of even one person is a great loss to us all .
When we understand that , we will treat each other and ourselves like the masterpiece that we are and we will realise our shared responsibility for each other 's safety .
That is what is behind Amendment 21 and why I emphasise to the Commission that the tragedy of injury is so much more than the economic burden .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , eight years ago I had the honour of being the rapporteur of a programme for the prevention of injuries during recreational hours ; at that time I had been impressed by the large number of such injuries , which indicated that we have a serious problem .
I would like to state that the report submitted by Mrs Sinnott is very good ; I also helped in that direction with my own amendments , so that if in the future a community mechanism is created , that is ' injury registration operation ' it assists in the development of national prevention policies , because the systematic collection of data will reveal the causes of these injuries , namely what we call determinants of injury .
I consider that the primary causes mentioned by the rapporteur , must be linked , to the effectiveness of injury prevention exclusively ; in particular I suggest that we look into the issue of the elderly , who make up for the majority of the victims and the injuries that originate from violence against women , which I believe is quite a large number , and of course road accidents , car accidents and also sports accidents as well as accidents that are caused by products and services .
In order to increase efficiency and reduce cost , I consider it necessary to integrate the existing programmes and infrastructures ( data banks and so on ) , because the Commission already has programmes covering this subject ; therefore there is data that must be taken into consideration when it prepares its proposal to Parliament .
This mechanism will gather details provided from Member States based on their national injury supervision systems , allowing easy access to information and correct practices .
Ladies and gentlemen , I conclude by saying that the thousands of deaths along with the financial damage created by injuries is an open wound for the European communities .
It will not heal easily , but we can still create in the future a community mechanism for gathering data that will assist us in the effective prevention of such injuries .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the figures are indicative of the need to warn the citizens of the consequences of risky behaviour .
How many accidents of different kinds are caused by alcoholism or drug use ?
How many serious injuries among children are the result of a lack of care by adults , for example , children swallowing detergents or medicines ?
Currently , some 235 000 European citizens die as a result of an accident or violence-related injuries .
This amounts to 600 fatalities per day in the EU alone . These are shocking figures , which lead , on the one hand , to personal suffering and tragedy , and , on the other , to social and budgetary costs .
It is a fact . Accident and injury comes at a very heavy human price - premature death , years living with incapacity - and entails high costs in terms of healthcare and loss to society owing to lack of productivity .
Injuries can be avoided , however . It is therefore essential to adopt healthier lifestyles and to make living conditions safer .
Prevention is better than cure .
The risk of injury is not spread equally across all Member States or all social groups .
Risk factors are also determined by the home and work environment .
Age and gender should also be taken into account .
This is why I tabled an amendment aimed at gender mainstreaming across all areas including health policy .
To this end , quantitative gender-based studies must be carried out and resources applying the principle of gender budgeting must be allocated because , as previous speakers have said , domestic violence , violence against women , is also a significant cause of injuries that are terrible , first and foremost , for women , but also for society .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I wish to congratulate Mrs Sinnott on her excellent report , which deserves our full support .
The subject matter of this draft legislative resolution is undoubtedly extremely important , as it concerns the premature deaths of more than 200 000 EU citizens annually and the injury of several million individuals in the 25 Member States .
Some of these injuries are horrific , and many result in the permanent disfigurement or severe lifelong disability of thousands of people .
Two main aspects of the prevention of accidental injury are : the identification and assessment of risks factors , and the proper communication and implementation of safety measures .
Mrs Sinnott correctly notes that , in addition to the gathering of information on injuries by way of establishing a surveillance system , the Council 's report needs to be enriched by placing more emphasis on the promotion of safety and raising risk-awareness among the general public .
Of the numerous serious risk factors affecting human life , allow me to concentrate on just one : alcohol and road safety .
In this area , there is much to be done in terms of prevention .
The use of alcohol by drivers is extremely dangerous , mainly because alcohol suppresses our higher-level brain function , resulting in impairment of sense perception , slowness of reflexes , disturbance of locomotor muscle coordination and poor understanding of danger .
In this respect , alcohol has , through the years , been responsible for the deaths of millions of road users worldwide .
Yet , either because of ignorance , or more likely as a result of very strong lobbying by the alcohol industry , we fail to comprehend fully that much more drastic action on drink-driving is necessary .
Instead , we are led to believe that alcohol intake is safe below certain limits , i.e. 50 mg per 100 ml of blood in most EU countries .

This is totally wrong in my view .
There is no safe limit for alcohol and driving .
Any alcohol intake , however small , will affect brain activity to some extent .
Whereas a driver with a blood alcohol level of 20 , 30 or 40 mg / 100 ml might be legally entitled to drive , he or she is at a much higher risk of being involved in an accident than someone without any alcohol in their blood at all .
Our state education systems , as well as our legal systems , give our drivers a false sense of security in allowing them to think that , as long as they do not drink excessively , they are safe on the roads .
This is criminally wrong and we must correct this situation by helping to bring about a zero-alcohol-level approach for drivers .
Only then can we hope to reduce significantly the number of alcohol-related road deaths .
But - and unfortunately there is always a ' but ' in politics - how many of us are willing and able to take on the task of fighting for no-alcohol intake legislation for drivers , and how many of us will survive politically if we come into direct conflict with the alcohol-related industries by supporting a zero-alcohol level for drivers ?
In conclusion , if there is an important injury-prevention message for our people this Christmas , it is that alcohol is a killer on the roads , in large as well as small quantities , and that the only safe driving alcohol level is a zero level .
( SK ) I would like to join those who support the Council 's recommendations .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for drafting the European Parliament 's report on this issue .
The basic reason for drafting this report has been mentioned several times tonight .
Every day , 600 people die as a result of accidents and injuries , which equates to a quarter of a million people per year .
On the one hand , these numbers express the grief and bereavement of families , and on the other hand , we must not forget that accidents and violence in the area of social and economic life also constitute a major economic burden on the state .
In many Member States , hospitals are required to consider meticulously the effectiveness of treatment , for instance in cancer patients .
While the treatment of victims of accidents and violence requires substantial spending , these conditions are preventable .
Each year seven million people in the European Union are admitted to hospitals and as many as 65 million require medical care .
These statistics express and reflect the enormous suffering sustained by all those affected .
Therefore , I believe that the proposal for common procedures by EU Member States to decrease levels of accidents and violence is highly effective .
Accurate statistics reflecting differences between Member States will help us to identify prevention methods more precisely .
If it is known that persons aged over 65 account for 16 % of the EU population and 40 % of fatal accidents , we should launch a series of awareness campaigns or introduce protective schemes that target people in this particular age group .
Young people are another important group that we should be focusing on for the prevention of accidents and violence .
Sports injuries occur quite often under the supervision of coaches and during free-time activities .
We must respect our health and the health of others .
Together , we should oppose the daily violence to which we are exposed to on TV and in films and children 's games , which often constitute an encouragement to these undesirable forms of behaviour in society .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's endeavours to reduce the large number of accidents and casualties and significantly improve the situation in Member States are certainly welcome , and indeed the rapporteur has had a few things to say about that .
Do we really think , however , that these measures will result in fewer accidents in these countries ?
I believe that the exact opposite will be the case .
These measures will mean the commitment of funds in these countries that can be used for precisely these measures .
I should like to comment on the costs , which are always set out .
Naturally , I am concerned about the number of casualties .
I read today , with regard to REACH , the amount by which we could reduce healthcare expenditure if we managed to improve this situation .
The figures are correct , of course , but we shall never achieve them .
The only thing we shall achieve with this document is red tape , even though we all insist that the EU rejects this and wants to reduce it .
Yet the EU Member States are well-placed to deal with this problem .
They collect their own statistics , they take the necessary measures , they know the local situation much better than we in Brussels or Strasbourg do .
We are deceiving ourselves if we suppose that our statistics are able to tell the Member States anything they do not already know ; we are on the wrong track .
Taking driving as an example , we cannot hope to influence driving practices in Sicily or Finland from Brussels .
This can only be done by taking action locally , and therefore such action should be regulated purely by means of subsidiarity .
I should like to offer a rather exaggerated analogy .
Say someone were to tell me today that many people are injured falling off ladders whilst hanging curtains . There are some countries that traditionally do not use curtains and thus do not experience such accidents .
Who would try to make a comparison ?
That is the way of things in many other cases , too .
In my opinion , therefore , we are on the wrong track here .
We should re-think these measures and focus on bilateral measures that will really lead to a reduction in accidents , as this proposal will not achieve that .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank Members for a very interesting debate .
I share with most of you the frustration we are facing that in the European Union we still have so many preventable causes of injury , death and ill-health , and that there is so much more we could do about it .
I think these contributions are a step in the right direction and contribute to this effort .
I know that the European Parliament has been consistently proactive on the subject of injury prevention , and today 's debate shows the interest in this issue .
For us , and me personally , the main target , the centre of my policies is the human being - people - and this is reality .
But , in this day and age we also have to admit that unfortunately not all decision-makers have that as their sole consideration .
So when we are able to accompany those arguments with financial and economic arguments , we can achieve this purpose even better .
Without saying that these would be the priority or the main consideration , it does help .
In addition to the human suffering , in addition to the pain , in addition to the social impact that injuries have , they also cause a serious problem for the economies of Member States and therefore investment from that point of view is also required .
Regarding the Commission 's position on the different amendments , the Commission can fully accept a large number of amendments , for example , 5 , 18 , 21 , and partially accept amendments 7 , 11 , 15 , 16 and 17 .
The full list of the Commission 's positions on each amendment is being made available to Parliament and I trust that it will be included in the record of this sitting .
We cannot accept the amendment that concerns the deletion of the financial mechanisms under the public health programme because we do not have any alternative , and on legal grounds we cannot accept an amendment that obtains support through the cohesion and structural funds .
So , in the circumstances we will have to insist on maintaining the funding through the public health programme .
The main target of this proposal is of course the issue of information , because without the right information we will not be able to set the policies , we will not be able to set the targets , we will not know whether we are achieving our targets .
Most Member States need help , and this can be shown from the results , from the information we have , and based both on the Treaty and the policies of complementing and supporting Member States in their efforts and also in coordinating the policy of Member States irrespective of policies , which is the reason for this proposal .
It is true that there is information here and there , but we need to pull it all together so that we can learn from each other 's experiences and prove that this is a European Union of solidarity , a European Union of cooperation , where we can learn from each other 's experiences and help each other so that every single Member State does not have to go through this learning process at the cost of lives , at a cost to the health of European citizens .
That is the challenge before us , and I think we can make great use of this possibility of an exchange of best practices and information and close cooperation .
That is the target of this proposal , and I would like once again to thank Mrs Sinnott and Parliament for their support for our proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Annex - Position of the Commission
Sinnott report
The Commission can accept Amendments 5 , 18 and 21 .
Amendments 7 , 11 , 15 , 16 and 17 can be accepted in part .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 19 , 20 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 and 30 .
Expenditure in the veterinary field ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Figueiredo , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council decision amending Decision 90 / 424 / EEC on expenditure in the veterinary field C6-0199 / 2006 .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , firstly I would like to say that I am grateful for the work done by the Members of the committees concerned with this Commission proposal to amend Decision 90 / 424 / EEC on expenditure in the veterinary field .
This year , the Commission allocated approximately EUR 210 million to assist Member States in running eradication and monitoring programmes to counter animal diseases .
This programme is a key element in our food safety strategy .
As we all know , animal diseases are unpredictable - the unexpected can and does happen .
In 2005-2006 even though we saw outbreaks of avian flu , blue tongue and classical swine fever in some Member States , none of them was a major outbreak and we managed to keep them under control and not allow them to cause extensive damage .
The Commission has embarked on a wide-ranging review of Community animal health policy .
An extensive evaluation has recently been completed and the results were presented at a conference held in Brussels last month .
I was pleased to note that several honourable Members attended , and indeed chaired , sessions .
One of the primary areas of interest for discussion today and one which generated considerable interest was the possible introduction of an insurance or cost-sharing element to help fund disease eradication costs .
However , these are longer-term measures which still need considerable discussion with the various stakeholders before we can determine how best to proceed .
There are , however , a number of key changes which we can make now , in order to improve efficiency in how the Commission and the Member States manage funding in this area .
The proposal before us today aims to make such changes , while allowing the necessary time for other longer-term issues to be dealt with in the ongoing policy review .
The proposal contains three main elements .
First , we propose to introduce the possibility of multiannual programming for the disease eradication programmes , but with a simplified procedure which will make it easier both for the Member States and also for the Commission .
Second , we propose to strengthen the legal basis for the TRACES programme , but also for communication .
It is interesting to note that we currently have a legal base for communication activities in animal welfare but not for animal health , and this is going to be corrected in the proposal .
Third , we propose to limit the list of disease eradication programmes eligible for funding to those that correspond to clear priorities , but with a procedure under which this list could be amended when necessary in response to developments .
The proposed changes would make important advances in strengthening and prioritising our food safety strategy .
The proposal makes a number of improvements which will also increase efficiency and reduce bureaucracy , both for the Commission and the Member States .
I am grateful for Parliament 's support .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report that I submit to the Chamber on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development welcomes the proposal by the Commission regarding the possibility of approving multi-annual programmes and updating some of the instruments that accompany Community policy on animal health .
It also considers , however , that some specific measures contained in the proposals aimed at amending Council Decision 90 / 424 / EEC fall short of what is required .
We therefore wish to highlight 12 amendments aimed at achieving five key objectives , which are as follows : in view of the lack of knowledge of what has occurred with programmes for the eradication , control and monitoring of certain animal diseases in the various Member States , the first of the objectives is to call on the Commission to submit a report every four years to Parliament and the Council on the animal health situation and on the cost-effectiveness of implementing the programmes in the Member States , including an explanation of the criteria adopted .
The second is to support the dissemination of good practices and to encourage the submission of joint programmes by two or more Member States in border regions wherever this is shown to be important for the prevention , control , monitoring and eradication of contagious animal diseases , including zoonoses , in view of the different attitudes and behaviour in different Member States , even neighbouring ones , as regards the same diseases , which can affect the measures adopted .
The third is to make it compulsory for funding proposals to be submitted in the event of emergency situations , which require the sudden and unforeseeable disbursement of very large financial resources . The funding proposals should not be subject to the deadlines referred to in this decision , which should , in any event , extend the deadlines laid down by the Commission .
An example of this is the foot-and-mouth outbreak in the United Kingdom in 2000 .
For diseases of this kind , the sooner measures are imposed and the more radical they are , the more effective they will be .
For this to be possible , a minimum financial reserve needs to be set up to respond to disasters which arise suddenly , insidiously and unforeseeably .
Fourthly , we are proposing to extend the list , attached to this decision , of contagious animal diseases to which Community financial support can be granted . The Commission had proposed to cut this list .
The proposal contained in this report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development thus adds eight diseases to the current list , and proposes more aimed at also ensuring funding for their control and eradication .
I wish to highlight the vital importance of this proposal , given that in a number of countries there are eradication programmes already under way , which should not be interrupted .
In Portugal , where I am most familiar with the situation , bovine leucosis is a disease for which eradication programmes have been running for around 20 years , and it is now in the final stage of definitive eradication .
Very few cases of leucosis were detected last year and it is estimated that the disease can be definitively eradicated in one year 's time .
Making the disease ineligible for funding could compromise all the efforts made and lead to its uncontrolled resurgence .
Another example is Newcastle disease , which is endemic in wild birds and could be transmitted to unvaccinated poultry at any time .
The economic consequences of this disease could be devastating for birds .
Aujeszky 's disease in pigs , which the Commission proposed to exclude , is also the subject of a planned programme for Portugal , where failure to eradicate the disease means that it is impossible to export pigs to some markets .
Swine brucellosis is another disease not included in the current list , which may pose the same type of problems for trade , and is endemic in Portugal and the Mediterranean basin .
In order to simplify the legislation in force , the Commission is also proposing the repeal of Council Decision 90 / 638 / EEC laying down Community criteria for the eradication and monitoring of certain animal diseases , replacing those criteria with fresh technical criteria set out in the annexes to the new decision currently under review , which the Commission intends subsequently to transform into criteria and standard requirements .
In this report we are proposing that Parliament issue a new opinion in the event of a change in the criteria in force .
Lastly , Mr President , I wish to pass on my thanks to all those who helped draw up this report . The Commission will hopefully take on board the proposals put forward in the report , which are aimed at helping improve animal health .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for her work on this report and the Commission for its contribution this evening .
I will deal with the future , because that is important in terms of the review .
However , as regards the issues in this report , as we have said , by and large we agree with much of the proposal .
Everyone recognises the need to control and monitor animal diseases , not only because of the human health implications , but also because of the economic consequences where there are outbreaks .
Take Ireland in 2001 , where we had a foot-and-mouth outbreak and the country came to a standstill .
Thankfully , we got it under control , but it showed what can happen when there are problems .
Information is the key to controlling , monitoring and being effective when diseases occur , and I am glad to see that we will be looking at better information systems within Member States and between Member States .
The funding proposal for information policy is very positive , and the multiannual programme is a very practical proposal : it makes it easier for Member States and that is to be welcomed , as are the joint programmes by two Member States or border regions .
We need the extension of the time limit for proposals from Member States in relation to their disease programmes .
We extended the list of diseases ; we are conscious that Article 6 allows for emergency situations , and that is to be welcomed .
I have a particular point to make as we look to the future : Europe needs to look beyond its borders and to ensure that our trade policy does not conflict with public health and food safety issues .
We allow food imports into the EU and , at the very least , we need to ensure that the standards of our imports meet those of our home-produced food .
We need to exclude imports where we have any doubt whatsoever .
It is all too easy to import a problem , but it is very difficult to tackle a problem once it is within our borders .
I am concerned that the WTO may be pushing for trade without due concern to animal health and human health implications .
I am not convinced that our current rules meet my concerns and I do not believe that computerised systems alone will protect us .
Let me finish by saying that we have taken the lead in the EU on these issues , but it would be regrettable if , in pursuit of a trade deal , we were to sacrifice our standards and the health of our animals and of our citizens .
Mr President , the present Commission proposal does not make any change to the existing rules on the eradication , control and monitoring of animal diseases and zoonoses , but rather aims to update some of the instruments that accompany Community policy on animal health .
We welcome this , but we welcome in particular the Commission 's announcement that it will shortly be submitting a full report on European animal health policy .
That would be a good time and opportunity to discuss further-reaching changes to the present rules and , if necessary , to set up a new legal framework .
We agree with the objectives of the proposal as set out in the Commission 's explanatory statement , and also with the rapporteur .
We support the proposed amendments to Council Decision 90 / 424 / EEC , and we also support the critical comments and notes by the rapporteur on the financing of the system for monitoring the movement of animals , and also on the system for financing unforeseeable diseases and outbreaks of epidemics , or animal diseases causing lasting harm .
Measures for combating animal diseases always require large amounts of funding , and providing this at short notice is often the problem .
The rapporteur 's suggestion that certain funds be set aside in a reserve should of course be considered .
Our secret hope is that the proposed amendments improve the implementation of the cofinanced programmes on the eradication of animal diseases .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking our rapporteur for her very well-balanced report .
As previous speakers , particularly Dr Kindermann , have already said , this is a technical report that introduces urgently needed amendments .
Flexibility is essential in crisis situations .
Assistance provided swiftly is worth double in such circumstances .
The reaction and measures taken must be prudent , however , and preventive action is better than reaction .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has been calling for monitoring of imports of live animals from non-EU countries to be as intensive as EU monitoring for many years .
As we all know , animal health has a direct impact on products of animal origin and thus , ultimately , on public health .
For this reason , special attention should be paid to ensuring that negative effects of the kind seen in the past no longer arise , where public confidence in products of animal origin is seriously dented , with damaging consequences for the economy .
( PL ) Mr President , as a Member of the European Parliament and also as a veterinary surgeon , I would like to express my support for Mrs Figueiredo 's report , in particular its call for infectious animal diseases such as bovine leucosis and Aujeszky 's disease to be kept on the list of diseases eligible for cofinancing from Community funds .
I would like to remind the House that eradicating these diseases in certain Member States is particularly important , amongst other reasons because of trade within the Union .
One of the conditions for placing pigs on the market is that they should originate from a region or country free from Aujeszky 's disease .
A similar situation exists for cattle , which must originate from herds certified free from enzootic bovine leucosis .
Many new Member States have limited budgets and consequently do not have the financial resources necessary to completely eradicate these diseases .
The European Commission 's proposed adjustment of the list of diseases involving the removal of bovine leucosis and Aujeszky 's disease , may lead to significant cuts in the preventive programmes in place , or even to them being completely halted .
It is essential that any future updating of the list of diseases should only take place after the consent of the European Parliament and the Council has been obtained .
Mr President , I welcome the interest shown by the Members in the proposal to modify what we call the veterinary fund .
I appreciate that the overall principles of the proposal have been accepted by Parliament .
The suggestions made are good ones but many of those are already being applied .
The idea , for example , to allow emergency expenditure in a crisis is indeed essential , but the provision already exists in the decision under Article 3 .
The Commission funds actions to deal with those diseases on an emergency basis , normally at 50 % co-financing of eligible measures and 60 % for foot-and-mouth disease .
The idea of ensuring coordination between Member States submitting programmes is also welcome but this is also the case in reality .
We will continue that approach but we feel that Article 16 is not the proper location .
We will introduce the idea somewhere else - the idea of task forces and sharing best practice .
The eradication plans are publicly available on the Commission 's website , but we would be very happy to provide information on progress to Parliament and the Council and we recommend these to the Member States .
The decision sets out the criteria that Member States must fulfil when submitting eradication programmes to the Commission for consideration .
Those are technical criteria .
Therefore the regulatory committee procedure is appropriate to define the information required .
Member States need to be very precise in the information they supply and it is therefore helpful for the Commission to specify the format required .
On the suggestion to delay the final date for submitting an application for funding , we encourage Member States to submit applications as early in the year as possible .
Nevertheless , we can accept a final date of 30 April .
With regard to the list of diseases eligible to receive funding , which was raised by many speakers , we have proposed shortening the list to focus efforts on the key priorities : those diseases that have indirect implications for human health and diseases that may lead to serious trade problems .
The addition of diseases or wider possibilities to allow Member States to submit any programme at all would risk dilution of those priorities .
Nevertheless many of the diseases and issues raised will be or are being covered differently , for example , through the emergency expenditure ( Article 3 of the decision ) .
It covers those diseases that have the potential to cause very serious losses , such as classical swine fever , avian influenza or FMD , for example .
There are , however , two diseases on the list today , for which Member States currently receive funding : Aujeszky 's disease and bovine leucosis .
For those two cases I am prepared to examine ways in which funding can continue for a number of years .
A full list of the Commission 's position on each of the amendments will be provided to Parliament . I trust that they will be included in the record of the sitting .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12.30 p.m.
Annex - Position of the Commission
Figueiredo report
The Commission can accept Amendments 7 , 8 and 10 .
Amendments 1 , 2 , 4 and 12 can be accepted in part .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 3 , 5 , 6 , 9 and 11 .
Banana sector ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Fruteau on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposal for a Council regulation amending regulations ( EEC ) No 404 / 93 , ( EC ) No 1782 / 2003 and ( EC ) No 247 / 2006 as regards the banana sector C6-0339 / 2006 .


Member of the Commission .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Members for their efforts to speed up the discussion on this banana proposal , and express special thanks to Mr Fruteau , who delivered an excellent report within a very tight time frame .
I am convinced that we all have an interest in approving the banana proposal before the end of the year , to give the producers a clear framework within which to operate in the future and also , of course , to achieve budget stability ; but also to reassure the banana producing regions that they can count on the tangible solidarity of the European Union .
Bananas are very important for the social and economic viability of our outermost regions .
They provide revenue to more than 15 000 holdings and jobs to some 24 000 farmers .
Those regions face very specific handicaps and the Treaty itself grants them a specific status , in Article 299 .
They are , in all respects , part of the European Union and have every right to enjoy the benefits of European Union policy .
The banana reform is the practical expression of our commitment to confirm solidarity within the Union .
I am very happy that the European Parliament agrees with the Commission on the need to reform the current banana aid scheme and to try to bring it into line with our common agricultural policy .
A crucial consideration is the budgetary unpredictability of the current expenditures within the banana sector .
I am delighted that the European Parliament agrees on the very substance of the proposal , namely , the choice of the POSEI solution , which represents quite a number of different advantages .
First of all , it is consistent with the CAP reform ; it is a very flexible tool for Member States and for the regions in question ; it permits Member States to give additional financing ; and , last but not least , it gives predictability from a financial point of view .
Another important point on which you agree with the Commission 's proposal regards the budget , which is based on the average support granted over the period 2000-2002 , and a marginal assurance has been added to take into account the variability of the banana market .
The recent change in the import arrangements and a possible agreement with banana-producing third countries have also been taken into account .
You have requested that the Commission should submit a specific report on POSEI in 2009 , if the livelihoods of banana producers , in particular , were to deteriorate following a change in the external regime .
As a matter of fact , our proposal already focuses on , or foresees , the submission of a report on the whole POSEI regime in 2009 , and that will include the banana sector .
Let us not forget that the banana sector represents more than 50 % of the agricultural revenue in some producing regions .
It goes without saying that this report will be submitted sooner in the event of a deterioration of livelihood in the outermost regions .
As concerns Crete , Cyprus and the Algarve , we should keep in mind that banana production involves less than 400 hectares and some 300 holdings overall .
That hardly justifies a derogation from the general principle that allows farmers the freedom to choose their crops according to the market and the best advantage they can derive from their production .
I am looking forward to the discussion with you tonight .
Again , thank you for being so quick in your action on this issue .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is , today , about to reform the internal strand of the common market organisation ( CMO ) in the banana sector , in order to adapt the aid scheme for European producers to the new global trade situation and to the principles of the new common agricultural policy .
This change , which is the subject of the report brought before the House today after being approved by a very large majority by Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , undoubtedly goes in the right direction .
For banana producers in the outermost regions , who account for more than 98 % of the EU 's production , it is proposed to transfer a package of almost EUR 280 million a year to the POSEI programmes , which will make for greater flexibility and better use of Community funds .
In this regard , I should like to thank you , Commissioner , for the reassessment of the amounts allotted for this reform , which should make it possible to better assure the sector 's viability , particularly in the outermost regions where banana production plays a vital economic and social role for which no other agricultural product could compensate .
I must , however , remind you that the amounts proposed were calculated on the basis of the current customs tariff .
Consequently , the uncertainty concerning world trade negotiations suggests that there may be a further reduction in this tariff level .
Given that , at EUR 176 a tonne , the banana sector is already in an extremely delicate situation that threatens the socio-economic balance of many of the producing regions , a further reduction in the customs tariff would signal the end of banana production in the Community if no adjustment is made to the plan proposed by the Commission .
If the opening up of markets is to make a contribution to revitalising the production structures , it can do so only insofar as the fundamental principles of regulation and equity are combined , that is , the various producers need to respect the common rules that put them on an equal commercial footing .
It is , however , quite evident that this equality is totally lacking in global trade given the gulf that exists between the social and environmental standards of European countries and those of the countries of Central or Latin America .
Faced with this problem , the resolution of which has to remain one of the European Union 's priorities , the aid granted to Community banana producers is necessary in order to compensate for the failures in the global trade system .
To be effective , these internal regulatory measures must be in line with the external regulatory tools .
It is in this light that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is insisting on strengthening the evaluation measures indicated in the reform proposals , in order that the Commission could take positive steps if the external tariff situation were to deteriorate , for example by increasing the amount of the financial packages granted to producers .
The survival of banana production in the European Union also depends on its capacity to optimise its production costs while respecting the social rules and living standards of the producers .
Since the CMO was established , producers ' organisations have in this way enabled a better concentration of Community supply of bananas in the market and contributed to a noticeable reduction in the costs relating to the cultivation of bananas in the European Union .
It would now be contradictory in economic terms to disrupt this process .
That is why we believe it is essential to maintain a regulatory framework in this regard at Community level in relation to producers ' organisations , in order to further the efforts already made towards strengthening our production structures .
As the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has asked , this willingness should , furthermore , be demonstrated by an obligation to affiliate to a producers ' organisation in order to benefit from aid provided within the context of the POSEI package , except when circumstances do not allow it .
Finally , and this will be my last comment , there is the question of the administration of aid .
The support system for production within the present CMO in bananas does provide for schemes for bi-monthly advances that are essential to the sector 's activity in the outermost regions as in the rest of the Union 's producing countries .
The transfer of packages to the POSEI programmes , however , is not coupled with any plan to continue this system of advances .
This jeopardises the survival of producers who would therefore have to resort to private sector borrowing , at a time when the characteristic fluctuations of the commercial climate in this sector does not encourage banks to grant long-term loans .
In this context of economic instability it is up to the European public powers to provide adequate safeguards so that these trade policy choices at global level do not run counter to the interests of those producers who are the most fragile in the Union .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Committee on Budgets has unanimously approved its opinion for this report on the reform of the Council Regulation and , furthermore , it entirely agrees with the fundamental aspects of that proposed reform .
Our only complaints - and the Commissioner herself has already explained them - relate to the lack of time available to us to analyse the proposal , since we have had to opt for the urgency procedure .
In any event , in the view of the Committee on Budgets , the only important thing is to accept the general funding mechanism proposed and , at the same time , to ensure that the proposal is entirely in line with the Court of Auditors ' report on the financial management of the common organisation of the markets in the banana sector .
Our committee simply proposes an amendment of a generic nature , which we are proposing for all programmes not subject to codecision , calling for the general financial framework that we have approved for 2007-2013 to be respected .
At the same time , in order to stress Parliament 's involvement even further and given that the consultation procedure is being chosen , we would like the aid to banana producers to be subject to this Parliament 's control by means of the annual budgetary procedure .
As a whole , however , this proposal is a good one and fundamentally helps all of those outlying European regions that face great difficulties competing with third-country products .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( PT ) Mr President , the Commission 's proposal to reform the Common Organisation of the Market ( COM ) in the bananas sector forms part of the process of liberalising the farming sector at EU level and in the context of the World Trade Organisation .
The Commission is proposing to decouple aid from production , to implement the single payment system , and to abolish the compensatory aid scheme that contributed to price stability and safeguarded , albeit only partially , producers ' income .
The ' POSEI ' option involves incorporating existing aid into the POSEI programmes for banana producers in the outermost regions , namely Madeira , the Azores , Martinique , Guadeloupe and the Canary Islands .
The Commission 's proposal is also aimed at saving money by stabilising budget expenditure on the COM .
Consequently , if the objective is to guarantee an income and a decent standard of living for banana producers , it is hard to see how the Commission 's proposals will improve upon the current COM .
Far from it , in fact .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development , I should like to emphasise the socio-economic importance of the banana sector in the outermost regions and its contribution to achieving economic and social cohesion , on account of the income and employment which it generates , the economic activities to which it gives rise , both upstream and downstream , and its effect of maintaining an environmental and landscape balance which encourages the development of tourism .
The amendments tabled by this committee , some of which are referred to in this report , are essentially aimed at offsetting some of the negative points in the Commission 's proposal .
They seek to protect producers , to ensure the development of the sector , to guarantee the implementation of a system of advances , and to continue to support producers ' organisations in order to promote marketing .
Furthermore , we are proposing mandatory interim assessments of the new measures in order to ensure the levels of income and employment and to prevent any deterioration in the sector 's economic situation .
Lastly , we are proposing only the partial decoupling of aid .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would like to congratulate Mr Fruteau on the excellent work he has done in drawing up this report and for his willingness to reach a consensus .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for her proposed reform , which has been accepted in general terms both by the sector and by this Parliament .
I hope that , from now on , these new rules will put an end once and for all to the arguments within the World Trade Organisation , and I would therefore ask that , despite the new pressure from certain Latin American countries , the tariff of EUR 176 per tonne , which entered into force on 1 January following the agreement reached in Hong Kong , be defended and maintained as a minimum with a view to providing the European banana sector with a little stability .
Commissioner , the outermost regions , which are the European Union 's main producers of bananas , are highly dependent on this product and therefore any modification to the arrangements governing the sector , in particular to the external arrangements , must be taken into account .
I am therefore amazed by the debate that is taking place within the Council of Ministers on the period of reference proposed , which has led to a budget of EUR 280 million per year .
I must insist that that period of reference must be the same as the one applied to the other COM reforms , and it would therefore be incomprehensible for there to be an exception to the rule set so far , or a budgetary haggle , when 98 % of that sum is quite rightly intended for the outermost regions .
Since it is important , I would also like to mention another of the requests included in the report : that relating to the continuity of the system for producers ' organisations , with a view to maintaining the concentration of the Community produce , which has been one of the main successes of the COM in bananas .
Its disappearance , Commissioner , would only exacerbate the disadvantages faced by Community producers in the face of third-country imports .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Commission has made a great effort to adapt the internal system for bananas to changing circumstances .
I believe that we must congratulate the Commission on that effort , which will essentially make it possible for Community banana producers to survive in very difficult circumstances .
As Mr Fruteau , the rapporteur for this report , pointed out , there is still concern about a possible future change to the common organisation of the markets in bananas externally .
The Commissioner has mentioned certain guarantees with regard to the Commission 's monitoring of this issue , but as a Member of this Parliament I feel obliged to point out our concern , which is enshrined in certain amendments that have been presented in the Fruteau report and that I hope will be approved by Parliament tomorrow .
In short , Mr President , I believe that Parliament will be able to approve this report tomorrow and probably some of the fundamental amendments , but the most important thing - I repeat - is that we can count on the Commission to carry on protecting the banana sector in the future .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , reform of the banana market affects a couple of the so-called outermost regions of the European Union .
Its implementation is more or less a foregone conclusion , which is not at all the case for reform of the fruit and vegetable market .
The latter involves several dozen types of fruit and vegetables and is of far greater importance for the whole Union , but is forever being delayed .
The future of some 300 000 jobs is at stake in the banana producing regions , whereas in Poland alone some two million jobs depend on fruit and vegetable production .
The cost of dealing with the main problems affecting the fruit and vegetable market is barely EUR 80 million a year .
At the same time , the Union 's budget would not suffer , as up to EUR 300 million is not taken up in that market every year .
The annual cost of reform of the banana market amounts to EUR 280 million .
This is a far higher sum , but will deal with fewer problems .
I would remind the House that , on 1 May 2004 , Poland and nine other countries became Members of the European Union and are entitled to be treated on an equal footing with other Member States .
The fact that they are not located on picturesque islands is no excuse for failing to do so .
In view of the situation I have described , references to a common agricultural policy can only be cause for embarrassment and shame , but it is not I who should be ashamed .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I fully endorse the report by Mr Fruteau , whom I congratulate on his outstanding work , amending the Commission 's proposal .
I support the objectives outlined in the report , which are as follows : to maintain Community banana production , in view of its vital contribution to employment , to economic and social development and to safeguarding the environment in banana-producing regions , especially in the outermost regions .
The second objective is to safeguard the incomes of banana producers and to prevent the economic situation of the banana sector from deteriorating . The third objective is to give banana-producing Member States control over the granting of aid , so that this can be done in the most effective way , taking account of the specific priorities of these regions .
The report also provides for a specific report to be submitted by 2009 in the event of changes to the incomes of producers , for example if the tariff changes .
I do not find it acceptable , Commissioner , to make aid contingent on producers joining a producers ' organisation .
I feel it would be more appropriate to leave the decision on such a requirement to the Member States .
I therefore propose that this be taken into account and that the Council adopt it accordingly .

( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , this proposal to reform the system of production aid for banana producers is a perfect example of Article 299 ( 2 ) , which provides for specific treatment for the outermost regions on account of their particular characteristics , being implemented in the farming sector .
In the outermost regions , banana production has undoubted economic , social and in particular environmental importance .
It is vital therefore that it be maintained , and that is precisely the purpose of this reform .
I wish to congratulate the Commission , which has outlined the right path forward : the management of aid via the POSEI programmes , greater flexibility for the Member States in distributing these resources and an end to the isolation of producers from the market , regarding which the producers ' warnings must immediately be heeded .
Lastly , the Commission must pay very close attention to the development of the sector . It may become necessary to change marketing conditions that adversely affect producers ' incomes , and the Commission must respond appropriately to such a situation by taking the necessary measures .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Commission 's proposed reform of the common organisation of the market in bananas is consistent with the philosophy of the 2003 reform of the common agricultural policy .
It is also consistent with the commitments undertaken by the Union during negotiations at WTO level .
Nonetheless , it is worth assessing the impact of the reforms on the level of banana production in the outermost regions of the Union .
There is a certain similarity between the reform of the market in bananas and the forthcoming reform of the market in soft fruits .
The regional market of the banana sector is just as important as the market for soft fruit .
The degree of threat to the stability of rural areas and to the livelihoods of the growers and their families is also similar .
Both products are very labour intensive .
In addition , it should be noted that the market in soft fruit is under greater threat from unauthorised action by third countries than the market in bananas .
In the case of soft fruit only temporary antidumping measures exist , while in the case of the banana market an effective single tariff system is in place .
Some of the support mechanisms proposed for the market in bananas would resolve the difficulties of the market in soft fruit .
The European Commission should therefore consider applying them to it , particularly the system of area payments for growers of soft fruit intended for processing .
Let us hope that the measures proposed will have a positive impact on the situation of banana producers .
However , we are still waiting for an account of the true costs of this reform .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to make a few comments about the questions raised here tonight .
As I have already explained in my introductory speech , a report on the implementation of the POSEI programmes will be presented not later than 2009 and will permit the assessment of the situation in the banana-producing regions .
If there are substantial changes in the economic conditions affecting livelihoods in the outermost regions the Commission may submit this report earlier .
A question was raised about the situation of the producer organisations .
It is important for me to underline clearly that producer organisations have not been abolished .
Simply , there is no longer a need for a common definition of producer organisations at Community level .
The vast majority of Community producers are already members of producer organisations .
It is therefore more appropriate to let Member States decide whether they wish to adopt rules on producer organisations , which will enable them to target regional needs much more specifically and provide support under the POSEI programme .
This is possible .
Regional authorities will be left to make their own choices .
This flexibility built into the system would be the best way to secure sustainable and coherent policy decisions in the outermost regions .
There were some questions about advance payments .
It is important that we do not forget that the new system offers a number of tangible benefits to the banana-producing farmers .
Firstly , as soon as the POSEI programmes are approved they will have budget clarity for the full period of 2007-2013 .
This will improve their position if they need to go to the bank about loans .
They could also obtain 100 % clarity concerning the aid already paid on 1 December .
Under the present system , they have clarity concerning only between 20 % and 40 % of the payments .
It is my clear impression that the Member States appreciate these changes .
In general , I can say with some confidence that our proposal on the budget will be very good for the banana-producing countries .
If we had chosen other reference periods the result would have been worse than choosing the period 2000-2002 .
Therefore , I am happy that the European Parliament has decided not to reopen this discussion .
There were a few comments on the fruit and vegetable sector .
I am very happy to be able to say today that on 24 January I will be coming to the Committee on Agriculture to give an explanation on the new fruit and vegetable reforms .
This will clarify some of the questions that have been raised here tonight .
On the various proposals , the Commission supports the incorporation of Amendment 4 , regarding the contribution of bananas to the social and economic cohesion , and Amendment 9 , which mentions the importance of various quality standards and the link to tourism , although we might need to revise the wording slightly .
Concerning the amendments asking to link the POSEI report to the banana sector and allow for a partial decoupling in non-outermost regions , the Commission 's view is that this would clearly go against the whole idea behind the reform and also the linkage to the 2003 CAP reform .
I wish to thank you once again for all your efforts to speed up the discussion of the banana reform .
I am delighted that Parliament seems to agree with the basis of this whole reform and I am looking forward to the vote in plenary tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( FR ) The banana plays a key role in the economies of four of the seven outermost regions , due to the importance of European markets and the exceptionally labour-intensive work that it requires .
Our Parliament must ensure that the proposed support is set at a sufficient level and that it takes account of possible price changes during negotiations at the World Trade Organisation .
In order to deal with a possible slump in producers ' income , provision should be made for an automatic revision clause , and the current system of financial advances , which is essential to the industry 's activity , should be re-established .
Banana producers in the outermost regions are waiting for a clear signal regarding the survival of the sector , in order to restore confidence within the industry .
Fragmented and ineffective for many years , the West Indian banana sector is today a model of organisation , and restructuring efforts in this area must be emphasised .
I would like to point out that the banana sector in the outermost regions meets the non-commercial criteria in force within the Union , unlike its competitors in Latin American countries .
Without the banana , which brings 15 000 jobs , representing the real economic backbone of these regions at human , social and environmental levels , the entire agriculture of Guadeloupe and Martinique would be threatened with extinction , for lack of alternative crops .
Circulation of compound feedingstuffs ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposal for a decision by the European Parliament and the Council correcting Directive 2002 / 2 / EC amending Council Directive 79 / 373 / EEC on the circulation of compound feeding stuffs C6-0209 / 2006- .
Member of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for its actions regarding this dossier , and especially rapporteur Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , who , unfortunately , could not be here today .
The Commission 's discussions demonstrate the high level of interest created regarding the issue of labelling compound feedingstuffs .
The Commission 's proposal is the logical consequence of the decision issued by the European Court , last December .
The proposal aims at aligning our legislation , namely Directive 2002 / 2 / EC , so that it reflects the Court 's decision .
I fully understand and acknowledge the need for political debate regarding the potential improvements on the current system of labelling compound feedingstuffs .
I appreciate the broad understanding on behalf of the European Parliament that today 's proposal is not a suitable context for this discussion .
The modernisation and simplification of the legislation on feedingstuffs is included in the Commission 's rolling simplification programme for 2007 .
The Commission is following this objective in the context of the procedure of evaluating the effects , during which interesting new ideas regarding the labelling of compound feedingstuffs will be taken into consideration , as discussed in Parliament in the past few weeks .
As I recently stated to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the evaluation of the effects will set the path for the legislative proposal regarding the modernisation of legislation on the labelling of feedingstuffs , which is expected to be ready in the second semester of next year .
This will give us the opportunity to study in full the best way to modernise all the provisions of the legislation regarding the labelling of feedingstuffs .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I , too , should like to thank the rapporteur , and not least his staff , for their commitment to this report .
Whilst this is evidently an interesting report , it is also a controversial one , and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has in any case made a correction to the Commission 's proposal .
This means that Article 1 ( 1 ) ( b ) of the 2002 Directive needed to be deleted in accordance with the proposal that was issued further to the European Court of Justice 's ruling .
During the exchange of views , it soon became apparent that there are very different opinions about the labelling of mixed feed .
This is not a matter of the exact designation , but of whether we really want to have a debate about the open declaration articles in the relevant legislation .
As I see it , this open declaration should be exposed , since the present regulation in this field is not workable and still not transparent , because there are , after all , still labels around which specify 110 % of ingredients .
In addition , too little consideration is being given to the intellectual property of the feed industry which , as a result of present legislation , is forced to make its recipes public .
This is detrimental not only to industry , but also to the farmer , for the consequence of it is that our competitors outside the European Union know exactly what we are doing .
Also , present legislation discourages innovation in the feed industry , and that does not benefit farmers either .
Unfortunately , it transpired that the deletion of Article 1 ( 1 ) ( b ) was at stake and that , according to the legal offices of the Commission , the Council and of this House , meant that the other articles in the legislation could not be amended .
I have to say that the coordinators of all parties shared this view .
This is why the European People 's Party would like a prompt review of the whole of feed legislation , not least as a means of guaranteeing complete transparency .
When I consider the amendments , I have to say that the European People 's Party is shocked that the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe tabled an amendment to another article , while their own coordinator declared this amendment to be inadmissible .
What we in the PPE-DE Group want is a prompt review , and we welcome the Council 's pledge in this respect , to carry out a complete overhaul in the first half of 2007 ; I assume that the Commissioner will be acting in accordance with this Commission proposal to the Council .
Mr President , my group supports the rapporteur 's call for clarity and transparency with regard to the circulation of compound feedingstuffs .
We also pay tribute to his considerable efforts to find a compromise solution .
The discussions in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have revealed a great variety of opinions , especially on the open declaration for compound feedingstuffs .
Views differed not only on the pros and cons of individual amendments , but particularly on their legal admissibility .
The reason for this was not necessarily the controversial nature of the subject alone , but chiefly the exceptionally complicated legal preliminaries to the procedure .
At this point , I should like to remind the House that we are talking about a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council correcting a 2002 directive amending a 1979 directive on the circulation of compound feedingstuffs that is based on a ruling by the European Court of Justice of 6 December 2005 .
The codecision procedure has been applied , although , as a rule , the Committee on Agriculture has only the right to be consulted .
Following much to-ing and fro-ing , advance talks with the Council produced a line that my group , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , can support .
The Commission has promised to present a revised version of the whole feedingstuffs declaration next year .
I hope this will indeed bring clarity and transparency for farmers , for consumers , for the industry and , most of all , for us politicians .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the rapporteur may well be absent , but I would still like to extend warm thanks to him , because I have the impression that , even though he has been a Member of this House for years , he has not lost any of the initial enthusiasm he displayed in the past .
Looking back , the European Union has been faced with a number of unparalleled cattle feed scandals that have had a profound impact on policy .
It is therefore self-evident that we cannot exercise enough care in the cattle feed sector , and there is every reason to put sound checks in place .
The big question is whether we will resolve this if we indicate exact percentages and quantities on the label , and so this method is probably ineffective , as the content changes by the day , and I know few farmers who study every label before they decide which cattle feed to buy .
What matters to an average farmer , an average cattle farmer , is the energy content of the feed , the protein content and the company 's reputation .
What is the role of the government in all of this ?
Should the government always need to have a certain insight into what a certain manufacturer does , and how can this be monitored ?
I therefore think it important that every cattle feed manufacturer in Europe should have the information available at any time in order to be able to present it to anyone who is interested , which does not mean to say that all company secrets should all of a sudden be out in the open .
Quite the reverse ; I doubt whether we can make this demand .
There are certain experiences that are beneficial to certain factories and these can be sustained , but I think that the Commission must be able to say that as a government body or national body , it must always be able to check the cattle feed composition and the possible impact this feed has on public health .
One of the interesting aspects of the Court of Justice 's judgment was that the directive 's criteria , as we know them , were not at all in proportion with the directive key objective , namely better public health .
My burning question is therefore : the current Commission is very much in favour of less legislation , but how can this be married with the Commission 's past requirements - and perhaps even today 's if I interpret the proposal correctly - involving precise percentages ? I cannot see how this can be done .
Less regulation and at the same time an indication of exact percentages ?
Another big area of concern for me is the fact that in seven of the Member States , the national judicial authorities have already declared the directive to be inadmissible .
I am therefore tempted to think that the entire directive in its current form is a legal ogre ; I therefore welcome the Commission proposal to table a fresh proposal at the earliest opportunity .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to thank our rapporteur , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has made real efforts to reach a consensus with all the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I support two substantive amendments , as I believe that text that is excessively detailed and excessively well meaning often confuses rather than enlightens .
I am in full agreement that , in case of calamities , the competent authorities need to obtain precise details of the feed materials contained in the feedingstuff concerned , and that these details must be disclosed .
Naturally , the definition of ' calamities ' is open to debate but , in my opinion , common sense will determine this in the end .
Secondly , it is important that , as part of the simplification programme , the proposals to overhaul feed legislation be drawn up by mid-2007 .
I believe that we have all learnt from the mistakes of the past .
We hope that the BSE crisis in the late 1990s was a one-off , an extreme situation , that will never happen again .
I would say to the Commissioner that transparency is essential when it comes to the production of foodstuffs , in particular .
The simplification programme for food and feed legislation is along the same lines .
Now , more than ever , transparency and confidence in a product are unbeatable advantages in international competition for consumers ; but we do have to permit international competition in Europe , too .
. - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to extend my thanks - which will be passed on , I am sure - to the rapporteur for his work , but I regret that the Commission has not accepted the proposal for a decision of Parliament amending the Directive of 2002 on the circulation of compound feedingstuffs .
In fact , while the requirement to provide the authorities alone with the composition of the mixtures in the event of a crisis admittedly represents a step forward , it is not sufficient , and the issue should therefore be tackled when the legislation is reviewed by the Commission in 2007 .
It is essential that farmers using these feedingstuffs should be aware of the origin of the ingredients , whether these be vegetable or mineral .
Different mineral and vegetable proteins have different properties , and it was for lack of information about origins that , for example , feed was found to contain rendered animal fats , leading to the infamous BSE crisis .
Furthermore , the composition of the mixtures cannot be withheld on the pretext of protecting the intellectual property rights to the formulas .
In carrying out their work and making up the feed ration for their livestock using some of their own produce , farmers must be able to balance the feed by supplementing it with a mixture .
In order to maintain this balance , it is therefore crucial for farmers to be aware of the composition of the mixture that they buy .
Farmers must remain in charge of their own affairs , and the manufacturers ' monopoly must not prevent them from doing their job , especially since , in the event of a crisis , they will be blamed for misusing feedingstuffs that they know nothing about .
In short , despite the amendments made to the Commission 's proposals by this report , agribusiness and the manufacturers of feedingstuffs are still unduly favoured at the expense of farmers .
( DE ) Commissioner , today , on the basis of a ruling by the European Court of Justice , we are discussing the correction of Directive 2002 / 2 / EC regarding the circulation of compound feedingstuffs , or the compound feedingstuffs declaration .
The aim of this Directive is not the protection of health ; in this respect , the ruling by the European Court of Justice was acceptable .
However , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development held a broad debate followed by the presentation of amendments calling for provisions on giving feedingstuff ingredients by weight and detailing these in percentages .
I should like to express my particular thanks to the rapporteur .
I also support the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , particularly my amendment - which has been adopted - calling for no further-reaching amendments to be made to the legal act from now on , to enable swift action .
The Commission has announced its intention to draw up proposals by mid-2007 to overhaul feed legislation , and it should do so .
That would be a good time to discuss the proposals , which should take into account not only consumer issues , but also the interests of farmers in being provided with precise , detailed information on the feed materials contained in feedingstuffs , and the interest of the industry in ensuring that business secrets are adequately protected .
It could also be a suitable time to reconsider the possibility , in future , of using high-quality animal proteins or protein components , which was of course banned following BSE and is still not accepted now .
As we all know , only feedingstuffs containing the best , high-quality ingredients guarantee animal welfare , optimum performance and high-quality foodstuffs .
( NL ) Mr President , since the BSE crisis and the dioxin scandals , farmers and consumers have , now more than ever , been in need of reliable information about the origin and content of cattle feed .
Clear rules in this respect are lacking .
Effective prevention of outbreaks of animal diseases requires maximum transparency and this interest must prevail over that of industry that refuses to reveal the content of cattle feed .
Since a compromise is well within reach , I am imploring the Commission to come up with a fresh proposal in 2007 .
The designation of all ingredients must be compulsory , but the percentages are only essential for the substances that determine the name of the product .
Exact percentages need not always be displayed .
The rules for cattle feed should really not be any stricter than those for human food , but the information must be displayed on the products themselves for the benefit of the users , the farmers and consumers and not kept quiet until something goes wrong , for by then it is too late .
The Commission proposal should bring clarity to the area of ingredients .
A transparent market is needed ; farmers and consumers are entitled to this , as is the cattle feed industry .
Unfortunately , the Conservatives and Liberals in this House have , in their amendments , been led too much by industry .
The EU will need to make tracks in deciding in favour of rules that are in the interest of the consumer and farmer .
No unnecessary delays ; every farmer wants to know the exact content of their animal feed .
Prevention of a new crisis requires maximum transparency that must be achieved in 2007 .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank Members for this interesting debate .
I shall now continue in Greek .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to remind you that today we are called upon to decide or agree on a proposal for a decision that amends the directive , based on the decision of the European Court .
I think that everyone agrees on this point , namely that irrespective of the opinions that each one of us has , this is not a suitable moment to discuss the full review of the legislation .
As I have assured you before , this will take place within the next year ; hopefully before the end of next year .
I believe it is of interest , for you too I hope , that until then we will issue a report regarding the implementation of Directive 2002 / 2 / EC , namely how this directive has been implemented by Member States , a fact that will help both our later discussion on the full review of the legislation .
Of course , today 's discussion demonstrates the high level of interest regarding the improvement of the legislation , considering that there is always room for improvement , and of course Parliament 's commitment to observing established procedures .
I am certain that Parliament will listen to our proposal by correcting , at this stage , the directive on the labelling of feedingstuffs , based on the Court 's decision .
With regard to the amendments , we will circulate a full list with the Commission 's position on each one of the amendments and I hope that this list will be included in the Minutes of this meeting .
Allow me to mention a couple of issues : The lawful ground of Directive 2002 / 2 is the protection of public health , something that is significantly linked to the safety of feedingstuffs , of course .
This was confirmed by the Court 's decision ; this is why the Commission cannot accept Amendment 1 which would seriously undermine this principle .
The new article that is recommended by Amendment 4 , regarding the notification of the exact percentages in the event of major crises , includes something that has already been integrated in the directive in a very explicit manner .
In such cases , the exact percentages will be given ; this is why we do not consider it necessary to adopt the amendment that overrules this provision , therefore the Commission cannot accept Amendment 4 .
Once again I would like to assure you that this proposal is included in the Commission 's programme regarding the simplification and improvement of the legislation .
In other words , it has included this legislation regarding the labelling of feedingstuffs in its proposal .
I believe that the discussion prior to this corrective decision will be taken into consideration during the formation of the new proposal , however we will , of course , have the opportunity to discuss again at a reasonable time our future proposal regarding the labelling of feedingstuffs , trying , always something that is not easy , I admit to combine consumer protection , improved consumer services with a reduction in the costs incurred by other bodies involved .
This is our objective and we believe that through this cooperation we will succeed .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12.30 p.m.
Annex - Position of the Commission
Graefe zu Baringdorf report
Yes / Recital 1a : Amendment 5 , Amendments 11 or 14
Yes / Recital 1b : Amendment 2
Yes / Recital 2b : Amendments 7 or 13 or 16
Yes / Recital 3a : Amendments 9 or 12 or 15
Amendment 3 / recital 3a can be accepted with editing .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 1 , 4 , 6 , 8 and 10 .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Legislative and work programme of the Commission for 2007 ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Russia-EU Summit ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Decision on urgent procedure
Amended Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing for the period 2007-2013 the specific programme ' Fight against violence ( Daphne ) and drugs prevention and information ' as part of the General programme ' Fundamental Rights and Justice ' - C6 0095 / 2005 -
Proposal for a Council Decision establishing for the period 2007-2013 the specific programme ' Fundamental rights and citizenship ' as part of the general programme ' Fundamental Rights and Justice ' - C6-0236 / 2005 -
Proposal for a Council Decision establishing for the period 2007-2013 the specific programme ' Criminal justice ' as part of the general programme ' Fundamental Rights and Justice ' - C6-0237 / 2005 -
Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing for the period 2007-2013 the specific programme ' Civil justice ' as part of the general programme ' Fundamental Rights and Justice ' - C6-0096 / 2005 -
Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and the Council establishing the European Refugee Fund for the period 2008-2013 as part of the General programme ' Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows ' - C6-0124 / 2005 -
Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and the Council establishing the External Borders Fund for the period 2007-2013 as part of the general programme ' Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows ' - C6-0125 / 2005 -
Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and the Council establishing the European Refugee Fund for the period 2007-2013 as part of the general programme ' Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows ' - C6-0238 / 2005 -
Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and the Council establishing the European Return Fund for the period 2008-2013 as part of the general programme ' Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows ' - C6-0126 / 2005 -
Proposal for a Council Decision establishing the specific Programme ' Prevention , Preparedness and Consequence Management of Terrorism ' , for the Period 2007-2013 - General Programme ' Security and Safeguarding Liberties ' - C6-0241 / 2005 -
Proposal for a Council Decision establishing the specific programme ' Prevention of and Fight against Crime ' for the Period 2007-2013 - General Programme ' Security and Safeguarding Liberties ' - C6-0242 / 2005 -
Mr President , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has already presented to plenary the reports by Mrs Kudrycka , Mrs Segelström and Mr La Russa on the legislative proposals for which the Commission requests use of the urgency procedure .
We believe that , from a political point of view , the compromise that we have been able to achieve with the other institutions is acceptable , and we are therefore in favour of plenary adopting these reports during this part-session .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to say - speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - that we are in full agreement with that , and I think that the Members belonging to the other groups in this House will be able to give their consent too .
( Parliament adopted the urgent procedure )
Financing instrument for development cooperation - A financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the
Recommendation for a second reading , by Mr Mitchell , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation ( 11944 / 2 / 2006 C6-0357 / 2006
and
the report by Mr Martin on behalf of the Committee on International Trade on the draft Council regulation establishing a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ( 11877 / 2006 - C6-0265 / 2006 -
rapporteur . - Mr President , this regulation has been in gestation for almost two years .
At times , the pressure on Parliament to cave in , to divide , to give up our legislative role , was barely tolerable .
I have been taken aback by the willingness of fellow MEPs , at times , to give other institutions carte blanche in this important area , so long as some little interest of theirs or influence was not lost .
However , I wish to pay tribute to my colleagues in the Committee on Development - Members who did not allow pressure to divide us , across all groups , and who , in the end , carried the day .
I should also like to pay tribute to the secretariat of the Development Committee and to the secretariats of those groups that worked constructively with us in these negotiations .
Having threatened to reject the original Development Cooperation and Economic Cooperation Instrument ( DCECI ) , as it was called , which sought to take away codecision powers by changing the legal base from Article 179 to Article 181a and to include developed countries and expenditure on non-development issues in a development instrument , we have negotiated with the Council and the Commission an instrument which few thought possible 12 months ago , one that will streamline EU activities for the developing world while maintaining accountability and transparency .
I should like to pay tribute , in particular , to the negotiating team who accompanied me at those talks , to the successive presidencies for the work they have put in and to the Commission for a good outcome .
I have one reservation , however .
I believe it was Voltaire who said , ' I do not agree with what you say , but I will defend to the death your right to say it . '
Having approached the whole of the negotiations in a way that sought to accommodate , I was very disappointed that , on one particular issue , my views were not accommodated .
It is not about diluting the availability of health services for women in need .
In fact , if my amendments - which were modest - had been carried , the Cairo Conference and all the related issues would have been respected .
Indeed , having been at the centre of compromise , finding and supporting others , I was surprised that my modest proposals did not receive proper consideration .
Part of the reason for that seems to me to have been a piece of written advice that was circulated , which pre-empted my proposals by claiming that PPE policy had been decided .
As the signatures to the amendments show here today , that is not the case and should not have been stated , especially at what was a very sensitive time in the concluding stages of the negotiations .
I can support the general content of the common position , with that one reservation .
I think it is a very good outcome for us : Parliament has gained , insofar as we have maintained codecision under Article 179 , which is a very important principle to us .
It is to be time-limited legislation .
The specific instrument for development policy is this instrument ; it will not have any other content .
There will be more detailed financial provisions : the financial provisions of the proposal were another area of very serious concern for the Committee , as they were extremely general and very far from the level of detail to which Parliament , as part of the budgetary authority , was accustomed .
That has now changed , and the common position now includes a breakdown of funding by programme and , in some cases , within programmes .
We are also breaking new ground .
The new DCI will , for the first time , enshrine in a legal text the internationally accepted definition of development policy set out by the OECD Development Assistance Committee .
A Commission declaration attached to the new DCI will contain , also for the first time , the benchmark that the Committee on Development has been using since 2003 to promote increased focus on the key MDG sectors of basic education and basic health , and the Commission has never before accepted the Committee 's 20 % benchmark for these sectors , which has been accepted on this occasion .
In relation to democratic scrutiny , further headway has also been made on the matter of the dialogue between Parliament and the Commission on the draft strategy papers to allow effective Parliamentary scrutiny of the implementation of the DCI , and I wish to thank Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner and Commissioner Michel for their letter to me and to the chairperson of the Committee confirming that .
Parliament does not want , or need , to be involved in micro-management , but it does give us an opportunity , through whatever structures we decide ourselves , to get involved at an early stage , thereby giving Parliament a much improved role in the whole area of transparency and accountability .
With the exception that I mentioned , I consider the common position as established by the Council to be a very good outcome for the European Parliament .
As I said at the outset , I doubt very much that anybody 12 months ago would have thought that we could have achieved what we did achieve .
But it shows that , when Parliament stands together , when the different groups do not allow themselves to be divided and are determined not to give away the powers of this House , we can , with the other institutions , come up with a very good instrument and one that ensures that the prerogatives of this House are protected .
rapporteur . - Mr President , before turning to my own report , let me congratulate Mr Mitchell on his .
As the House will know , these two instruments started life as a single instrument and the Committee on Development was correct to argue that they needed to be separated because we were mixing apples and pears .
The development instrument essentially aims to promote the interests of developing countries .
The economic instrument , the one I am responsible for , is about promoting - not exclusively , but mainly - the interests of the European Union .
It was therefore wrong that these two objectives should have been contained in a single instrument .
The Committee on Development was correct to argue for a separate instrument and it was also correct to argue that it should be pushing hard for the European Parliament 's involvement to at least be the same as it is under the plethora of existing instruments .
So , I congratulate Mr Mitchell on his report .
Turning to my own report , it is small in importance compared with the other external instruments , but still a significant tool of this European Union .
It expands on the existing programmes , firstly in terms of geographical areas : the existing programmes cover just six countries , this new instrument will cover 17 countries .
It is expanded in terms of objectives and , as one would hope with both the objectives and the geographical area being expanded , it is also expanded in terms of its budget .
So , while it is the smallest of the external instruments , it is still a significant instrument .
It focuses on furthering EU interests in industrialised countries and it builds on the highly successful executive training programme for Japan and Korea and the Gateway to Japan programme .
Both have been subject to a Commission-financed study , which demonstrates that they have increased the access of European companies in both Japan and Korea and increased the awareness of the European Community in those two countries and so are worthwhile in themselves .
The new programme will have five key objectives : to build on public diplomacy and outreach ; the promotion of economic partnership and business ; people-to-people links , particularly through education ; encouraging dialogues ; and finally the evaluation of small-scale cooperation projects to assist small and medium-sized enterprises to get access to third country markets .
These are all very worthwhile objectives .
In terms of the Committee on International Trade 's approach , we have concentrated on three things .
First , given that the scope of the programmes has expanded from 6 to 17 countries , we have insisted that there is room for differentiation within the programme - a one-size-fits-all approach would simply not work in a programme like this .
I am glad to say that the Commission has gone along with the idea that the programme should be country-specific , rather than a general programme for 17 countries .
We have also tabled amendments to ensure that this programme is complementary to the other instruments that we will be adopting either today or at a later stage .
Again , given that the programme has expanded , we have insisted that there should be human rights and rule of law clauses in these instruments .
Again both the Council and the Commission have indicated a willingness to accept those amendments .
I am also pleased to say that , despite this being only a consultation and not a codecision matter , unlike Mr Mitchell 's report , the Council has agreed to attach the two interinstitutional agreements on budgetary discipline and democratic scrutiny .
It has also agreed that Parliament should be more involved in this programme than originally envisaged and has accepted that , if the scope of the programme is altered , either geographically or in terms of its objectives , Parliament will be fully consulted .
The Commission has also agreed to bring forward multiannual planning for consultation with Parliament on this .
So the level of parliamentary involvement has been significantly increased .
Finally , let me conclude by saying that there is a chance that , if we adopt all the amendments today , this instrument will be adopted by the Council in exactly the form that it leaves Parliament .
That is quite an achievement , given that it is only a consultation exercise .
I would like to thank the Commission for its excellent cooperation , and particularly the Finnish Presidency , which , on a relatively minor instrument compared to the other instruments , has been fully engaged in Parliament 's work , has kept us fully abreast of its position and has made compromises .
We have made compromises with the Presidency .
I think in the end we have got a very workable instrument and I would like to thank all the institutions for their cooperation .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , this December part-session is an important milestone in establishing an effective and streamlined legislative framework for the Community 's external spending .
I must say I feel honoured that I represent the Commission in this part-session , as we are now close to concluding negotiations on the four remaining instruments for the delivery of external spending , for the future period from 2007 to 2013 .
We have all come a long way since the Commission tabled these proposals two years ago .
The new simplified architecture was the first attempt to streamline all the instruments for external spending .
This was deemed the highest priority for the Commission in order to increase our own efficiency and coherence and that of our external action as a whole .
While both Parliament and the Council welcomed the simplification process , these proposals generated a very substantial debate .
Important questions were raised soon after Parliament began its work .
I greatly appreciate the efforts made by Parliament and the successive Council presidencies to find constructive solutions to the challenges we have encountered with these innovative proposals .
These efforts culminated in a successful trialogue in June 2006 when an overall agreement was reached on the architecture of the external financing instruments .
Reflecting your concern to ensure a strong development focus for the development cooperation instrument , we agreed to separate the instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries .
A specific human rights instrument was also established .
To address your further concerns , it was agreed that the instruments be adopted under codecision whenever the Treaty made this possible , and a separate instrument for nuclear safety cooperation was created so that the instrument for stability could pass from consultation to codecision .
In total four of the seven new instruments are now co-decided .
This gives Parliament a legitimate and unprecedented degree of legislative power over the framework covering external spending .
As for the development cooperation instrument , which represents the central brick in this new architecture , I greatly appreciate the fruitful cooperation with Parliament , especially during the last five months , and I thank the rapporteur , Mr Mitchell , for the central role he has played in bringing the negotiations to a positive and timely conclusion .
I should further thank the Committee on Development 's negotiating team .
The compromise as reflected in the negotiated common position of the Council represents a finely balanced solution .
I also appreciate that the Committee on Development endorsed this compromise and recommended the approval of the negotiated common position of the Council at second reading .
As requested by Parliament , the development cooperation instrument now includes indicative financial allocations , a mid-term review and an expiry date .
For the new co-decided instruments , we have also agreed that before undertaking the review Parliament should examine the operation of the instruments to identify any dysfunctional situations which may have arisen .
Parliament 's report would be considered by the Commission in carrying out the review of the instruments .
This review should be carried out in 2009 .
In response to the letter sent by the chair of the Committee on Development , Mrs Morgantini , I am pleased to confirm that this review date will also apply to the development cooperation instrument .
In comparison with the development cooperation instrument , and if budgetary clout is a measure of importance , the instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries does not stand out as the biggest amongst the external action instruments , but this should not lead to underestimating its utility and its relevance in enhancing the role of the European Union in the wider world .
Indeed , this instrument will directly help promote the EU 's objective of becoming a more visible player on the global stage .
It will achieve this objective by providing a framework in which , through concrete initiatives , we can strengthen relations with key developed partners , promote Community interests , and also raise awareness about the EU there .
Since last June , the rapporteur , the Finnish Presidency and the Commission have worked hand-in-hand to ensure a timely adoption of the instrument , while making sure that the views of each institution are duly taken into consideration .
In this regard I would like to express my appreciation to the rapporteur , David Martin , and the Committee on International Trade as a whole for their hard work and the spirit of cooperation demonstrated in expeditiously processing the dossier .
This ongoing dialogue has permitted the factoring-in of Parliament 's views in preparatory discussions in the Council held in parallel with parliamentary work and therefore , thanks also to this collaborative approach , beyond the Commission 's own view and without encroaching on the Council 's prerogatives .
I can envision with some confidence that key amendments regarding , in particular , references to the core values of the Community - democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights ; the protection of the Community 's interests ; reinforced evaluation and reporting provisions for the specification of an indicative financial envelope for the period 2007-13 ; or the inclusion of the review clause - will find their way into the final text .
Furthermore , additional editorial changes will bring the final text more into line with language suggested by Parliament and with language already agreed in other external action instruments , to ensure sound coherence between them .
I am looking forward to a positive outcome to the votes on the development cooperation instrument today .
That will allow the Commission to start its work as of 1 January and for the delivery of the external assistance without any further delay , which is so important .
With an agreement on the remaining legislative proposals the European Union will significantly increase the effectiveness of its external spending and , in particular , its visibility on the international scene , allowing it to live up to its role as major donor of development aid .
Similarly , I welcome the positive view taken on the industrialised countries instrument in the report that is put before Parliament today .
I can give you a clear assurance that the final text , which the Council is set to adopt very soon , will also substantively reflect the main thrust of Parliament 's resolution .
That is a testimony to our willingness to work constructively with Parliament on this dossier , something that will continue in future in implementing cooperation activities , with industrialised countries as well .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I wish to thank the Commissioner and to thank the rapporteur for all his work and cooperation on this report .
The rapporteur and I often joke that we find very little to disagree on when it comes to international trade issues .
When it came to shadowing this report , once again we found very little to disagree on , partly because the rapporteur is such an expert in this area and has dealt with it in a number of other reports .
I should just like to repeat what good cooperation there was , and I have actually learnt quite a lot from him throughout this process .
One day I will find something to disagree with him about , but for now let us look at the issues .
We all agree that the proposal should be tightened and clarified .
It is very important that we define the EU 's strategic interest , and I welcome the amendments adopted in committee to this end .
We must also have consistency across the financial instruments .
Once again , the rapporteur and I had a number of discussions in this area , and I am very pleased that these were adopted .
The other area is the review clause .
It is very important to decide whether this instrument should be reviewed during the lifetime of this Parliament or after the European elections of 2009 when new Members come in .
Those new Members will not have our expertise in this matter , and that is why I would have preferred to have seen a review within the lifetime of this Parliament .
Finally , the report has got it right on human rights and democracy , especially when we are dealing with developed countries .
Let us hope that we can continue to pursue these goals within the framework of trade agreements and continue to work with our partners .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , with the new development instrument we are at last getting a piece of development legislation that will give centre stage to the Millennium Objectives , which represent a pledge we made to millions of children in Africa , a pledge that has to do with education and health care .
Unfortunately , the bitter reality is that in recent years , the Millennium Objectives have , rather than coming closer , tended to disappear out of sight , and it was for precisely that reason that we were so tough in the debate on the present financing instrument .
For one and a half years , we debated long and hard about this new piece of legislation ; that was no mean feat , and it turned out not to be in vain .
In the next seven years , we have one clear European Development Act which , with a clear , thematic programme and a geographic programme accounting together for nearly 70 billion , will map out the course .
This is putting an end to 16 different regulations that are difficult to implement and monitor .
The new Act has two clear priorities , namely the Millennium Objectives , and within these objectives education and basic health care , areas , in short , that really matter .
The campaigns we have launched in order to achieve this have not been in vain .
We have campaigned with school teachers ' unions and many other organisations from the world of education , including Education International , in order to try to make education more central to European development programmes .
The same applies to our campaigns involving health workers in an effort to double spending in basic health care .
Finally , the Commission has now officially pledged to at least double its spending by 2008 , with at least 20 % of the geographical budget being spent on education and basic health care .
Including the thematic dimension of the Act , this amounts to more than EUR 2.5 billion .
With this new financing instrument , Europe , with its Member States , can now make a difference in Africa .
There are still more than 45 million children who have no access to schooling and millions of patients , especially girls , who have to go without basic health care .
In 2015 , they will enjoy the education and heathcare provision to which they are entitled .
This will put an end to the fight I , together with my group , have put up from the moment I took my seat as an MEP in 1999 .
I would thank all European citizens and organisations who have helped me along the way , ranging from the ' STOP AIDS Alliance ' to ' Bono ' - thank you !
On 1 January 2007 , we start a fresh chapter , namely that of putting this act , along with all its principles and promises , into practice .
This is something to which the Committee on Development will be devoting much of its parliamentary time , both in terms of programming national policy plans and of monitoring their implementation .
We do not want a noncommittal attitude . We want 100 % commitment from all parties .
This is why we do not accept that the programming stage for the period up to 2008 should already be completed .
Consultations with civil organisations and parliaments over there and NGOs and our Parliament over here must be done in accordance with the new agreements .
This is incumbent on the Commission by law from 1 January .
I assume the Commissioner is in agreement with me on this and that he is prepared to confirm this unconditionally .
Ten days ago , the funding of the Global Fund was yet again set to jeopardise the arrangements made in respect of the thematic section for the Act of 2007 .
Fortunately , with a letter dated 8 December , the Commission asserted its willingness to respect the thematic programming arrangement for 2007 .
It would be good if the Commissioner were to confirm this , and by doing so , put the mind at rest of the 23 NGOs that will be presenting President Barroso with an urgent note on this matter this weekend .
I would wish the President , Mr Mitchell , the Council and Commission good luck with this success .
I am also enormously grateful to them for the thorough cooperation ; I do hope that this House will reject the cancellation amendment , because I think we made it clear that we no longer accept amendments .
This Act is it ; let us make it a success .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a Regulation of the financing instrument for development cooperation and economic cooperation presented by the European Commission two years ago to the European Parliament did not satisfy the European Parliament .
The Regulation sought to curb the European Parliament 's general decision-making powers , and it did not adhere to the principles of development cooperation policy , conflating economic cooperation with developing and developed countries .
Today in a second reading we are discussing a differently-named document concerning a European Parliament and European Commission Regulation defining a financing instrument for cooperation that supports development .
It was particularly important for the Committee on Development to have a financing instrument for development cooperation intended only for developing countries .
The document submitted for a second reading is really a compromise European Parliament , European Council and European Commission document , drafted in tripartite negotiations .
Consensus rule is back in , as is budgetary transparency and accountability to Parliament ; past budget items have been returned along with detailed financial guidelines and specific development cooperation provisions .
It should be stressed that we agreed to rely on EC Treaty Article 179 , since a broad definition of cooperation in support of development and a broad choice of action according to geographical and thematic programmes is assured by consensus .
The geographical programmes cover Latin America , Asia , Central Asia , the Middle East and South Africa .
The specified thematic programmes include such programmes as investing in people , management of the environment and sustainable natural resources , including energy resources , participation of non-governmental organisations and local government institutions in the development process , food security and migration , and asylum .
It is gratifying that agreement was reached on basic education and healthcare financing and that more than 20 % of the funds allocated to development will be earmarked for this , which is one of the priorities of the European Parliament Committee on Development .
The Commission made a commitment to carry out increased and more precise monitoring of implementation .
We regularly felt this was lacking when approving budget implementation .
The Regulation on Financing Instrument for Development Cooperation replaced 16 existing pieces of legislation , which is a good step towards improving and simplifying EU legislation .
I recommend that the Regulation be approved without addition or amendment .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Mitchell , this House , the Council and the Commission have spent much time wrangling over the future development finance instrument , and have actually ended up finding a largely sustainable compromise .

The intention is that the new instrument should help us to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , thus forwarding a very important objective of which both the committee and this House as a whole have been recurrent defenders , and , in view of the UN 's recently-published estimate of their effectiveness to date , particularly in the fight against poverty , I see the EU as sending out a very important message in that respect .

It is evident that Mr Mitchell 's dedication , as rapporteur , and that of the Committee on Development as a whole , to changing the regulation as tabled has very definitely paid off , and so , with compromise in mind , all the groups have held back from tabling amendments , although the rapporteur has not , and I have to say , with some regret , that this is where he comes in for strong criticism from me , for , rather than doing what he said he would and supporting those who want to grapple with the wording of the compromise agreement , Mr Mitchell has himself been tabling the relevant amendments , which I see as being , in many respects , highly problematic and outrageous , in that they demand nothing less than that the reproductive health of women should cease to be a goal in development cooperation ; his amendments aimed at deleting Recital 18 and parts of Articles 5 and 12 do not merely do away with the wordings he finds disagreeable , contrary to what he has said , but also have the effect of removing other goals as well , among them the right to give birth free of risk and to generalised access to comprehensive , safe and reliable reproductive sexual health care and services , the reduction of infant mortality and the fight against diseases associated with poverty , particularly HIV / Aids , tuberculosis and malaria .


In so doing , he disregards not only the compromise already arrived at , but also world opinion as expressed at the UN conferences on population development , in Cairo , and on the situation of women , held in Beijing , and hence also the WHO 's definition .


That I regard as a scandal , and I think this House would be making itself look utterly ridiculous if it were to adopt his amendments tomorrow .
My group will , as a matter of profound conviction , be voting against them .
I think it makes a great deal of sense to combine the EU 's aid options - which have hitherto been highly chaotic - in a single instrument , but this must not have the consequence of important matters simply being dropped .
Since the rapporteur is questioning the compromise , I can already tell him that my group will , in future , be asking searching questions about one aspect of the new finance instrument in particular , namely the use of development cooperation resources to fund measures aimed against illegal immigration and used for the stepping up of border controls .
Article 16 ( 2 ) c introduces into this compromise something that perverts virtually the whole of immigration and asylum policy , which , as formulated elsewhere in Article 16 , is a positive approach .
You can be sure that my group , in doing this , will avail itself of one particularly positive aspect of the new instrument , namely the better opportunity given to this House to have direct input alongside the Council and the Commission , at whose insistence , significantly , trade will , in future , be included alongside the funding of development .
Notwithstanding the fact that the first words of the new instrument stress the importance of the developing countries ' trading capacities , we will be most careful to ensure that we do not embark upon a new decade characterised by the covert promotion of external trade .
We will ask searching questions and take a critical line if , in so doing , your sole desire is to help the countries of the Global South to sell Europe the raw materials it needs without let or hindrance , for it is not selling all their raw materials , but rather fair trade with finished goods , that offers southern societies a chance to overcome poverty .
A fortnight ago , in the Financial Times , Philippe Maystadt , the President of the European Investment Bank , warned that Europe was imposing too stringent conditions on financial arrangements to be able to compete with Chinese or Russian businesses for African raw materials .
Where is this argument going ?
Do we not then end up again tolerating slave labour in order not to lose the race for raw materials ?
I find it quite remarkable , and a cause for rejoicing , that it is stated in the present financial instrument and in our compromise that the criteria to be met include that of ' decent work ' on which the mind of this House is shortly to be expressed by a report .
I believe that this sends a very important message in response to calls - which I regard as wrong-headed - for the European Union , in future , to be less exacting in its political criteria in terms of the war on poverty and the advancement of development .
Let us instead use the new instrument , knowing how important coherence and policy are , to offer something better , with bauxite being turned into aluminium locally , using environmentally-friendly methods , by workers working under decent conditions and for living wages .
The new instrument will have achieved something if it manages to create the conditions with respect to education and health without which productive economic performance that benefits the local community is not even possible .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , our privileged and wealthy part of the world bears a great deal of responsibility towards those who are starving and have no prospects of development .
Of course , the aid which we provide to these people cannot solve all their problems , some of which have deeper , political causes .
However , it can help to resolve crises .
I think that we are unanimous in recognising our humanitarian duties , and this gives us great strength .
That is why I am all the more opposed to the introduction of legislation relating to so-called reproductive and sexual rights , which implies our political and financial support for abortion .
This proposal was not contained in the initial European Commission draft , and was only introduced in this Parliament .
This sends a very negative signal to those Europeans who have moral objections to abortion and do not want to pay for activities which hide behind the façade of the technical term ' reproductive rights ' .
After all , it is a means of undermining the common front against poverty and of weakening European integration .
Is that really what we want ?
Can we ignore the consciences of many Christians simply because of the fact that today they are in the minority ?
Today , we are clearly letting them know that Europe has become a project in which they will no longer play any part .
I therefore call on you to support Amendments 1 , 2 and 3 .
Without these amendments , I will not be able to vote in favour of this report .
Mr President , I see that there is a great eagerness in this Parliament to offer opinions on everything under the sun .
Everything from extremely important issues such as chemicals legislation to small ones such as the standardisation of windscreen wipers crop up for consideration .
We are now debating the financing instrument for the EU 's development cooperation .
I am convinced that all my colleagues in the Committee on Development want to see a reduction in world poverty so that vulnerable people around the world can live tolerable lives .
I believe that most of my fellow Members desire the same thing .
I should like , however , to call on them to stop and think a moment .
Is the EU really doing everything in its power to reduce poverty globally ?
I find it very difficult to understand how , at one moment , people can sit and recommend aid under the auspices of the EU and then , at the next moment , support subsidies for EU agriculture or a harmful fisheries agreement with a poor African country in which corruption is a major problem .
If we really want to help poor and vulnerable people in the world , we should really come at things from another angle .
Let us abolish the EU 's common agricultural policy and protectionist trade policy and let us stop protecting non-competitive European production .
My proposals would obviously not solve all the problems in the world , but I believe that they would be a good start .
( SK ) First of all I would like to state that in my opinion both economic and development cooperation should be included in a single financial instrument underpinned by a double legal basis , namely Articles 179 and 181 ( a ) .
However , I respect the conclusions of the trilateral meetings which resulted in the original financial instrument being divided into economic and development cooperation .
The instrument used to finance cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories is financially flexible , and its expanded geographic scope reflects the current situation .
It also considers countries that are still on the DAC list to be developing countries despite the fact that they have long since ceased to be ones .
This includes countries like Brunei , Taiwan , Singapore , Saudi Arabia , Bahrain , Qatar etc . These nations are important trading partners of the European Union , and it is therefore necessary to expand the existing cooperation with countries such as Japan , South Africa and Australia to include the above-mentioned new countries .
As the countries covered by this financial instrument represent a very mixed bag , it is imperative that all treaties should include clauses on human rights and respect for democratic principles .
In my amendments to the report , I have highlighted the need for strengthening the role of the European Parliament .
In conclusion , I am in favour of the European Parliament endorsing every change on the list of industrialised counties and of the Commission being required to assess compliance with the original objectives and costs on a regular basis .
Finally , Commissioner , I would like to express my admiration for your work .
( NL ) Mr President , since development cooperation has its own Commissioner , its own budget , and its own committee in the European Parliament , and since this House has codecision powers in this area , it has been an important sphere of activity since the beginning of European cooperation .
The European Union is right to feel responsible for contributing to peace and prosperity in countries outside of the Union .
The fact that the Commission has made an attempt to make improvements is a good thing .
While we invest a great deal , the results are sometimes far from satisfactory .
Africa is a case in point , for poverty there even appears to be on the increase .
Much needs yet to be done in order to achieve the Millennium Development Objectives .
The Commission 's original proposal was meant to improve matters , but was , in fact , extremely disappointing and hardly confidence inspiring .
Both the budget for development cooperation and this House 's involvement were at risk of being adversely affected .
The negotiations were not easy as a result .
All credit to Mr Mitchell who has done a fantastic job .
The upshot is that a separate development instrument will in any event remain in place , with codecision and with Article 179 as its only legal basis .
An agreement has been reached on the priorities of the Millennium Development Objectives within which priority has been given to education and basic health care .
This also includes reproductive health , and I should like to add , also in reaction to Mrs Zimmer , that the amendments have been tabled in order to underline the importance of this issue .
It is incorrect to say that Mr Mitchell 's amendments are opposed to reproductive health .
He states - and I am quoting from his explanatory note to the amendments - that it is too important an issue to handle in two sentences flat , which is saying something completely different .
The new financing instrument for development cooperation is set to change the way Parliament works ; we will need to focus more on the monitoring and implementation side of programmes .
I hope that we can count on the Commission 's promised cooperation and openness in this matter .
( ES ) Mr President , this debate is important because we are going to approve the instrument that will serve as a legal basis for using the resources that the European Union allocates to development cooperation and humanitarian action .
While the Financial Perspective for 2007-2013 reduces the Union 's capacity to act in almost all fields , paradoxically , the money available to us for our solidarity with the developing world is not being reduced , but rather it is increasing slightly .
This debate provides a satisfactory end to a process that has lasted an exceptionally long time , having had to overcome serious difficulties .
However , the instrument that we will approve has the merit of reaching the House as the result of a consensus between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
The search for that consensus was the reason for the process taking so long .
It was a complicated challenge , since the task was to condense , into one single legal instrument , the more than fifteen previously in force over which the bases for our development cooperation actions were spread .
It was a question of rationalising that task , and Parliament agreed with that .
Nevertheless , it had to reject the Commission 's initial proposals when , supposedly for the sake of greater efficiency , it came to restricting the House 's role , that is to say , to restricting democracy .
That was something that Parliament could not accept and our Committee on Development acted with a degree of responsibility that we should be proud of .
Despite what some people claimed , it was not a question of promoting the role of our committee .
It was a question of maintaining and increasing the role of Parliament , that is to say , the democratic responsibility of our House , in a field that is important from political and budgetary points of view .
Many of us have had to confront totalitarian powers , which justified their authoritarianism by stating that democracy complicated procedures and made management less efficient .
We all know what a fallacy that is , however , and that there can be no efficiency without democratic rules , both when actions are decided upon and when the executive 's actions are subject to control .
Thanks to our firmness with regard to the work of the rapporteur , Mr Mitchell , and thanks to all of the groups rallying round , our efforts ended in success .
We must thank the British , Austrian and Finnish Presidencies for the understanding they have shown towards our points of view , and also the Commission , which has sought ways to take account of Parliament 's demands .
The text of the instrument is consistent with the European consensus on development and with the various strategies that we have been approving , particularly the European strategy for the development of Africa .
It is also consistent with the text of the Constitution , which makes solidarity with the countries of the South a constitutional priority for the European Union .
My concern is that , having consolidated Parliament 's competences , we are now going to fail to meet the responsibilities conferred on us by the instrument and which are going to require a lot of work on the part of the House , its Committee on Development , its staff , which must be increased , incidentally , if we want to be in a position to take on the work , and , above all , on the part of the parliamentary groups , whose obligations are going to be increased since they will have to contribute to the strategy documents for each country targeted by European Union development cooperation , and in monitoring the programmes that are approved .
We must not end up in the ridiculous position of not being able to meet the obligation that we have worked so hard to obtain from the Community 's institutional partners .
( FR ) Mr President , it is always a pleasure to welcome a consensus and a good result .
I therefore join my fellow Members in doing so .
Balance has at last been restored .
We have a common legal instrument , expiring in 2013 , and we have a mid-term review .
We have an appropriate instrument at last .
We have avoided confusing different terms : no mention is made of industrialised countries or human rights ; only development is referred to .
We are able to set clear objectives and point out our political priorities .
We have , at last , an instrument that , as my fellow Members have highlighted , has its legal base in Article 179 , which reintroduces the codecision procedure .
Never again will the European Parliament be unable to co-decide on a development policy .
We have at last managed to ensure that the financial allocations are linked to different programmes , in order to increase our control .
I would therefore like to highlight the work of our rapporteur , Mr Mitchell , and the attention given to this matter by the Commission and the Council .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , we have taken due note of the Commission 's commitments regarding our role during the mid-term review and relating to the rational anchoring of finances , to the dialogue on strategy papers and , as I would like to point out , to our priorities , namely health and education .
To conclude , I believe that our Parliament will have no problem in adopting this report and in adopting it unamended .
I will not waste your time by discussing these amendments , which are certainly out of touch and backward-looking and absurd in every way .
( PL ) Mr President , the idea of the European Union providing aid to nations and countries in need is worthy of our support .
However , there are doubts as to whether political issues should be included in cooperation policy as conditions for providing this aid .
I understand the principle of not providing aid to countries that infringe human rights or commit various crimes .
However , using cooperation policy as a tool for forcing countries in need to adopt solutions applied in the European Union as a condition for providing aid is to put unlawful pressure on these nations and goes against the idea of solidarity .
We will do more to promote democratic processes if we show , in our own back yard , that we can protect civil rights and freedoms and ensure respect for and the development of the values which have always been part of the European identity .
Turning cooperation policy into a weapon for militant feminism , for example , which creates a lot of controversy in Europe itself , will undermine our status and power to act in other parts of the world .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the goal we have set ourselves - of increasing official development assistance and halving global poverty by 2015 - is an ambitious one , but it has to be said that we are a long way away from achieving it .
My view is that development assistance has to be a short-term measure , provided where people have nothing , in regions full of refugees or countries in crisis , for example .
In the long term , though , it cannot be a substitute for systems that actually work .
What matters , then , is that recipients of aid be given more power over their own affairs , and that some sort of accountability be required as a means of dealing with corruption and so on .
Africa is an example of how the way development cooperation works is not always ideal , and no wonder , when it was often used to promote the donor countries ' exports , to shore up dictatorships or to drive states into debt and dependency , so it is not acceptable that China , for example , should encourage states to get back into the indebtedness from which they have only just escaped and become dependent in new ways , merely in order to secure supplies of raw materials .
Nor , however , is it acceptable that states should be so keen to hold out their hands to receive development funds when they are unwilling to take back any of those of their own citizens who have , in droves , sought refuge elsewhere .
Mr President , I rise to congratulate a number of my colleagues in the Committee on Development , and the rapporteur , Gay Mitchell , in particular , as well as my fellow coordinator , Mrs Martens , and all coordinators of political groups , for having conducted this matter over a period of two years to produce this result .
Why did it take two years , one might ask , given that what we have produced now could have been done in three months ?
It took all that time because of a very stubborn attitude from a member of the Commission - a ' commissar ' , one might say - who was in a senior position in DG RELEX .
It is only because the Commissioners and the Council recognise that the European Parliament is a premier democratic institution , which must be able to criticise legislation and make it accountable .
At a time when the European Parliament and the European institutions are being seen to be remote from our citizens , for the Commission , as it was then , to produce a piece of paper that took away the powers of the Development Committee and the European Parliament to set development policy , was outrageous .
It is only because Parliament stood together as one , despite attempts by certain people to divide Members and to have us at each other 's throats , that we succeeded in producing this .
I want this on the record because , as a coordinator for the Development Committee , I can say we went through hell trying to get this thing passed in a way in which parliamentary scrutiny , parliamentary control of policy , parliamentary control of strategy papers , parliamentary control of time-limits on legislation and parliamentary control of specific instruments for development policy were all going to be very important .
We must connect with our people , with our constituents , with our voters .
To have the Commission come in , as though it had come from Moscow in the old Soviet days , was absurd .
I say thank you very much to the Commissioners , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , in particular , and Mr Michel , for understanding that we have a democratic role to play .
( FR ) Mr President , a joint declaration on development , a strategy for Africa , commitments on levels of development aid : the EU has certainly revised its political ambitions upwards in recent years when it comes to development cooperation , and this new financing instrument gives us a tool to match our ambitions .
A financing programme over seven years , devoted entirely to international solidarity , really is a great victory for our partners in the South , and it is a great victory for us here in Parliament , because , after two years of locking swords with the Council and the Commission , our main demands have been met .
It is a victory in terms of the commitment to allocate at least 20 % of appropriations to the education and basic healthcare sectors , in order to increase the pace of progress on the Millennium Goals ; it is a victory in terms of the creation of a specific instrument to fund the promotion of human rights and democracy in the countries of the South ; and it is a victory in that it limits the scope of the new instrument to the countries of the South alone , in order to ensure that development appropriations are not siphoned off to other policies .
Finally , the provision of a mid-term review for this vital instrument will give us the opportunity to rework it shortly and to make any necessary improvements . It is a pleasant prospect , which now allows us to conclude the process of examining this text in peace .
These victories will give rise to others , for example the ongoing negotiations on the programming of the European Development Fund ( EDF ) , which I , as rapporteur , will make every effort to give the same priorities .
Although it is true that , despite our best efforts , we have not managed to achieve the budgetisation of the EDF or to get officially involved in the comitology procedure , in order to keep a closer eye on the implementation of development policy , we should nevertheless be delighted at our many victories , the most important of which is the promotion of a generous view of development policy .
In establishing this development cooperation instrument , the European Union is , more than ever , establishing itself as a leader in this field .
It was already by far the biggest donor in the world in this domain , and it was already doing more than the rest of the world for international solidarity .
From now on , it will do even better !
I believe that , today , Europe can be proud of the fact that it has remained loyal to its values of generosity and solidarity .
I , too , would like to echo what has been said , and to thank the rapporteur , Mr Mitchell , all those who have worked towards this result - particularly Mr van den Berg - and all those who have made such valuable contributions to it .
I hope that this report will be adopted without amendment .
( ET ) The financial instrument for development cooperation involves a very fragile compromise between the commission , the Council and Parliament .
We must also recognise that Parliament 's views have largely been taken into consideration during the codecision procedure .
Any proposal to add a new instrument would mean that the instrument would not be implemented from the beginning of the following year , and the aid might not even reach those who need it .
The instrument will cover a broad range of developing countries , from the very least developed countries to high-income countries .
The instrument will also cover a wide range of topics and include activities that were previously financed from the environment budget .
I am satisfied with the course of the proceedings , during which the European People 's Party has removed those motions to amend that contained mention of political institutions , and thus I will offer a brief conclusion .
I would like to emphasise once again that the financial instrument for development cooperation is a compromise between institutions , and the slowing of its processing would mean the delaying and interruption of aid , which certainly does not serve the instrument 's purpose of promoting democracy and human rights .
I therefore support the passing of the report without any amendments .

( EL ) Mr President , my intervention refers to Mr Martin 's report , whom I must congratulate on his creative contribution .
His report refers to the financial instrument for developing cooperation with industrialised countries and territories .
The discussion regarding the institution of the said financial instrument is part of a wider problem that concerns primarily the harmonisation of the European Union 's actions in foro interno , in foro externo and secondarily the cohesion of the European Union 's entire foreign activity , whether political , financial or commercial .
In particular , the proposed regulation unites a heterogeneous group of countries as well as a wide range of activities in fields such as economy , commerce , research and scientific cooperation .
Distributing resources per field of activity on the one hand , and per country or group of countries on the other , should reflect the European Union 's strategic , political , financial and commercial objectives .
Ladies and gentlemen , with respect to the cohesion of European Union 's foreign activity I would like to refer to the new trade strategy that the Commissioner on International Trade , announced .
Given that this strategy concerns our next steps with important European Union trade partners , is a compatibility issue regarding the European Union 's political priorities being raised ?
Does it connect the range of subject matters covered by the proposed financial instrument with European Union 's internal political choices ?
Moreover , should not it promote even more the European Parliament 's active role in the determination of priorities as well as the evaluation of programme effectiveness ?
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a good thing that we are having this joint debate , since we will end up , in future , with a shared legal basis differentiating between developing countries and richer , industrialised nations , and so it is good that we should be discussing this today .

Mr Martin , the rapporteur , was right to point out that we have to seek after a more logical and systematic approach when it comes to defending the European Union 's interests in our cooperative efforts with others , and I am glad that the Commission treated with respect his argument that further differentiation is needed , along with consideration of the countries ' specific interests , more evaluation , and an early review .
I would like to add a couple of other points , which Mr Papastamkos has already addressed .
When this review is carried out , this differentiation must be reflected even more logically in our dealings on the foreign policy and trade policy fronts .
What I mean by that is that we currently maintain very intensive relations with certain countries , with free trade agreements and partnership agreements , but the thinking on the basis of which we cooperate using financial instruments is not always in line with our thinking about policy .

It follows that we should strive after greater strategic depth in financial cooperation too , for there is no point in having free trade agreements - with Mexico or Chile , for example - and having more of their kind in mind for the future , while not being logical in our cooperation ; it is just as illogical to deny the least developed countries more intensive support than that given to those that are already on their way up and can be described as emerging .

It is in just this way that we need to become more specific in future , and I might add that that also involves Parliament being consulted not only on the financial instruments as part of the codecision procedure , but also as soon as dialogue towards the conclusion of bilateral agreements is embarked on , and that its agreement shall be an indispensable requirement , for this House 's involvement will otherwise result only , in the final analysis , in a wedge being driven between the Commission and the Member States , and that will make full and democratic support quite simply impossible .
I would like to ask the Commissioner , as a matter of urgency , to stress , in the debates involving the Commission and the Member States , the necessity of Parliament 's approval being given in all areas , so that our system of values - about which we talk unceasingly - may remain intact not only when we talk about other countries , but also when we make policy for ourselves .

( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to thank Mr Mitchell and the coordinators , and to congratulate them for managing to assert , through shared moral values , the will of a directly elected Parliament , which they have achieved in part thanks to our support .
Development cooperation must lead to development and not to stagnation .
It must lead to the rule of law , to the development of a free economy and , in turn , to pluralism in decision-making and respect for human rights .
As many countries in the world have shown , economic development is not in itself sufficient .
The pursuit of economic openness and rapid economic development is not enough when , in the absence of the rule of law , there is political stagnation , a closed society , corruption and the usurpation of power .
Economic development of this kind leads to serious political failures and security problems , and ends in terrorism .
We in Parliament have at our disposal an instrument whereby we can place conditions on development aid , guiding and earmarking it so that criteria are properly met and genuine development is achieved .
This instrument lays down precise financial conditions and provides for precisely controlled funding for development programmes , including those of non-state beneficiaries and local authorities .
With everyone better off , it will be possible for Parliament to influence the final form of national strategic documents and to assess their implementation .
Speaking as a member of the Executive Committee of the World Movement for Democracy , I welcome the possibility of promoting genuine democracy via our democratically elected Parliament .
I should just like to promise that , in common with the other Members of this House , I shall make every effort to ensure that we work effectively in conjunction with the Commission and the Council to achieve development throughout the world .


Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Mitchell and Mr Van den Berg on their excellent work on the development cooperation instrument .
I have to say , though , that I strongly oppose the amendments put forward by Mr Mitchell on recital 18 , Article 5 and Article 12 .
In a few days ' time we will not have a separate line for the funding of sexual and reproductive health rights and I think it would be a grave injustice , in particular to the women who are at risk from very serious illnesses in maternity , to remove these references .
We are committed in various agreements already made by the European Parliament with the Commission , with the Council and in international agreements , to precisely the language that is contained already in this DCI , and it strikes me as disingenuous for Mr Mitchell to offer by way of explanation for these amendments the assertion that these matters cannot be dealt with in two lines .
These issues have been debated ad nauseam by this House and by most national parliaments and the outcome is always the same in this Parliament .
This Parliament stands behind the rights of people to choose independently their sexual activity , their sexual proclivities and their right to proper health services and to prevent the appalling death toll of something like 90 000 women who die annually as a result of backstreet abortions .
We need to end that and I believe we should leave the report as it stands .

( LT ) Today the congratulations are ringing out particularly loudly for rapporteur Mrs Mitchell , who has achieved a good compromise after two years of negotiations with the Council over a very important matter .
For the first time we have a definition of development policy that allows resources for the support of development cooperation to be directed only to those countries that are most in need of them .
One fifth of the funds will go to the areas of healthcare and education , which is socially equitable support for countries trying to liberate themselves from the stranglehold of poverty , disease and inadequate education .
It is very important that Parliament will be able to exercise ongoing control and to have an effect on the allocation of funds .
The compromise which is being worked out shows that this is essential .
I believe that developing countries will hail this constructive step of the European Parliament and the European Commission , which enables us to hope that the funding of EUR 17 billion will be allocated thoughtfully , with maximum benefit to people facing the greatest adversity .
It is important to spread this news within European Union countries as well , particularly in the new Member States .

Madam President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Mitchell and Mr van den Berg on the success of this report , which focuses on simplifying how EU aid would be spent in developing countries .
I also would like to state that unfortunately I will not be able to support the amendments that Mr Mitchell has tabled , for the same reasons as outlined by Mr De Rossa .
As he said , this is an issue that has been gone over on a number of occasions , both within Parliament and internationally .
I believe that we should stick to the agreements that have been there since Cairo .
' The US fights , the UN feeds and the EU funds ' .
Those are the words of a French international affairs student .
However unfair , that paints a picture of the importance of the EU to developing countries .
In recent years , the world has been tragically hit by disasters such as tsunamis , earthquakes in Pakistan and the recent flooding in Bangladesh .
The United Nations fund CERF was designed to fund and provide a rapid response to any sudden global emergencies and to provide critical funding which has already been put in place by international donors .
In the first five months of this year , CERF has provided EUR 200 million to more than 320 projects in 26 countries .
However , ECHO has refused to contribute to CERF to date , arguing that it has its own rapid funding mechanism for swift and even-handed funding in emergencies .
I would argue : what is the point in having two funds supposedly achieving the same goals ?
Why not have one central fund which deals with these emergencies ?
I would urge the EU Commissioner for Humanitarian Aid , Mr Michel , to open a line of discussions with the United Nations to streamline the global response to international emergencies .
Bureaucracy must not get in the way of saving people 's lives , because that is what we are talking about .
Let us not fight over two different funding blocs when the aim is to feed and fund the people who have been hit by disasters as quickly as we possibly can .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , I wish to thank you once again for this closing debate .
We had long negotiations , which at times were not easy , many formal and informal trialogues .
As always , every party has to make its points clear , and sometimes that takes time .
However , the important thing is that we get a good result in the end .
I have listened very carefully to all of you and I think we can all live with this result and we can look to the future .
There is now a new set of financial instruments and we want to ensure better external action and better visibility in favour of development , stability and human rights .
Let me now say a few words about some specific items mentioned in the debate .
On the question of sexual and reproductive health and rights , I am aware that the issue is of a very sensitive nature wherever it has come up in all the different fora .
It becomes an even more complex matter in a Union of 25 Member States , all of which have their own different traditions .
For this reason , the respective provisions in the Development Cooperation Instrument represent a finely balanced compromise , which I admit was difficult to achieve and which should not be reopened .
These provisions are largely taken from the old regulation on aid for actions on sexual and reproductive health and rights in developing countries .
Hence , these provisions already reflect a certain consensus as the old regulation was approved by Parliament in codecision .
Transferring the issue from the Development Cooperation Instrument to a separate regulation would not facilitate the problem , but rather protract the discussions on this very sensitive matter .
Such a solution would also go against the aim of simplification , which was the guiding principle for the reform of the external action instruments .
The respective provisions on the Development Cooperation Instrument reflect a balanced compromise , which most likely would not be improved by regulating the issue of sexual and reproductive health in a separate regulation .
I should also like to say a word on the question of the main thrust .
The Commission reaffirms that eradication of poverty and the pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals are at the core of the primary objective of its development assistance .
The Commission commits itself to prioritising basic health and education and social cohesion as a whole in its programming and implementing role for country programmes .
Moreover , the Commission will endeavour to ensure that a benchmark of 20 % of its allocated assistance under country programmes covered by the DCI will be dedicated by the year of review , 2009 , to basic and secondary education and basic health care .
But I also have to say that the DCI also contains a thematic programme on migration and asylum , which is the successor of the old AENEAS programme .
The contents of this thematic programme are the expression again of a finely balanced compromise , in particular with the Member States in the Council .
In the light of the challenges which the European Union is currently facing in the field of migration , the thematic programmes will respond to those needs .
Indeed the root causes of migration will primarily be addressed through our geographic cooperation - I have just spoken about that .
Those who have prospects will not migrate , but there are many others .
It is combating illegal migration on the one hand , and working for legal migration on the other .
We must not close our eyes to the fact that migration , and especially illegal migration , is one of the big challenges of our time that we have to face .
I look forward to putting those instruments to work , together with you .
We have to look to the future .
One of the most challenging questions throughout the negotiations on these new co-decided instruments was the role of Parliament in the strategic planning , as expressed in the strategy papers .
Based on the declarations attached for the interinstitutional agreement on the new financial perspectives , the modalities of a democratic scrutiny dialogue have been fleshed out in an exchange of letters with the committees concerned .
The first pilot country strategy paper will soon arrive in Parliament .
We now look forward to the implementation of that democratic scrutiny dialogue .
Regarding the ICI , I should like to say to Mr Martin and Mrs Mann that , as you know , the legal base is Article 181 ( a ) of the EC Treaty , which foresees the consultation procedure with Parliament in the legislative process .
But of course the Commission is always ready to exchange views with Parliament on aspects of cooperation with industrialised countries too .
We will certainly take the utmost account of any resolution that Parliament might adopt in that respect .
If , in the developing countries , we have not yet always seen the results we wanted to see , that is also because sometimes good governance has not yet been achieved .
That is another very important factor I should like to highlight because we are providing a lot of funding and we try to do our best .
Unfortunately , however , sometimes good governance is not there .
In conclusion , negotiations are always complicated , but what we wanted to have was simplification .
It is so important to simplify in order to achieve visibility and efficiency .
Reducing more than 40 different legislative instruments to seven policy-driven instruments has been difficult but I believe that in the end it has been a rewarding challenge .
Three new instruments are already in force : pre-accession , the neighbourhood policy instrument and the stability instrument .
Four instruments will be adopted shortly : the DCI and the ICI , the nuclear safety and the human rights and democracy instruments .
Everyone who has spoken today of the positive results of our negotiations on the DCI and the ICI has also seen that .
What this whole exercise has shown is that if we , the three institutions - the Commission , the Council and Parliament - work together in a constructive manner , in the end we can produce results of quality .
Again , I look forward to working together with you to secure a really good , efficient and visible implementation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon today .
Protection of groundwater against pollution and deterioration ( debate )


rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Members of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the environment is a broad field ; all human life on our continent is dependent on both air and water , and groundwater is among the most important and most vulnerable resources that we humans possess .
It recovers lost quantity only very slowly , and regains its original state only very slowly after pollution ; cleaning polluted groundwater can be done , if at all , only at enormous expense and with recourse to enormous technical resources .
Our experience with air is currently teaching us that all the measures we have taken over the past decade have proved insufficient to prevent climate change and all its deleterious side-effects .
Where air is concerned , we in Europe can accomplish relatively little unless other industrial states around the world lend a hand .
Where groundwater is concerned , here in Europe , we alone have the power to secure this precious good for future generations , and in that the precautions we take and the protection of the groundwater ecosystem are of the utmost importance .

This has been my core concern , the thing for which I , as rapporteur , have fought , and I am grateful to all those who have supported me in this , by which I mean primarily you , the Members of this House , for , without your convincing votes at first and second reading , we would not have been able to achieve the result that we did in the conciliation negotiations with the Council , even though we had the Commission 's support .
I would like to thank the Council and the representatives of the Commission for their constructive cooperation and for their support in the quest for compromises .
What , then , have we achieved ?
The protection of the groundwater ecosystem and the precautionary approach have been explicitly included , the latter of which meaning , with regard to groundwater , that water that is still clean must be kept in good or very good condition .
It means not leaving action until the conditions defined by the limit and threshold values as ' poor ' have already come about .
The reversal of trends and deterioration are regulated in such a way that not only the transition from good to poor conditions , but also ongoing increases in values within a category are considered and have to trigger action .
When laying down the threshold values for the materials described in part B of Annex 2 , the Member States shall be required to take account of knowledge concerning toxicity to humans and the environment as well as of hydrological conditions , in other words , of background levels , in order to be able to take better account of the differing conditions from one European region to another .
For the purpose of reviewing the effectiveness of these measures , the introduction of a review clause was especially important .
The observation on the Nitrate Directive in Annex 1 was deleted and the reference to it in Annex 4 has been expanded .
The targets for protection and repair laid down by the Nitrate Directive and the Water Framework Directive in conjunction with this Groundwater Directive , which is derived from them , are comparatively stringent , and the new Article 11 , on evaluation , is important in this regard .
The Commission 's reports on groundwater must include an assessment of this directive in its relation to other relevant environmental legislation - such as the Nitrate Directive - and of the degree to which it is in harmony with it .
The wording of the directive has now been made clearer and less ambiguous , with concepts such as ' background concentration ' , ' starting point ' , or ' significant upward trend ' being defined , and requirements that are unclear or open to reinterpretation being deleted .
Where its implementation is concerned , the Member States are allowed more scope for devising their own solutions , with the possibility left open of contractual agreements between , for example , farmers , water treatment companies , and local authorities , and , when the directive is adapted in future , this House will be allowed more scope for its own input , since the new comitology procedure enables it to raise objections when the lists of pollutants , indicators and limit values are altered , and its consent is required before specific substances can be deleted from the list .
The rural development regulation makes it possible for agriculturalists to be compensated for losses of income sustained by them in consequence of constraints imposed on their management of their land in order to protect groundwater .
We sought compromises , and we have managed to find them .
I am firmly convinced that we will be able to sustain and defend all this .
There are some irregularities remaining in the various language versions , and I ask the language service to iron them out .
The new groundwater directive will be an effective aid in protecting our groundwater , and so I ask all of you to vote to accept that which has emerged from the Conciliation Committee .
Member of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to both congratulate and thank the Parliament delegation that participated in the Conciliation Committee on 17 October .
In particular I would like to thank Mrs Roth-Behrendt , who chaired the Parliament delegation and rapporteur Mrs Klass on their outstanding work and the result they achieved .
The Conciliation Committee 's discussions were constructive .
As stated before by Mrs Klass , Parliament achieved positive results on certain important issues , especially on the vital issues of prevention of deterioration of groundwater and establishing quality standards for groundwater .
I am positive that Parliament will endorse the good results achieved by its delegation .
The European Commission supports the document that was adopted by the Conciliation Committee .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) When I entered the European Parliament two and a half years ago , I must admit I was afraid my fellow Members and I would become part of a Babelish confusion , and in fact , we would be able to do very little in terms of making decisions affecting half a billion citizens in Europe .
Well , now I am standing here and I can say that yesterday we helped to deliver the new chemical industry law , and today I may be actively involved in delivering another piece of legislation offering great hope : the law on groundwater protection .
I have spoken a great deal with Mrs Klaß , whom I would like to thank at this point for her selfless efforts , about how important and significant this law is . About how we cannot be allowed to pollute the water we drink , without which life on Earth cannot be sustained .
It is not that anyone would have argued against the principle of it , but when it got down to the nitty-gritty , touching on actual cooperation between Member States , nitrate limit values and protection zones , some countries started giving their own interests priority over the Community 's interests .
Finally , however , common sense prevailed and the agreement was adopted .
As a result of the successful ' trialogues ' , every citizen in Europe , regardless of whether their country shares a groundwater base with another country or not , is now in the same position , and will be able to enjoy a considerably higher level of water quality and safety than before .
It is now up to the Member States as to how they implement this law , how they integrate groundwater protection into their rural development policy and how they encourage agricultural practices to be adapted to this new directive .
Congratulations to Mrs Klaß , the Commission and Council on this water protection law which is of great importance to Europe .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like firstly to congratulate Mrs Klaß and the other Members for their work on the drawing up of this report .
I believe the result to be positive , thanks to the work of this House , which has improved it considerably , to the efforts that the Commission has made in helping us , and also , lastly , to the understanding of the Council in the Conciliation Committee .
Groundwater provides around 65 % of all of Europe 's drinking water .
The fact that we have obtained a definition of deterioration and that precaution and prevention are now seen as a principle , is really very positive .
In order to protect the environment as a whole and human health in particular , we must prevent and reduce the dangerous concentration of harmful pollutants in groundwater , I believe that this Directive is moving very much in the right direction .
The quality of water and , hence , the health of human beings are threatened by the presence of high concentrations of nitrates , pesticides , heavy metals , hydrocarbons and a long list of pollutants .
I am therefore particularly pleased with the agreement that we have reached with the Council , which will make it possible to implement a whole series of rules for preventing pollution and protecting groundwater .
These rules will oblige the Member States to prevent or restrict the entry of dangerous substances into groundwater , and in this field it is also very important that we take account of the different hydro-geological conditions in the different regions of Europe , because soil that continuously receives water is not the same as dry soil , which faces other kinds of problems .
Furthermore , I would like to stress the possibility for the Member States to establish protection areas of a size that the water authority , or other competent national body , considers necessary in order to protect drinking water supplies .
I believe that this is one of the most important elements to have been introduced .
I would like to end by calling on the Members to vote in favour of this report and I hope that the States will implement these measures as soon as possible , with a view to preserving the environment and protecting human health , thereby moving us in the direction of the sustainable Europe that we all want to see .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , Commissioner , my congratulations to the rapporteur Mrs Klaß , the EP delegation chairwoman , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Commissioner Dimas , the Council and all those who have made it possible for this directive to go through conciliation successfully .
Many will say that this directive is long overdue , and they are most probably right .
But , as my English colleagues wisely say , better late than never .
Many will also say that this directive does not go far enough in ensuring the utmost protection of our groundwater and they , too , are probably right ; but when the issue at hand is so complicated and when the stakes and stakeholders involved are so numerous and significant , the need for an agreed compromise is paramount and essential .
Indeed , some compromises were made , for example on nitrates and on the revision clause period , but these were part of an overall balanced and fair agreement .
On the other hand , issues like the protection of public health being sufficient justification for laying down more stringent limit values for pollutants such as pesticides were correctly re-emphasised in the directive .
Additionally , and most significantly , reference to the water framework directive was justifiably included in a recital .
But , perhaps most significantly , the EP delegation secured a broader role for Parliament in future decision-making and consequently a role in overall surveillance of correct and adequate implementation .
Indeed , implementation is an area where I feel that weaknesses may emerge and it cannot be emphasised too strongly that a watchful eye and strict adherence to the rules and regulations must be achieved if we are to secure high quality of our valuable groundwater reserves for ourselves and for future generations of Europeans .
In conclusion , we have before us a balanced and most satisfactory compromise that deserves our full and undivided support .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Klaß , Commissioner , that the groundwater directive has not been watered down amounts to a tremendous success , and the proposals now made are a real step in the right direction , although we would , of course , have expected even more .
As we know , 80 % of all drinking water is derived from groundwater , but 40 % of Europe 's groundwater is already polluted .
In Germany , the pollution of rivers in North Rhine-Westphalia and Bavaria through fluorinated tensides has made it abundantly clear in just what peril our number one nutrient now is .
That the groundwater directive now contains a legally binding ban on the introduction of pollutants into groundwater must be counted a success , and it is to be hoped that this will bring in strict and efficient measures for sustainable water protection .
It is cause for rejoicing that Parliament has torn up the ' shopping list ' of derogations from second reading , and fortunate that the agricultural lobby 's feeble excuses for upper limits on nitrate have been thrown out ; even farmers have to comply with the 50 microgram / litre tolerance limit , which is not actually that much to expect of them .
Nitrate is associated with cancer , and it has been found in Germany in concentrations of up to seven times those that are permitted , which makes it abundantly clear just how disturbing the situation is .

If this precious resource of ours is to be effectively protected , what we could actually do with is a limit value of less than 25 micrograms per litre .
Nitrates pollution continues to be the biggest and the most expensive problem where the protection of European groundwater is concerned , and so I regard it as seriously negligent of this House , and the Council too , to fail to push the case for protection against nitrates in order to set ambitious targets for it , but the fact that it has been confirmed and laid down that groundwater is , as such , to be protected , constitutes a major triumph .
We still know too little about the characteristics of our ecosystem , for preventive protection of groundwater is ten times as beneficial as measures to clear up the damage after it has been done , which are , in many cases , impossible .
We need to adopt the groundwater directive , and it must be the starting point for further measures to protect the environment .
In the forthcoming process of producing legislation on pesticides , I shall , in my capacity as rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , be paying very special attention to the maximum quantities of pesticides in groundwater , for it is important that that be dealt with if the groundwater is to be better protected .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the Directive on the protection of groundwater from pollution and deterioration is a necessary document .
It will have a positive effect on access to drinking water and water used in farming and industry , of which there is a shortage in many regions within the European Union .
Water is an economic and humanitarian matter in these regions .
Water shortages and the poor quality of the water available mean that it often needs to be delivered to holdings , where people work and live , from places ranging from a few to more than a dozen kilometres away .
The Directive does not restrict the implementation of national policies , which take into account the specific circumstances of individual countries .
It is a document which represents a compromise between our wishes and reality .
In its approved form , it is a document that is worth adopting .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Klaβ , for her work .
The UEN Group will support the jointly approved text of the Directive .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I too should like to congratulate Mrs Klaβ warmly on the result achieved .
Although the circumstances with regard to groundwater can be very different and the effects do not always extend across the border , it is useful nevertheless to have the prospect of a sound groundwater directive .
We have even managed to bring in the more ambitious requirement that the quality of groundwater should not deteriorate , and so , rather than fighting a running battle , we really are clamping down on pollution .
I am pleased that the directive has taken into consideration the specific protection measures that are already in place in some Member States , and I say that with particular reference to Denmark , which applies strict standards for pesticides on account of the fact that groundwater is used directly as drinking water .
Although the Treaty already provides for this , it is good that this directive explicitly confirms that Member States are allowed to take further action .
Finally , I should like to add that the option of withdrawing the current Nitrate Directive should be given serious consideration .
The objective , a limit value for nitrate , has already been laid down .
An effective regulation for the measuring method is also in place now .
The Nitrate Directive is now only about the means to achieve this end .
As I see it , the means should remain secondary to the end .
The mother can now throw away the bathwater with confidence , because the baby has now been washed , the mother , of course , being the framework directive on water , the bathwater being the Nitrate Directive and the daughter being the Groundwater Directive .
Madam President , the Commission , the Council and Parliament have all talked much of better regulation and removing duplication .
Yet here we have a new groundwater directive not to consolidate or replace , but to supplement , the existing directives : the Water Framework Directive and the Nitrates Directive .
The overregulated farmer , instead of having one clear-cut directive with which to comply , has to contend with aspects of four directives on this subject .
So , far from the promised rationalisation of legislation , we seem to be seeing more proliferation .
As for the assurance that loss of income suffered by farmers as a result of restriction on farming practices can be offset under the Rural Development Regulation , that is of no comfort in a country like the United Kingdom , where a large part of the funding for rural development is coming from the farmers themselves , through top-slicing their single farm payments via the misnamed ' voluntary modulation ' .
( DE ) Madam President , I , too , would like to thank Mrs Klaß for the outstanding work she has done .
When one first comes to the subject , one asks oneself who actually can be opposed to the protection of groundwater ; one ought , of course , to immediately answer that question with ' nobody ' , but , as we see , we have among us a number of Members from the United Kingdom who still take the view that these are rules and regulations of which we have no need .
It must , though , be clear to anyone that our primary source of sustenance , on which we depend for our existence more than on anything else , needs to be protected .
Perhaps the news has reached even the United Kingdom that groundwater does not stop at national borders , and that is why we have the task of enacting regulations applicable to Europe as a whole .
What is being taken here is a first step , and in that respect at any rate , Mrs Breyer has got it right .
We must keep on working on this , but let us just remember that we have laid down standard values for pesticides and for nitrates , and the Member States are mandated to specify , subject to their own national circumstances , limit values for ten other pollutants .
We have managed , through tough negotiations , to bring in a prohibition of deterioration .
All these things are milestones as we journey in the right direction , and it really would be completely wrong to say that Europe is doing nothing in this area .
Perhaps I might also point out that it is now , in fact , possible to use European funds to compensate for the losses in income of which some Members have spoken , and so , in other words , the European Union is helping , by making the necessary funds available , the farmers , some of whom would certainly find implementing this problematic .
It is also for the Member States to put in place comparable rules by way of standardised measurement and testing procedures .
As I see it , we have taken a very good step in the right direction , but it is only a first step , and we have more work to do .
I think it would be fundamentally wrong to demand ' less Europe ' in this area .

( DE ) Madam President , I too would like to join in the congratulations to our rapporteur , Mrs Klaß ; the adoption of this compromise from the conciliation committee brings us to the end of the process of legislating on this extremely important matter .
Groundwater is the most vulnerable of the European Union 's fresh water resources , and is one of the main sources for the public water supply not only in my own country but also in many other European regions .
Uniform standards for the most important pollutants , applicable right across Europe , are essential to the protection of our groundwater , for it is these alone that can prevent distortions of competition and environmental dumping .
This directive lays down limit values for nitrates and pesticides right across Europe , leaving it to the Member States to bring in their own threshold values for other pollutants such as arsenic , mercury , lead and chlorine .
The limit value laid down for nitrate is 50 mg .
It is fortunate that this House 's demands , and the pressure it brought to bear , meant that the derogations provided in the Common Position in respect of agricultural activities could be deleted , for it is still the case that agriculture is primarily responsible for the pollution of our groundwater in many European regions , and if it is to be better protected , the practices of those engaged in agriculture and forestry in many parts of Europe will have to change .
The directive on the protection of groundwater obliges the Member States to take all action necessary to prevent hazardous substances finding their way into groundwater .
That they will in future be obliged to actually take these steps and will no longer be allowed merely to aim to do so is another of the significant triumphs of the conciliation process .
Even though the right of the Member States to take more stringent measures is already specified in the treaties , I am delighted that this principle has once again been explicitly entrenched in the groundwater directive .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , water is one of the most abundant resources on the planet : the oceans and seas cover 70 % of the Earth 's surface and produce three quarters of the oxygen we breathe .
However , we can only actually use 1 % of this water , and many human activities are putting a major strain on the resource .
Polluted water , regardless of where the pollution comes from , gets back into nature one way or another , and is therefore liable to harm human health and the environment .
This proposal for a directive is a step forward for the protection of groundwater and in preventing its deterioration , because it provides for compliance with the precautionary principle , specifically in Article 6 .
It will now be the responsibility of the Member States to take the necessary measures to prevent and limit the discharge of hazardous substances by defining zones to guarantee the protection of the bodies of water in question .
Farmers will be able to obtain compensation to cover the loss of revenue attributable to the obligations imposed in the protection zones , particularly in drinking water catchment zones .
Parliament will also be more deeply involved in future decisions , because it will be able to oppose amendments to the list of pollutants .
I would therefore like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Klaß , and Mr Florenz and Mrs Roth-Behrendt for the tenacity they demonstrated during the negotiations with the Council and the Commission .
Parliament 's delegation succeeded in toughening the obligations imposed on Member States with regard to the protection of groundwater .
Under these circumstances , I recommend that we adopt the joint draft at third reading .
( SV ) Madam President , we have reached agreement , and it is now important that these things be properly implemented .
I should , of course , have liked the Member States to have been forced to take measures whenever a tendency to exceed the limit values is noted instead of once we have already damaged the groundwater irreparably .
In spite of everything , however , this compromise has its advantages .
I am particularly pleased about the opportunity it gives countries to ban dangerous chemicals throughout their territories in order to protect their drinking water .
I think that this is a good addition .
We must remember that , in the future , it is climate change that may be still more of a factor in destroying the groundwater .
It is important for us to take measures to combat climate change , as a further problem will arise if there are floods that sweep through , for example , poison stores in factories , causing the poison to end up in our watercourses and then to sink down into the groundwater .
Firstly , then , we need the Groundwater Directive , but we must solve the climate problems if we are to have a chance of protecting the groundwater in the future .
Madam President , I also wish to thank Mrs Klaß and the parliamentary team .
At this stage in the process so much has been said that I shall use this minute to recall some basics on groundwater .
It is important to remember that groundwater is very different to surface water , which moves in a continuously renewing cycle of flow , evaporation , precipitation and flow .
Only some groundwater is renewable and it can take water a very long time to percolate through the layers of the Earth 's crust to renew the underground source which we can so quickly deplete . Some sources of groundwater are not renewable .
We sink wells which , once exploited , go dry .
Lastly , pollution works in two ways .
Groundwater may be safe to use or it may not .
During the UN International Water Decade in the 1980s , deep bore wells were drilled in parts of water-starved India .
By the end of the decade people were beginning to show symptoms of skeletal sclerosis .
Now six million people suffer from severe skeletal sclerosis and 66 million to a lesser degree from naturally contaminated water .
As we search for more sources of water , it is important that groundwater be protected from pollution , but it is also important to remember that protection from pollution works two ways .
Madam President , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Klaß , and the Chair of the Conciliation Committee , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , for this very good report and for the agreement that was achieved with the Council .
Clean water is , clearly , vital to life , and we are fortunate in Europe to have , at least relatively speaking , an abundant supply .
We must maintain , and indeed improve , the quality of that supply , reversing the damage already done .
I believe that in Ireland , in particular , considerable damage has been done by illegal landfill sites and the abundant spreading of pig slurry by farmers on land .
Despite the concessions made to the Council , I still believe we have a strong defence of the environment and water supply here .
The key points are the ' protection against deterioration ' requirement on Member States , the requirement that nitrate quality standards be consistent with the Water Framework Directive and the requirement for a revision to be carried out every six years .
Finally , I want to refer to the enhanced role of Parliament under the new comitology procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon today .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.00 p.m. and resumed at 11.30 p.m. )

Welcome
I would like to welcome to the official gallery a delegation from the Afghan Parliament led by the President of the National Assembly of Afghanistan , Mr Mohammad Yonus Qanoni .

( Loud applause )
Mr Mohammad Yonus Qanoni is accompanied by four other Members of the Afghan Parliament .
Tomorrow I will have the pleasure of meeting this delegation personally . It has already held an exchange of views with the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Development .
We welcome you most warmly and we would invite you to remain in the gallery for the award of the Sakharov Prize to Mr Milinkievitch and , later on , the important debate on the European Union 's annual report on human rights .
1 .
Nomination of the Bulgarian Commissioner ( vote )
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
We shall begin with the proposals for decisions on the appointments of the new Commissioners nominated by Bulgaria and Romania , respectively .
The President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , will speak on its behalf .
President of the Commission .
Mr President , today you are asked to give your opinion on the appointment of the two Commissioners that have been nominated by Bulgaria and Romania , Mrs Meglena Kuneva and Mr Leonard Orban .
It is the first time that an accession treaty explicitly makes provision for consultation of the European Parliament on the appointment of Commissioners from new Member States .
I very much welcome this important role given to your institution as it increases both the democratic rights of Parliament and the Commission 's accountability .
I stand here before you today to ask for your approval of our two new colleagues .
I do this because I sincerely believe that they both fulfil the highest standards .
The approval by the European Parliament of the appointment of the two Commissioners-designate will allow the Council to formally appoint them .
Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban will thus become full Members of the Commission as of 1 January 2007 .
As Commission President I am particularly happy and proud that Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban - two remarkable personalities - will join my team .
Both have worked incredibly hard to help their countries to successfully complete their final preparations for accession .
With their experience and their European conviction , both will bring a valuable contribution to the collegial work of the Commission on moving Europe forward , including the institutional settlement necessary to ensure a more democratic , transparent and efficient Europe .
In the course of the last weeks many of you had the opportunity to get to know the two Commissioners-designate , be it in a bilateral context or through the hearings .
Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban have successfully passed in the relevant parliamentary committees .
It is my firm belief that both candidates in the course of the hearings proved their personal integrity and independence , their general competence and professional experience , as well as their deep and genuine European commitment .
The promotion of linguistic and cultural diversity in the European Union touches the very substance of our European values and identity and is the prerequisite for communicating Europe and multicultural dialogue .
I am sure that Mr Orban is the right person to do this job .
The protection of consumer rights is central to the interests of each and every one of our citizens .
I am sure that Mrs Kuneva is the best person to do this .
1 January 2007 will be a truly historic moment .
The accession of Bulgaria and Romania will complete the fifth enlargement of the European Union .
Enlargement has not only contributed to peace , prosperity and stability throughout Europe but has also made all of us richer socially , economically , and culturally .
With Bulgaria and Romania becoming members of the European Union , we will see the fulfilment of the ambitions and hopes of so many people who have fought for freedom in Europe for so long .
The new Member States will now be firmly anchored in the community of European values which inform and permeate the public purpose of the European Union .
Their rightful place at the heart of this community will give them new confidence and new dynamism which I am sure will generate benefits for the whole of our Union .
( Applause )

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am , quite honestly , surprised at being called on to speak right now , but life is always full of surprises .
I was very glad to hear what the President of the Commission had to say : the hearings have been held , and the result is that both Mrs Kunewa and Mr Orban have met with the approval of the relevant committees .
It is for me an honour and a joy to be able to affirm these two Commissioners ; we , in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will endeavour to work very well with both of them .
We have the goodwill to do so , and we say ' yes ' to the appointment of both of them .
( Applause )

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the hearing of members of the Commission is an important prerogative of this House ; it is one that we take seriously , and it appears to us that the Commission does so too .

It is for that reason that Mr Vosgenian , the first Romanian candidate , did not even get as far as a hearing that he would not have got through , and you , Mr President of the Commission , did the right thing in learning from that and taking action to get another candidate ; that shows that Europe 's democratic structures work when the institutions take their roles seriously .
Far from being a formality , these hearings are a real testing process , and the Socialist Group in this House believes that both candidates , Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban , have come through it well , and that they are equal to the task allotted to them , and so we will be voting in favour of both of them being appointed .






Even so , it still has to be said that the letter you , Mr Barroso , wrote in response to our questions , does nothing to make it any the clearer precisely what portfolio has been allocated to Mr Orban , and that shows that the search for a portfolio in a Commission consisting of 27 members can be interpreted to mean only that this Commission is being formed on the basis of the Treaty of Nice , a treaty that was , in the opinion of those who drafted it , not even suitable for 15 states , and it certainly does not work for 27 of them .

( Applause )
Institutionally speaking , then , we have reached our limit .
This criticism must neither be held back nor taken to be directed at Mrs Kuneva or Mr Orban , for it is to the discredit of neither of them .


Now , Mr Orban , Mrs Kuneva , we knew even before the hearings that neither of you are enthusiastic supporters of the social democratic movement , but we will not hold that against you , for everyone has the right to be wrong ; even so , though , we appeal to you to take care , when you become members of the college , that that college does not lose sight of the need for a political balance , in Europe , between economic and social responsibility .
By voting for you , we are expressing our confidence that you will come to see that .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the imminence of the accession of Romania and Bulgaria is underlined by today 's vote on the nominees for the posts of two Commissioners and two Members of the Court of Auditors .
Both Meglena Kuneva and Leonard Orban were deeply involved in the negotiations for their respective countries ' membership .
Each was dealt a tough hand of cards , especially if you think of the distance that each country has travelled on its road to membership .
It proved tougher than expected and needed two years more than other countries emerging from the former Europe .
We must learn now to adapt our Union to a wider membership - a fuller house - with inevitable family disputes .
All must learn to give a bit if they are to take .
Whether we yet have a full house , of course , is still a matter for debate and maybe Mr Brok would enlighten us towards the end of this week ?
It is fitting that those who bore the burden of accession negotiations bear some of the fruit of their labours .
Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban have a great deal to contribute to Europe .
The depth of knowledge they have gleaned from the talks will stand them in good stead for their collegial decision-making on the upper floors of the Berlaymont .
Whether they choose to play the Queen of Hearts or the Ace of Spades in President Barroso 's House of Cards is up to them , but I remain convinced that Romania and Bulgaria will be an asset to the Union , and not a burden as some would have us believe .
I know that some in this House are thinking of voting against one of the nominees for the Court of Auditors .
If we are serious about bringing two countries into the Union , let us be serious about bringing them in properly and not play games with the nominees .
Let me offer a word of advice to President Barroso as he chews on how to use the talents of his two latest recruits : there are not enough jobs for 27 Commissioners .
That is why we supported the Constitution 's provisions to slim the College down .
Please ensure that Members of the Commission act in the Community interest and not as representatives of their home states ; define their jobs clearly , more clearly than you have done in your letter to President Borrell , allegedly ' clarifying ' the role of intercultural dialogue .
It has left many of us with more questions than answers .
However , we wish you success .
We wish the two new Commissioners success and we expect that you will do the job we need to advance the cause of Europe .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the President of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will vote in favour of the integration of Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban into the Commission .

We would like to congratulate them on their nomination and we hope that they will be able to work in a team whose internal cohesion , motivation and European vision is not , unfortunately , that which we hope for and which the European Union needs .
In this respect , our vote of approval today is more a sign of welcome to the two new Member States , represented here by the two new Commissioners , than support for the current Commission and its policy .
Mrs Kuneva , you will very quickly become aware that , in the Commission that you are entering today , the industrial lobbies have much easier access and much easier lives than the consumer movements .
I hope that you will be able to introduce change and stand up to this in some way .
Mr Orban , you will quickly become aware that protecting the cultural dimension of the European Union is a very difficult task , in a Commission which is perhaps too open to one part of our world rather than to others .
Mr President , casting our vote of approval in this matter for us also means setting a precedent in some way , by voting on individual Commissioners ; this is something that we have often called for and that we hope to be able to do in the future .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , I would like , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to welcome our two new Commissioners , Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban .
My group will approve these two nominations .
I myself would have preferred it if the President of the Commission had made the most of the conclusion of this stage of enlargement to engage in a fundamental debate on an interim assessment of his Commission , to reshuffle the cards within the enlarged Commission , if appropriate , and , finally , to submit the whole of his team to Parliament 's vote .
At a time when so many questions are being asked about the operation , the direction and the future of the EU , this would have done the Commission 's authority and parliamentary democracy no harm at all .
As we can see , this was not what was decided .
Even so , all the best to Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , today we mark another step in the progress of Romania and Bulgaria towards welcoming them back into the family of democratic nations within the European Union .
I welcome the appointment of Commissioner-designate Kuneva and Commissioner-designate Orban , and I hope that all colleagues within this Chamber will not use political points to try and attack them in the important role that they will undertake in the future .
In particular , the respect for diversity that will be required in the European Union of the 21st century is encompassed by the portfolio that Commissioner Orban will have , and I call on all colleagues to be as generous as possible towards him , and to all the Commissioners , but in particular to be helpful towards him in suggesting new ways in which that diversity can be protected within the European Union .
Finally , at this important juncture , it is vital that all peoples across Europe come together and unite , and understand that , no matter what may divide us in our different ideologies , or in our different political opinions , or , indeed , in our different religions , the things that bring us together , the things that we share , are far more powerful and far greater , in order to effect change for the good , not only in Europe but on the world stage .
Rather than being bogged down in mere politics , let us look to the bigger picture .
Let us grasp the opportunities that have been given to Romania and Bulgaria today , but , most importantly of all , let us grasp the opportunities which have been given to the European Union to act as a beacon of hope , of democracy , of freedom , of respect for human rights , across the world .
In particular , let us ensure that we can do this collectively for the betterment of all mankind .
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , today we are being asked to approve the nomination of European Commissioners from Bulgaria and Romania .
Well , I do not approve .
I voted against the accession of Bulgaria and Romania , as did many of my colleagues from the IND / DEM Group .
My colleagues and I from the UK Independence Party were vilified in 2004 because we opposed the accession , but we did so for several reasons , not least that we are totally opposed to the European Union 's empire-building because it is a thoroughly undemocratic organisation that undermines self-government .
We also voted against it because we knew that there would be mass migration from some of the new Member States to Britain - a mass migration with which my country 's infrastructure cannot cope .
Two years later we have been shown to be right : an estimated 650 000 people came to Britain from the accession countries during the first year of membership .
Furthermore , such has been the drain of skilled workers , that we now have the ridiculous situation in which the President of Poland is putting out statements calling for his fellow countrymen to return to their homeland .
Will the EU empire-builders ever consider the immense social cost of their actions ?
We now stand at the cusp of a tragedy : two further countries , which have recently thrown off the yoke of communism and grasped their freedom , are about to throw it away by taking on the yoke of Brussels , with all its suffocating bureaucracy and its relentless pursuit of power .
It will not be many years before Bulgaria and Romania discover what a mistake they have made in subjecting themselves to the will of an intolerant European Commission .
It will be like exchanging an iron curtain for a vast curtain of paper , which could end up being almost as big a threat to civil liberties and prosperity as was its predecessor .
Freedom is indivisible .
It should never be given up in the pursuit of economic gain , particularly when it has been won at such a high price .
( Applause )

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to add two quick comments to what Mr Titford has just said with regard to these Commissioners from two friendly nations - one Slavic and the other Latin - which have recently been freed , it is true , from the yoke of communism , and who we hope will not find themselves under another yoke .
My first comment is that Mr Orban 's portfolio , multilingualism , must treat the learning and use of the national languages of the Member States as a priority , including within the European institutions .
In a little while , ladies and gentlemen , we are going to give our opinion on the appointment of two members of the Court of Auditors .
I have in front of me the French versions of those reports : one of them has been drawn up by Mr Pomés Ruiz , a Spanish rapporteur , on the Bulgarian candidate ; the other , by a Hungarian rapporteur , on a Romanian candidate !
In these French versions , the biographies of the members of the Court of Auditors and the questionnaires are in English .
So there we have an important area for Mr Orban to work on : ensuring that linguistic diversity is respected in our institutions !
I would also like to wish Mrs Kuneva good luck .
She has had a very difficult job defending the interests of her fellow Bulgarians during the negotiations : I hope that she will find it easier to defend the interests of European consumers .
I would finally like to say that we are opposed to the application of the protocol annexed to the Treaty of Nice that states that , from the point when the European Union has 27 Members , the number of Commissioners will be less than the number of Member States , which would deny some of them any representation within that institution .
We have two and a half more years to show that that measure is entirely useless and contrary to the equality amongst nations that should govern the future of our international organisation .
We shall now proceed to the vote on the proposal for a decision on the appointment of the new Commissioner proposed by the Republic of Bulgaria , Mrs Meglena Kuneva .
The vote will be by roll call in accordance with Rule 99 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
( Parliament approved the decision )
( Loud applause )
Thank you very much .
Congratulations , Mrs Kuneva .
Few Commissioners have received such long and loud applause as you .
2 .
Nomination of the Romanian Commissioner ( vote )
We shall continue with the vote and vote on the proposal for a decision on the appointment of the new Commissioner proposed by Romania , Mr Leonard Orban .
( Parliament approved the decision )
( Loud applause )
Thank you and congratulations to you too , Mr Orban .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments while awaiting the award ceremony for the Sakharov Prize and resumed at 12 noon )
Voting time
Formal sitting - Award of the 2006 Sakharov Prize
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , it is a great pleasure for the European Parliament to receive the winner of the 2006 Sakharov Prize , Mr Milinkievitch , leader of the opposition United Democratic Forces in Belarus .
Please believe me , Mr Milinkievitch , when I say that we are particularly happy to have you here with us today .
( Applause )
There have been times when we thought that you would not be able to come .
Our Sakharov Prize winners have often been unable to come here to receive the prize .
Aung San Suu Kyi , Wei Jingsheng and the Women in White have regrettably been unable to attend this ceremony .
We should remember that we Europeans , at home in our consolidated democracies , often take human rights for granted , seeing them as something natural and indisputable , like the air we breathe .
We enjoy our political and civil freedoms , sometimes forgetting what it costs to obtain them and accustomed to exercising them .
We become accustomed to good things very quickly , and even countries that have obtained freedom later enjoy it as if they have always had it and as if everybody had it .
We must remember , however , that billions of people on our planet lack the freedom that we enjoy .
Our Union is based on respect for human rights , and defending them and promoting them around the world is part of our raison d 'être .
Not just for moral reasons , but also in our own interest .
In terms of Europe 's interests , it is a priority that our freedom should be exercised by the whole of humanity .
The Sakharov Prize is therefore an expression of the European Union 's defence of and commitment to human rights , and this year it is being awarded to a person who is dedicating his life to the fight for freedom in his country .
Everybody knows that the presidential elections in Belarus in March were neither free nor fair and that the European Union was not able to send its observers , their access to the country being denied .
Mr Milinkievitch has had the courage to challenge the last dictatorship in Europe ; he has managed to unite the democratic opposition forces in order to restore political rights and freedoms in his country .
He has headed mass demonstrations and has been arrested for urging his fellow countrymen to defend their fundamental rights .
Mr Milinkievitch , you have become a symbol of resistance to oppression and of hope for a democratic future .
We share your ambition that Belarusian society should obtain the right to elect its leaders democratically , the right to independent information , the right to create non-governmental organisations and the right to an independent and impartial judiciary .
That is something that the European Parliament has always defended .
We have protested against the violence , the arbitrary arrests and the politically-motivated sentences by the Belarusian regime against people fighting for fundamental rights in that country .
The Prize that you are receiving today is a demonstration of our support for all of the people fighting alongside you .
This is not the first time that we have awarded this prize to people from Belarus .
In 2004 , this Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize to the Belarus Association of Journalists , to professionals who were risking their lives in order to discover the truth and to make it known .
Today , two years later , we are once again showing our full support for the fight for democracy in Belarus , because things have not improved since then .
The death penalty is still carried out regularly in that country .
I wish to condemn the arrest and sentencing of Aleksander Kazulin , who is currently on hunger strike in prison , and I wish to tell you that we are convinced that Belarus 's future lies in sharing in the freedom and prosperity of democratic Europe .
You are a scientist , Mr Milinkievitch , as was Andrei Sakharov himself .
Both of you have shared the same opinions , the same values and the same education and you have experienced the same tragic consequences of confronting a totalitarian regime .
Today , the prize bearing the name of the scientist Sakharov is being awarded to another scientist , but above all it is being awarded to the hope of a democratic Belarus and to all the people fighting alongside you to make it a reality .
You have the floor , Mr Milinkievitch .
( Sustained applause )
( The President awarded the Sakharov Prize )
leader of the democratic opposition in Belarus .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall speak in my mother tongue because I would like to say what I think , and I always think in Belarusian .
I am therefore going to speak in the language that best allows me to express my feelings .
( Parliament stood and applauded Mr Milinkievitch . )
( The speaker spoke in his mother tongue , the text below being a translation )
I would like to begin by thanking the European Parliament most warmly for awarding me this high honour , the Andrei Sakharov Prize , named after the brilliant physicist and ardent defender of human rights .
I would also like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak to you .
This prize is not for me alone !
It is for all the Belarusians , for all of those who were in the square in Minsk last March , who have been thrown into prison and expelled from universities and workplaces .
This prize is for all of those who are carrying on with the fight .
There are many of us !
We are the ones who want Belarus to return to the family of European democracies and who are ready to sacrifice our personal well-being , our freedom and even our lives to get there .
Belarus has always been a European country .
It has given a lot to Europe , making many sacrifices .
In the 19th century , it gave Europe a prototype for a first democratic constitution , the statute of the Grand-Duchy of Lithuania .
It gave the world several eminent personalities , such as Guillaume Apollinaire , Marc Chagall , Fyodor Dostoevsky , Dimitri Shostakovich and Tadeusz Kościuszko .
The Belarusians were the second in Europe to translate the Bible into their mother tongue .
During the Second World War , it was in Belarus that the most powerful resistance movement in Europe emerged , costing the lives of one out of every three inhabitants .
Of the six million Jews exterminated in the Holocaust , one million came from Belarus .
If anyone deserves freedom , it is us !
We have earned it through the whole of our history and the sacrifices we have made on its behalf .
Every century , as a result of endless wars , Belarus lost from a quarter to a third of its sons and daughters .
It lost its elite .
Our people have suffered the forced uprooting of their national identity and the eradication of their historical memory .
In 1991 , we were delighted to finally achieve our independence , but at the time we did not realise that freedom and independence are not the same thing .
Today , we are once again fighting for freedom and defending our independence .
We are doing so not just for ourselves , but also for our children , who , like French , Lithuanian , Polish and British children , have the right to live in a free country .
It was our children who spent long nights standing on the square in Minsk after the elections on 19 March , when the adults could not stand the cold and returned to their homes .
It was our children who were thrown into closed lorries , suffocating , and imprisoned , while their parents spent days looking for them .
It was our children who , having been released from prison , were expelled from universities for their choice of conscience .
But not for one moment did they doubt the justice of our common choice .
I am proud of them .
Throughout the week following the elections , when we were remaining on the square and protesting against the outrageous falsification of the results of those elections , the authorities arrested more than a thousand people .
Minsk 's prisons had never been full to bursting : that was exactly what happened during that week .
The regime realised that that protest movement could only be ended by military force .
That is why , during those few days , the authorities arrested everybody who came to the square , even those who were simply bringing food , water and warm clothing to the people living in the ' tent city ' .
On 19 March , the authorities did not expect to see tens of thousands of people coming out , despite the threat of reprisals .
That was our first victory .
I am very well aware that we will need many more similar victories before we can put an end to that illegal regime .
The former presidential candidate , Mr Aliaksandr Kazulin , is now in prison , sentenced to five and a half years .
He has now been on hunger strike for more than 50 days .
His state of health is extremely serious : he has lost 40 kilos , and his life is in danger .
This prize is also for him , and for Zmitser Dachkevitch , Pavel Seviarynets , Mikola Statkevitch and Andreï Klimaǔ and all of the other political prisoners in my country .
This prize is a sign of Europe 's awareness of the situation in Belarus .
This prize is a wonderful example of moral politics .
This prize is a recognition of Belarus 's European future .
This high distinction today could have been received by the person who was the leader of the Belarusian democratic movement for several years , Professor Hienadź Karpienka . Or by the former Internal Affairs Minister , Yury Zakharanka .
Or by Viktar Hantchar , the vice-president of the last legitimate parliament in Belarus .
These people are heroes , fighters for the freedom of Belarus , but they have disappeared without trace or have been murdered . These are the methods , as old as human hate and as horrifically outmoded as the inquisition , that the Belarusian authorities currently use against their opponents .
In his speech on receiving the Nobel Peace Prize , Andrei Sakharov said : ' I am convinced that international trust , mutual understanding , disarmament and international security are not possible without an open society with freedom of information , freedom of conscience , glasnost , the right to travel and the right to choose one 's country of residence ' .
I share that view .
The academic Sakharov always preached non-violent resistance .
I agree with him in that regard too .
We have everything we need to win : faith in Belarus 's European future , solidarity , courage and experience .
For many young people , blue - the colour of the European flag - has become a symbol .
In March , that flag was raised alongside our white , red and white national flag .
As a sign of those countries ' solidarity with us , the flags of Lithuania , of Ukraine , of Poland , of Russia , of Estonia , of Azerbaijan and of Georgia were also flown .
We must conquer the fear that has impregnated people 's consciences over the last ten years as a result of constant propaganda .
Andrei Sakharov issued a warning : ' Freedom of thought is the only safeguard against the contamination of people by collective myths , which , in the hands of perfidious hypocrites and demagogues , can turn into a bloody dictatorship ' .
That is what is happening today in Belarus .
Monuments to the glory of Stalin are reappearing .
Resurrecting the ' best ' traditions of the Soviet system , the official media endlessly pours out torrents of lies and slander , as in Sakharov 's era .
The main enemy is the West and local democrats are depicted as its agents .
The regime is in a difficult situation today .
Its planned economy is not efficient , and Russia is threatening to put an end to economic preferences .
For that reason , the government is getting nervous and is trying to blame its political opponents .
At the end of November , at his meeting with Ukrainian journalists , Mr Lukachenka stated that , ' this opposition sneaks abroad to call for the application of economic sanctions against the country and is then happy that gas prices are going to rise tomorrow ' .
I would like to take this opportunity to state from this European platform , taking full responsibility and to everybody , particularly the Belarusian people , that these are lies !
We have never called for economic sanctions against our country and we are perfectly aware that such sanctions primarily hit the ordinary citizens of Belarus .
The regime in power will always find ways to sustain its officials .
We have always stated that Russian gas would no longer be cheap for Belarus , that it was going to become expensive in Russia itself .
It is a shame that the Belarusian leaders have not taken the opportunity that had presented itself and that they have not taken advantage of the possibilities they have had for a long time to carry out real economic reforms .
Now the Belarusian people are going to suffer the consequences .
The main conditions that Moscow currently imposes on Mr Lukachenko in return for their long-standing economic and political support include joining the monetary union , effectively the Russian rouble , and the adoption of the constitutional act of what the Russians call the ' Union State ' .
Accepting these conditions would inevitably mean a loss of sovereignty for Belarus .
The Belarusian political leaders are currently still resisting a move in that direction .
Mr Lukachenka has recently openly expressed his concern about the country 's independence .
He talks about the link , which Belarusian democratic forces have been talking about for a long time , between independence and well-being .
But in his case , defending independence must not be confused with defending his personal interests and his desire to hold on to power at all costs .
He and his entourage are perfectly aware that , with the loss of independence and the arrival of Russian capital in the country , very few of them would keep their positions or their wealth .
We cannot rule out the possibility , however , that , led by an instinct for self-preservation , the Belarusian regime will accept Moscow 's conditions and call a referendum to approve them .
There can be no doubt that only democracy , rather than dictatorship , can guarantee Belarus 's independence .
The fact that we have not so far found a common language with Moscow does not mean that the Belarusian democratic forces are against Russia .
We want to live in a sovereign State and build the best possible relations with Russia .
We are prepared to take account of its interests , provided that they do not run counter to our own interests .
Russia is a strategic partner for us , as it is for the EU .
A democratic Belarus will be a credible and reliable friend to Russia .
We believe that banning entry to the countries of the European Union for people violating the Constitution and participating in repression is a very effective measure .
This list of enemies of democracy should be extended .
At the same time , I would appeal to you not to increase the cost of Schengen visas for Belarusian citizens .
From 1 January 2007 , the cost of a Schengen visa is expected to be EUR 60 .
For the overwhelming majority of Belarusians who desperately need free contacts with the West , that cost would be prohibitive .
That decision is in danger of creating a new ' iron curtain ' .
These measures will benefit Mr Lukachenka , who is always telling the Belarusian people that ' nobody wants us in the West ' .
We were very pleased with the European Commission 's proposals last month .
They offer Mr Lukachenka 's government a good opportunity to leave behind the international self-isolation and the poor economic situation that it is stuck in .
Aliaksandr Lukachenka himself was obliged to acknowledge , at the meeting of the government , that next year will be ' catastrophically tough ' .
If the regime accepts these proposals , Belarus will be able to receive considerable support for the launching of the political and socio-economic reforms that have been so necessary for so long , and to begin a genuine rapprochement with Europe , including by means of gradual economic integration .
However , there is practically no hope that the Belarusian Government will accept the course of rapprochement with the European Union .
There have already been plenty of similar proposals , but the regime has never responded in a positive concrete fashion .
Its faithful are perfectly aware that , once it is launched , democratisation will inevitably and very quickly put an end to their stranglehold .
The current leader of Belarus would never win genuine free elections .
At the same time , this European Union proposal offers us the opportunity to make the citizens of our country understand that , despite what the State propaganda says , Europe is leaving the door open to Belarus , but to a free and democratic Belarus .
These proposals have appeared at a very appropriate time , during the local election campaign .
There will be no genuine elections , just as there is no genuine local government in Belarus .
Within the context of that campaign , we are distributing information on the European Union 's proposals .
We appreciate your assistance very much and we thank you most warmly for it .
I would , however , ask you to extend it and make it more flexible .
We are talking about things that are already well-known : assistance for free media , support for civil society and for repressed people .
The European Union 's current programmes are drawn up for countries that are already moving towards democracy and carrying out reforms , but they cannot work in the case of Belarus .
In order to promote democracy in countries such as mine , it is high time that a European Fund for democracy were created with real resources geared towards countries with dictatorial regimes .
Europe must not shrug its shoulders and say ' what can we do about it ? ' .
There is a lot you can do !
You can help us to break down the barriers to information and the restricted view of the world imposed upon my fellow countrymen by government propaganda , to create a public space conducive to open debate amongst the citizens , bringing together independent authors , intellectuals and moral authorities .
This will undoubtedly help civil society in Belarus to develop more quickly .
Europe 's recent message to the Belarusian people was both a demonstration of your solidarity and a reminder to the current regime of its responsibility for its crimes .
The most important thing , however , is that that message should make clear that our country belongs in Europe .
It is my profound conviction that Europe will never be complete without Belarus .
That is why we repeat the same slogans as my ancestors who rose up against tyranny for the sake of freedom : ' For your freedom and for ours . '
As a Belarusian and a citizen of a European country , I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart and I also thank you on behalf of all of those people who were on the square in March and those who have been , or still are , in prison for defending their fundamental right to live in a free country .
I thank you for having faith in our victory .
I promise you that our victory will not be long in coming .
My country has changed .
It is less afraid and it believes in change .
Belarus will soon return to the European family and will once again be a free and democratic State .
Historically , dictatorships have no future and , as history shows , they end badly for the tyrants .
Under a dictatorship , the only real option is to fight , simply because we have no other choice .
Thank you for your support and long live Belarus !
( Parliament stood and applauded the speaker )
Thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen .
Thank you , Mr Milinkievitch .
The European Parliament is proud to have awarded you this Prize and is sure that the words you have spoken today will go down in history .
( Applause )
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments while awaiting the continuation of the vote )
Agenda : see Minutes
( DE ) Mr President , this morning 's sitting was yet another that ended half an hour early , and Mrs Kaufmann , who was in the chair , deserves thanks for having apologised for this to the visitors who were pouring in at the time .
I would ask that the person in the chair at any given time be given a bit more speaking time if it is in any case clear that the sitting is going to end earlier .
It is not good for visitors to come into the Chamber in the expectation of hearing a reasonably interesting debate , and then to find the place empty .
It would be possible to be a bit more flexible in this respect , and it would keep the Members happy too .
( Applause )
I share your desire for flexibility , Mr Swoboda .
I am very firm when time is limited .
When possible , I would like to increase the maximum speaking time .
Having said that , when the agenda 's time , and the Members ' time , has run out , what can we do ?
Mr President , may I just say in that regard that you do not only have the option of letting speakers speak for longer , you also have the option of taking additional speakers under the ' catch the eye ' procedure , which is perfectly within the Rules of Procedure .
Of course , Mr Corbett , provided that the speakers in question are here , because a President cannot give the floor to absent Members !
1 .
Nomination of the Bulgarian Member of the Court of Auditors ( vote )
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to invoke the Rules of Procedure .
I feel obliged to point out - as I said a moment ago - that the report by Mr Pomés Ruiz is not available in French , or , to be more precise , the version of this report presented as the French version contains the biography of the candidate as well as a reply to questions exclusively in English , which seems to me to violate our Rules of Procedure .
Mr Gollnisch , since you are a stickler for the rules , I am going to do you the favour of giving you the only reliable information : you are absolutely right , we should have full translations of all texts put to the vote .
And that is actually the case .
All of the texts put to the vote are available in all languages .
Annexed documents themselves are not in any way put to the vote , according to our Rules of Procedure , and are not therefore subject to translation in their entirety .
Now you are fully informed !
2 .
Nomination of the Romanian Member of the Court of Auditors ( vote )
3 .
Modalities of Iceland and Norway 's participation in the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( vote )
4 .
Community action programme in the field of consumer policy ( 2007 - 2013 ) ( vote )
- Before the vote
5 .
Prevention , control and eradication of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( vote )
6 .
Statistical data on landings of fishery products ( vote )
7 .
Protection of minors and human dignity and the right of reply ( vote )
8 .
Customs 2013 programme ( vote )
9 .
A paperless environment for customs and trade ( vote )
10 .
Community surveys on the structure of agricultural holdings ( vote )
11 .
Cooperation between Asset Recovery Offices ( vote )
12 .
Expenditure in the veterinary field ( vote )
13 .
Protection of groundwater against pollution and deterioration ( vote )
14 .
Financing instrument for development cooperation ( vote )
15 .
Community Customs Code ( vote )
16 .
Circulation of compound feedingstuffs ( vote )
17 .
Statistics on foreign affiliates ( vote )
18 .
Financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide ( vote )
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to say briefly that I hope that we are on the point of adopting , by a large majority , this European instrument for promoting democracy and human rights , because it is the only instrument enabling us to support projects for promoting democracy in third countries , without the support of the governments , and it is therefore the only instrument that can provide a response to the issues that have just been raised by Mr Milinkievitch .
How can we support free media , how can we support independent civil society , how can we defend and protect the defenders of human rights in third countries , without the support of governments ?
The answer is by means of this instrument .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should just like to inform the House that not only have we achieved a separate instrument to promote democracy and human rights as a successor to the European initiative , against the original wishes of the Council and Commission , but we have managed to achieve all the objectives set by the European Parliament .
In reply to Mr Milinkevich this morning , it is true now that that instrument can have the capacity to operate within his country , without his country 's consent as Mrs Flautre says .
Moreover , this year I visited a number of what we call ' difficult countries ' - China , Cuba , even Russia today , parts of the Arab world - where the democracy backlash is moving in .
I should like to read from the letter that Mrs Ferrero-Waldner sent last Friday to the rapporteurs and the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Mr Brok : ' This provision may also include working with democratic political partners in third countries , provided that the principle of impartiality towards such partners is respected .
On the other hand , funding of political parties as such remains excluded from the scope of the draft regulation . '
So , Mr President , this is part of the process of the moral politics that Mr Milinkevich talked about , but it is only part of it .
We must do a lot more and not leave that field to the Americans .
( Applause )
If I am not mistaken , you are proposing an oral amendment to Amendment 147 .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , you are indeed not mistaken .
This is an oral amendment to Amendment 147 which , in order to conform precisely to the terms negotiated with the Council , is intended to replace the phrase
' including rights of migrants , asylum seekers and internally displaced persons ' with ' including migrants ' enjoyment of human rights , rights of asylum seekers and internally displaced persons ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
19 .
Prevention of injury and the promotion of safety ( vote )
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - Mr President , I shall be brief .
I wish to thank the shadow rapporteurs and the Secretariat , and to say that safety is something that affects us all .
A split second can change our lives , and the challenge is to save lives and to preserve health .
20 .
A financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ( vote )
That concludes voting time .
Voting time ( continued )
We shall now resume voting time .
Explanations of vote
in writing . I voted in favour of the appointment of Mrs Meglena Kuneva , the Bulgarian Commissioner designate .
However , while I have no problem with the individual herself or with the appointment of a Bulgarian Commissioner , I have serious doubts about there being enough jobs for 27 commissioners .
I look forward to a Treaty change that significantly reduces the number of Commissioners .
in writing . Mr President , my party is keen on the continuing enlargement of the Union , and we look forward to our Bulgarian and Romanian colleagues joining us .
We have paid close attention to the confirmation process of our two new Commissioners , and are satisfied that both are welcome additions to the College .
I am pleased to support Mrs Kuneva 's appointment today .
in writing .
I voted in favour of the appointment of Mr Leonard Orban as Romanian Commissioner .
However , I very much regret that the Nice Treaty makes it necessary for us to have one Commissioner per Member State .
I simply do not believe that there are enough serious jobs for 27 Commissioners and look forward to a Treaty reform along the lines of the draft Constitution that significantly reduces the number of Commissioners .
in writing . Mr President , my party is keen on the continuing enlargement of the Union , and we look forward to our Bulgarian and Romanian colleagues joining us .
We have paid close attention to the confirmation process of our two new Commissioners , and are satisfied that both are welcome additions to the College .
I am pleased to support Mr Orban 's appointment today .
in writing . I welcome the appointment of a Bulgarian Member of the Court of Auditors and am glad that this proved uncontroversial in the light of other difficulties .
in writing .
I voted in favour of Mr Ispir despite allegations of corruption involving Mr Ispir being made in the Romanian media .
The Committee on Budgetary Control could find no evidence to support these allegations in their hearing .
Mr Ispir has also strongly denied any wrongdoing .
On the evidence available the allegations against him appear to be politically motivated .
However , if any evidence of wrongdoing emerges I would expect Mr Ispir to resign from the Court .

( DE ) Mr President , if a stop is to be put to meat scandals and the back-door introduction of genetic engineering , then consumers need to be told the blunt facts , with nothing left out , but it cannot be acceptable that the stringent food regulations we impose on our own farmers and producers should be regularly circumvented by imports from third countries , a state of affairs that I regard as unfair to our farmers , counterproductive in terms of consumer protection and therefore needing to be done away with at once .
It is for that reason that I voted against the Thyssen report .

in writing . ( SV ) The June List thinks it crucial for there to be proper consumer protection within the EU .
However , funding the necessary measures is primarily a national issue .
We do not , then , believe that there is any justification for the budget heading of EUR 156.8 million entailed by the present consumer policy programme .
We are also extremely critical of the proposal to support financially the development of master 's degree courses in consumer issues within the framework of an integrated European examination .
It is not , of course , for the EU institutions either to determine the type of educational courses to be established in the Member States or to finance these .
We should , then , have voted against this report .
in writing . Irish consumers know only too well the reality that is Rip-Off Ireland .
Spiralling costs of basic services such as gas and electricity , or outrageous mobile phone and roaming charges continue to hit Irish consumers hard .
Of course those living in or at risk from poverty are hardest hit .
In order to counter this unacceptable situation , government needs to step in with stronger regulation and resourcing of the relevant consumer protection agencies .
In this context I welcome today 's report by Marianne Thyssen MEP .
The aim of the report is to initiate an action programme in the field of consumer protection for the years 2007 to 2013 .
The programme seeks to complement , support and monitor the policies of the Member States and to contribute to protecting the health , safety , economic and legal interests of consumers .
The programme would also attempt to promote consumer rights to information , to education and to organise themselves in order to safeguard their interests .
In Sinn Fein 's view the Irish Government need to take a lead in strengthening the rights and protections of consumers .
However , there is clearly a role for the EU , to assist Member States ' agencies in sharing models of best practice and ensuring a level of consistency throughout the European Union .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Community action programme in the field of consumer protection for 2007-2013 is intended to complement , support and monitor the policies of the Member States .
It will contribute to protecting the health , the safety and the economic and legal interests of consumers , and also to promoting their right to information , education and organisation with a view to defending their interests .
The actions will contribute to guaranteeing all of the Union 's consumers a high level of protection and to ensuring the effective application of the consumer protection rules .
I am delighted that this programme has been divided into two parts , thereby distinguishing between health and consumer protection .
While I regret that the Commission has reduced the financial envelope from EUR 233.46 million - at first reading - to EUR 156.8 million and that the number of actions in the field of consumer protection has been reviewed and reduced from 20 to 11 , I have voted in favour of Mrs Thyssen 's report , so that consumers ' organisations can benefit from this programme in the interests of our fellow European citizens .
This regulation details how to address and combat diseases such as BSE and scrapie , which affect ruminants as a whole .
Firstly , the number of categories of risk of contracting BSE is reduced from five to three , in line with World Organisation for Animal Health recommendations .
The regulation bans the use of animal proteins in feeding ruminants , but states the quantity up to which the addition of such proteins is considered insignificant .
The report also calls for a review of the rules on the use of mechanically processed meat for human consumption and lays down new rules on providing better information to consumers .
In order to prevent mass , indiscriminate slaughter and the ensuing losses for the producer , the report also defines the use of animals up to the end of their productive lives .
This will naturally be monitored very closely given that there is no scientific data confirming that BSE is transmitted via milk or from cattle to their offspring .
Prevention programmes for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies are to be carried out on a voluntary basis , and there is to be regular assessment of the scientific results of these programmes .
The Portuguese Social Democrat MEPs thus support the Roth-Berendt report .
This proposal , submitted for a second reading , differs from the legislation in force in three key areas .
One purpose of the proposal is that data be submitted annually rather than monthly .
According to recent studies , monthly data forwarded up to six months after the event are of limited use in day-to-day market management , whereas the compilation of annual data can be useful for medium- to long-term market studies and can help reduce the workload for the national authorities in forwarding data .
According to the proposal , data submissions are to be required by the flag ( or nationality ) of the vessels responsible for the landings .
This requirement , as opposed to the current submissions by broad groups of EU , EFTA and other vessels will enable the data to be analysed in greater detail and yet will not significantly increase the workload of the national authorities which already collect the data to this level of detail .
Lastly , this proposal for a regulation provides for a more flexible approach , enabling sampling techniques to be used to estimate total landings .
National authorities may , to an appropriate extent , use sampling methods for data collection purposes , providing that they justify their use and analyse the quality of the resulting data in a methodological report ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The new information and communication technologies have raised pertinent questions regarding the protection of minors and human dignity , given the amount of illicit , harmful and undesirable content that can easily be found on the Internet .
There appears to be a desire for regulation on this issue that has come up against technical and legal difficulties .
Measures to protect minors and human dignity are undoubtedly needed .
It is therefore necessary to discover more about , and to assess , these new technologies and not to downplay the progress that they have brought to our societies , the consequences of which have , in the main , been beneficial to the quality of life of the poorer as well as the wealthier sections of society .
Universal access to information gives the poorest people quicker access to solutions to day-to-day problems .
Accordingly , as regards protecting minors , the recommendations proposed here are eminently sensible criteria that we must disseminate in our societies by raising awareness among parents and teachers and by ensuring that regulatory bodies exchange experiences in classifying audiovisual content .
From a very early age , children are consumers and quickly take to these technologies .
in writing . I welcome this report which aims at the implementation of automated customs systems and of coordinated processes and services under both the current and future modernised Customs Code .
The main objective of this Decision is to determine what action needs to be taken for the achievement of a simple and paperless environment for customs and trade .
This is highly laudable but I hope it does not prove to be a pious goal .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List is in favour of cross-border police cooperation .
It is necessary to confront contemporary international crime , but this has been done successfully for decades by the international police body , Interpol .
The June List is very sceptical about measures to combat crime being taken at supranational level .
We are in favour of intergovernmental cooperation and opposed to common legislation .
The Commission recommends that Asset Recovery Offices be set up in the Member States , directly subject to EC legislation and administration .
This means further interference in the Member States ' national legal systems and a weakening of Interpol 's respected position .
The June List is therefore voting against the report as a whole .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that cross-border animal diseases are an important area for cooperation within the EU , but it is not for the EU routinely to finance the fight against animal diseases .
We want to point out that , in the final analysis , it is the responsibility of the Member States , both financially and in terms of the measures taken , to combat animal diseases and zoonoses within their respective territories .
We therefore object , in particular , to Amendment 6 , tabled by the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , whereby each Member State would be able , depending on its specific circumstances , to submit national programmes to be financed by the EU .
We are voting against the report as a whole , since it is based on the European Union taking major financial responsibility for combating animal diseases .
EU funds are not a horn of plenty that can constantly finance measures within the agricultural sphere .
Sweden , for example , has conducted a long and successful fight against salmonella within its own borders and is proof that the Member States themselves can engage in such battles without the need for funding by the European Union .

( DE ) Mr President , nature has a long memory , and so , for example , thanks to the EU 's ' Groundwater 2010 ' programme in Austria , pollution of the groundwater from the past twentieth century is being laboriously cleared up .
The amount of nitrates finding their way into it from agriculture creates major problems in some regions in that it makes the maintenance of the prescribed chemical conditions difficult .
This underlines once more the importance of biologically and ecologically reasonable modes of management , which , when properly applied , can make a vital contribution , and so I do believe that it is important that much more be done to promote their use , and have voted , accordingly , in favour of the Klaß report .

( DE ) Mr President , I , too , voted in favour of the compromise , even though I also take the view that it would have been desirable , in view of groundwater 's extreme importance as a primary source of food , to have a single set of European rules applicable to all hazardous substances .
Let us also bear in mind that our health and that of our children are at stake here .
Since short-term economies will prove to be problematic not only for the state but also for the healthcare systems , I call on all the Member States to put everything rigorously into effect , while at the same time joining in working on a further package of measures with ambitious limit values .
in writing . Groundwater is a valuable natural asset and must be protected wherever possible .
It also extremely awkward to treat for pollution , even when the source of pollutants has been removed .
I broadly support the intentions of the new directive , which would help preserve Scotland 's reputation of having a clean , unspoiled environment .
There must be a balance , however , so that any new directive that is passed is not unnecessarily obstructive to farmers and agricultural business .
For example , in 2003 , Scottish farmers faced groundwater charges when those in England did not .
As long as this proposal does not produce extra bureaucracy or impractical demands for those who work around groundwater , then I think this directive is a worthy one .
in writing . I voted in favour of the Klaß report on the protection of groundwater against pollution .
I believe the report is now much stronger than the Commission 's original proposal .
We will now have more stringent rules to prevent or restrict inputs of hazardous substances into groundwater with a possibility to have even more stringent national measures .
As regards nitrates , the provisions are now consistent with the Water Framework Directive .
in writing . Because the south-east of England has suffered so much from drought orders which have affected water usage by consumers , this directive is extremely important .
Some 70 % of south eastern England 's water comes from groundwater resources .
Protection of this resource , therefore , is essential to allow for both the capacity of such resources to recover as well as for nitrates and other chemicals to be excluded as far as possible from reaching the UK 's drinking water .
Parliament has stuck steadfastly to its view that Member State governments must do far more to prevent this type of pollution , such as arsenic , biocides and cyanide .
Parliament 's approach to ' toughen up ' the legislation in this field is very much welcomed .
Water is the basis of all life , and in this sense , a matter of life and death .
The European Environmental Agency regards the situation as serious : 87 % of groundwater in agricultural areas fails to meet EU standards on the presence of nitrates , and most of the Member States have reported on the risk of contamination by pesticides .
A strict new Groundwater Directive is therefore of vital importance .
The text approved by the conciliation committee deserves our support .
This House has managed to make the notion of ' protection against quantitative decline ' legally binding .
Moreover , steps have been taken to ensure that the measures for achieving the quality standard for nitrates draw on the Water Framework Directive .
More emphatic demands are also made of Member States and regions to prevent and reduce the introduction of dangerous substances into groundwater .
They are now required to ' take ' all the measures necessary , and not just to ' strive towards ' them .
The result at first reading was , from an environmental point of view , a huge disappointment , and the Council 's common position was also a complete disaster .
These have now been put right at second reading in this House and the subsequent conciliation procedure .
As we should be pleased with the outcome , I have endorsed the agreement reached .
Mr President , in all the continuing debates surrounding abortions performed on those who could live , one rather individual moment is presented by a seemingly neutral formula : reproductive healthcare , which is a catch-all term , and in a sense a confusing one .
Therefore , we should speak openly about non-reproductive health and show concern about how to limit or lessen reproductivity inside European society without causing physical harm to women .
Such harm is a very bad thing , but the time should come to realise that the problem is broader , as the harm includes psychological and social aspects and should deal also with the lack of compassion and growth of cruelty in our societies , which are turning them demographically into suicidal ones .
Those are the reasons why I voted for the deletions proposed by Mr Mitchell .
The original proposal for a regulation , tabled by the Commission and establishing a financial instrument for development cooperation was unacceptable to Parliament , given that it jeopardised its codecision powers and the very principles of development policy .
Following the amendments introduced by Parliament , however , I support the final text of the regulation , which provides for time-limited legislation ( 2013 ) and a mid-term review ( 2009 ) , the creation of a specific instrument for development policy - the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) - as distinct from the policy of cooperation with industrialised countries , a single legal basis and the drafting of more detailed financial provisions .
It also safeguards Parliament 's right to define development policy under the codecision procedure .
in writing . The Development Cooperation Instrument covers over EUR 16 billion of development spending over the next financial perspective .
The Instrument is in two main parts - geographic and thematic .
Geographic spending covers the money that will be negotiated between the Commission and partner countries through Country Strategy Papers ( CSPs ) - almost EUR 11 billion .
I welcome the fact that Parliament insisted in negotiations that social services , and particularly health and education , be prioritised by the Commission when drawing up CSPs .
Parliament also got a commitment from the Commission that 20 % of spending on geographic programmes would be on basic health and basic and secondary education - an important and longstanding priority of the Socialist Group .
Promoting development is , mutatis mutandis , equally as important in the EU 's external policy as promoting human rights and democracy .
Whenever the EU boosts the growth and development of third countries within the framework of external cooperation , it is to promote a better world and , indeed , to promote its own interests , a fact that must be acknowledged but that does not in any way diminish the virtues of the gesture .
Quite the opposite , in fact .
In the area of illegal immigration , for example , it should be stressed that this policy is one of the most powerful weapons at our disposal , especially when used in conjunction with our neighbours .
As regards development , it is , like democracy and human rights , a universal good .
in writing . Our part of the world having the privilege to live in wealth has a great responsibility to those who suffer hunger and whose future is uncertain .
I believe we can speak with one voice according to our humanitarian responsibility .
United in this noble cause we can change a lot .
That is why I am against paragraphs introducing so-called ' reproductive and sexual rights ' which are simply trying to win our support for abortion .
This subject was not in the original Commission proposal .
It appeared in Parliament .
It is very unfortunate message for those Europeans who do not agree with abortion and do not want to pay for such practices , hidden in this document under the technical term ' reproductive right ' .
Do we really want this message to be sent ?
We cannot disrespect Catholics ' beliefs only because they are in minority today .
Our message to them is clear : it says that Europe is not their responsibility any more !
In conclusion it weakens our fight against poverty and weakens European integration .
Therefore I called for support for Amendments 1 , 2 and 3 .
I could not vote in favour of this report without them .
The Group of the Greek Communist Party in the European Parliament voted against the report regarding the Commission 's proposal for a regulation on a ' Modernised Customs Code ' , because it clears the path for invasion of major monopoly enterprises ( especially logistics ) in the sector of customs procedures .
Establishing a ' certified financial body ' in combination with the replacement of Article 5 of Regulation 2193 / 92 , which refers to customs representatives , will result in the loss of jobs for all customs brokers in Greece and several EU Member States , who will be replaced with monopoly enterprises at the expense of the security of customs procedures .
The new Customs Code follows the framework of the Lisbon Strategy , which aims to increase the prosperity of the capitalists .
This policy , apart from destroying labour , salary , insurance and social rights of the workers , which are its primary goal , will have devastating consequences on the self-employed and the small to medium-sized enterprises .
This reactionary policy by the EU is aimed against all grassroots classes .
Therefore , it is absolutely essential to form an alliance between the small- to medium-sized enterprises and the working class , a people 's alliance that will put an end to the aspirations of the monopolies and imperialism and will claim its own power and open the road to social prosperity .
in writing . - ( EL ) It is the farmer 's and consumer 's right and obligation to look after their health and safety and know the composition of each product , including animal feed .
Therefore , we agree on the amendments and amendment proposal regarding the directive on the circulation of compound feedingstuffs .
However , certain companies appealed to the European Court with the pretence that the ' financial interests of the manufacturers would be seriously harmed ' and that intellectual property would not be safeguarded , in order to circumvent from their obligation to inform the consumers on the composition of feedingstuffs , something that would provide farmers and consumers with the right to choose but also protect their health .
At the same time each manufacturer would be controlled as to whether the product he is selling corresponds to the ingredients printed on the label and regulations on the protection of public health .
However , we should not be fooled by thoughts that legal and other barriers can prevent monopoly enterprises in the animal feed sector from acting unscrupulously , given that such companies are responsible for the dioxin and Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy scandals .
For these enterprises profit is the number one priority and not the protection of public health .
Moreover , for as long as there is a lack of adequate state control bodies and control responsibility is handed over to private individuals , we should be very worried about the protection of public health and the safety of the food chain .
in writing . I supported this report so as to allow for a swift correction of Directive 2002 / 2 / EC by deleting the obligation for feed manufacturers to inform customers on request of the exact composition of compound feedingstuffs , in line with the ruling of the Court of Justice .
The ECJ ruled that this provision provided too little in the way of additional health protection to justify the serious impact on the interests of the manufacturers .
However , I am concerned and disappointed that the legal services of the institutions prevented elected MEPs from tabling more far-reaching amendments to this controversial piece of legislation .
The intention was to amend the rules that currently require all feed materials in a compound feedingstuff to be indicated with a declaration of percentage by weight .
Disclosing exact percentages for animal feedingstuffs goes beyond the equivalent provisions applicable to food for human consumption .
In most cases , ingredient listing by weight is sufficient to protect the interests of farmers and consumers and the formulations of the manufacturers .
I expect the Commission to take on board these concerns in its review of feed legislation programmed for next year .
in writing . Conservative MEPs supported this report so as to facilitate a swift correction of Directive 2002 / 2 / EC by deleting , in line with the Court of Justice 's ruling , the obligation for feed manufacturers to inform customers on request of the exact composition of compound feedingstuffs .
The ECJ ruled that this provision provided too little in the way of additional health protection to justify the serious impact on the interests of the manufacturers .
However , we express our disappointment that the legal services of the institutions prevented elected MEPs from tabling more far-reaching amendments to this controversial piece of legislation .
Our intention was to amend as well the rules that currently require all feed materials in a compound feedingstuff to be indicated with a declaration of percentage by weight .
We do not believe that exact percentages need to be disclosed and note that this goes beyond the provisions applicable to food for human consumption .
In most cases , ingredient listing by weight is sufficient to protect both the interests of farmers and the trade secrets of the manufacturers .
We expect the Commission to take on board our concerns in its review of feed legislation programmed for next year .
I support the report by Mr McMillan-Scott and Mrs Flautre on the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , because democracy is a fundamental universal right , and , as such , should be promoted by transnational institutions .
The radicals in this Parliament have fought for years for the ' democratic clauses ' contained in many agreements between the EU and authoritarian countries such as Laos , Vietnam and Uzbekistan to be respected .
These agreements must be applied to the letter ; however , the promotion of the right to democracy cannot be a mere by-product of policies on cooperation , international trade or humanitarian aid .
We need to take action , devising a genuine European policy on democracy in the world , because the right to democracy cannot stop at Europe 's ' neighbours ' .
All over the world we need to succeed in building an alliance between Europe and pro-democracy forces : that is what the rapporteurs aimed for .
The EU 's ability to act in the future will tell us whether this aim has been achieved , or whether new , more flexible and effective instruments will be needed .
Socialists can look back on a long tradition of international solidarity .
They champion human rights , peace , democracy , social security , fair sharing , public services and a clean environment not only for the sake of people in their own towns , regions or countries , but also for the people in neighbouring countries and in other parts of the world .
Human rights for others are more important than the economic benefits accruing to us from cheap imports from countries where human rights are trampled underfoot .
It is this conviction that has led us to back boycott campaigns against dictatorial minority regimes in South Africa , the former Rhodesia , the former Portuguese colonies and Pinochet 's Chile .
By joining forces with opposition movements in those countries , we have managed to help bring about major changes .
This is why we , representatives of the Dutch Socialist Party , support the Flautre / McMillan-Scott report on human rights in international treaties and relations with dictatorial states .
We are aware that this report can be misused for measures against Venezuela or other states where the people have opted for radical steps towards human equality , and maybe even as justification for military interventions on allegedly humanitarian grounds .
We regret that fear of this appears now to have prompted some of our Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left to opt for a principle of non-intervention , and hence , albeit unintentionally , for turning a blind eye to unacceptable dictatorships .
The fact that the EU explicitly links its external policy with promoting human rights and democracy should be highlighted and lauded .
Yet not everyone in Parliament , and in other Community institutions , will share the same views on which human rights have been violated and on where there is and is not democracy .
Perhaps it would be better to avoid this question at this time , although in so doing we would be sweeping the situation under the carpet rather than addressing it .
That being said , the first of these points should be brought to the fore .
The expansion of democracy and the protection of human rights is intrinsically a good thing that brings benefits to the people of countries in which there is neither democracy nor respect for human rights , as well as to the people of neighbouring countries ( which is why promoting these values in our neighbourhood is so important ) and of the world as a whole .
For these reasons , albeit with the reservations to which I have referred , I support the report before us .
in writing . - ( EL ) The ' financial Instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide ' is a blatant admission that in the name of ' democracy and human rights ' we are establishing the EU 's right to imperialistic interventions at the expense of nations around the world .
The Commission report moves in an even more unacceptable , reactive direction , by stating that it will be used ' without the consent of the host country 's government ' , in order to provide plenty of money to the long arm of EU imperialistic policy , to various non-governmental organisations and moreover to organisations that are not officially registered in their country , that is illegal organisations .
It provides for the creation of a productive workforce for independent civil society organisations , namely training of secret agents .
Its objectives include the strengthening of the International Criminal Court , and moreover special international criminal courts .
The EU proclaims itself the universal protector of democracy and human rights , in the sense of a ' Trojan horse ' that will be used to undermine the national and social sovereignty of nations that oppose the EU 's decisions and overturn governments that do not agree with them .
Let the nations draw their own conclusions .
They should strengthen their struggles against this barbaric imperialistic union of monopolistic capitalists and send into history 's trashcan the imperialists ' ambition to be elevated to the position of worldwide policemen .
The high number of injuries arising from accidents or violence in the Member States remains cause for concern .
We therefore welcome the focus on the causes of these injuries , on the circumstances in which they occur and on why , when and where they occur .
There are numerous factors behind the injuries , including social , economic and cultural factors .
The more we understand these aspects , the bigger and , more importantly , the better , will be the measures put in place to prevent them from happening .
Hence the report adopted today to place the emphasis on prevention .
The first step is therefore to gather information .
The bottom line , however , is that people 's living conditions must be improved , which entails , for example , maintaining a public health policy with guaranteed access for all to healthcare regardless of economic circumstances , ensuring high quality public education and reducing or eliminating inequality .
Accident and injury comes at a very heavy human price - premature death , years living with incapacity - and entails high costs in terms of healthcare and loss to society owing to lack of productivity . Injuries can be avoided , however .
It is therefore essential to adopt healthier lifestyles and to adopt public policies that help make living conditions safer .
Prevention is better than cure .
in writing . - ( EL ) The primary reasoning of the ' effort to prevent injuries ' is to invest in sectors that will offer something back .
They promote cost-gain reasons instead of health .
We disagree with these free market motives that drive this so-called effort to prevent injuries .
Dissimilar incidents are being lumped together and addressed within the framework of individual responsibility on the grounds that they all classify as injuries .
The true causes of accidents are being concealed , thereby sending the strategy for preventing and addressing them off the rails .
Personal responsibility is stated as the main cause of these ' injuries ' in order to cover up managerial liability for accidents at work .
The promotion of ' safe behaviour ' conceals the need for a prevention strategy directed at taking collective measures that safeguard safety in areas where employees work and live .
They are aiming at burdening the employee , directly or indirectly , with the managerial obligation and cost of preventing accidents at work .
Their end objective is to promote further intensification of work and reduction of labour cost .
The State is largely to blame .
In order to serve free economy , it does not carry out essential controls ; it accepts criminal omissions and imperfections in projects from businessmen , which in turn increases the risk of accidents .
Accident prevention should be enforced by the state on a regular basis , providing detail on the actual causes ; moreover the bodies recording and investigating these accidents should be state controlled .
Insurance coverage of occupational hazard , the creation of a state body of workforce doctors and safety technicians will provide the foundation for a systematic prevention of accidents at work .
in writing .
( DE ) We owe it to our environment and to the people whom we represent to halt at once the policy of promoting long-distance transport the length and breadth of Europe ; now that cancer and respiratory diseases have become the fourth most frequent causes of death in the EU , it is past high time that we did so .
If , though , safety is to be promoted , a solution also needs to be sought to the problem of deluded multiculturalism , which ultimately results in more and more problem areas in European cities , in which the forces of law and order are regarded as invaders , in which a massive decline in values prevails and in which the rule of the state is no longer acknowledged .
This phenomenon is not limited to Paris , for , in Berlin too , there are districts in which fires cannot be put out in good time or the injured taken away because it is impossible to communicate with the rampaging foreign mob , by which those trying to help risk being attacked or robbed - so-called ' no-go areas ' , in which even the police now venture only en masse .
That is exactly how it started in France , and we all know what that led to .
If we are going to talk in terms of prevention and of more security , then these problems too must be addressed before the situation escalates .
in writing . I naturally voted in favour of my report on the financing instrument for cooperation with the industrialised countries and territories .
As I said in the debate , this might in financial terms be the least significant of the new external instruments , but it will still involve a budget of around EUR 22 million a year and cover our external actions with 17 important countries .
I believe the amendments that Parliament has approved will make the instrument more appropriate and effective in promoting the interests and values of the EU in these 17 heterogeneous countries .
I would like to thank colleagues of all Groups for their support in finding such a wide consensus .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Coordination of certain of the Member States ' provisions on television broadcasting ( debate )
Madam President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , I would thank all those in this House who have worked on the proposal for a directive on the various audiovisual media services .
I should like , in particular , to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Hieronymi , as well as the co-rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs who have put a lot of time and energy into drawing up Parliament 's opinion .
Their efforts have been rewarded , as a number of the amendments that we are examining today improve the Commission 's initial proposal , presented on 13 December 2005 .
I also wish to emphasise the excellent cooperation between Parliament , my services and the Council , whose Finnish Presidency has done a first-class job .
The proposal for a directive on audiovisual media , which updates the TV Without Frontiers Directive , will be seen as one of the important pieces of legislation adopted in the course of this Parliamentary term .
It responds to two requirements : firstly , it enables us to adapt our audiovisual enterprises to the considerable technological and commercial developments that have taken place ; and , secondly , it demonstrates the political will that exists to ensure the continuation of the values essential to our communal life and to the forming of public opinion .
On the one hand , the technical and commercial aspects have to be taken into consideration .
There are the new means of watching television , such as Internet Protocol Television ( IPTV ) and video on demand ( VOD ) , the shift to digital technologies offering many more services and the arrival of new players in the market , including telecommunications companies , Internet access providers and big international investors .
On the other hand , account needs to be taken of cherished considerations such as consumer protection , human dignity , the protection of minors and the promotion of cultural diversity and of media pluralism .
What is more , the Commission proposal will enable all companies that want to invest in the audiovisual media to do so under fair conditions of competition and at European level , namely that of the internal market .
The principle on which the 1989 directive is based has not been substantially changed and is still that underpinning the updated directive .
According to this principle , full compliance with the free movement of services in the internal market is conditional on responding only to the legislation of the country of establishment .
I would thank Parliament for supporting me in the matter of this basic demand , which contributes not only to the strength of our audiovisual industry but also , by opening national markets to European competition , to media pluralism .
The essential points of the Commission proposal are as follows .
Firstly , the directive should be made applicable to audiovisual media services , with a definition of these services that is sufficiently flexible to stand the test of time while remaining sufficiently precise to provide the sector with the legal certainty it needs .
Secondly , the various services should be divided , or grouped , into two categories reflecting the twofold differentiation criterion of , on the one hand , users ' choice and control , and , on the other , the impact of these services on the way in which public opinion is formed .
Linear services , which constitute the first group , correspond to television broadcasting involving a chronological sequence of programmes .
Such services are ' push ' content , whether the platform is traditional , IPTV or mobile television .
The other group - non-linear services - are supplied at the consumer 's request .
These services - video on demand , for example - are ' pull ' content , selected from a catalogue .
Where the rules are concerned , audiovisual content in the first category - that is to say , traditional radio and television broadcasting - needs to be subjected to a set of rules comparable to the current rules , but updated and simplified in order to take account of the developments I have mentioned .
In the case , moreover , of audiovisual content in the second category , recourse to the country of origin principle should be authorised , on condition that the harmonised basic rules relating , in particular , to the protection of minors and the ban on incitement to racial hatred are complied with .
We then need to lower the barriers to entering the audiovisual sector by simplifying the current rules , particularly in the area of commercial communications , and to do so without compromising the general interest .
Madam President , I am very aware of the fact that many Members are very sensitive about this subject and that a number of them are asking for stricter rules on advertising .
I want to be very clear about this issue .
Like yourselves , I do not want to see American-style television , that is to say programmes constantly interrupted by isolated advertising spots .
That is why the Commission is reaffirming the limit of a maximum of 12 minutes per hour and maintaining the principle of exception for isolated advertising spots , except in the case of sport .
At the same time , we must bear in mind that , to put it bluntly , television channels , whether they be publicly or privately owned , need advertising revenue in order to buy high-quality content such as sport , films and documentaries .
If we want Europeans still to be able to have a choice between free-to-air-television and pay TV , we must accept that there is going to be advertising .
What is more , recourse to co-regulation and self-regulation needs to be encouraged as a supplementary means of implementing the directive .
This is the first time that this option has been introduced into a legislative text .
There is also cause for reaffirming the general interest when it comes to the protection of children against harmful content , the protection of human dignity and the consumer 's right to transparency , as well as the promotion of European works , which are an expression of our cultural diversity .
Honourable Members , you have today the opportunity , while still making stringent ethical demands , to enable the very successful European audiovisual content industry to become still more competitive and more integrated into the European internal market .
I would ask you , in the course of the debate and the voting , to seize the opportunity to send two messages : one to Europeans , encouraging them to embrace new developments in television , and another to the professional sector , encouraging it to invest not only in order to create value but also in order that tomorrow 's creative content might be European .
It will only be possible to achieve this if the legal framework is better adapted to 21st century television .
The Commission is inspired solely by these considerations in examining Parliament 's amendments .
Madam President , I shall have the opportunity at the end of the debate to explain the Commission 's position on the amendments in greater detail .
Thank you for your attention .
I am able to tell you right now that the Commission intends to accept a very large number of the amendments tabled by the rapporteur .


rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , I want first of all - Commissioner - to thank the Commission , and also the Council under both Austrian and Finnish Presidency for the outstanding way in which it cooperated with this House , but very particularly my fellow rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs , who made it possible for the Committee on Culture and Education , the lead committee , to work so very well with the Committees on the Internal Market , the Economy , Industry , Civil Liberties and Gender Equality .
Our common objective was and remains to keep television , a mass audiovisual medium , both an economic and cultural good in the future , for , in a shared internal market extending across Europe , freedom of information and diversity of opinion cannot be left to the market alone , and so it is vital that we should , today , proceed to revise the television directive , which covers analogue television services , but lacks as yet the legal certainty and clarity appropriate to the new digital services .
It is the express wish of this House and of its committees that television and similar services should in future be evaluated on the basis of their content , and without reference to their technological platform .
What is crucial is the primary purpose of the audiovisual mass medium in which content for information , education and entertainment purposes is produced and complied subject to editorial responsibility and then broadcast to the general public and transmitted via electronic networks , which means that these are clearly distinguished from the other services of the information society and in particular from those covered by the directive on electronic commerce .


It is this legal clarity that the new audiovisual services need , and , by being taken into consideration in this directive , that is what they are getting ; it is only when the primary purpose of this directive is fulfilled that it actually becomes effective , so let me reiterate , and make it abundantly clear , that this directive does not cover those emails that are private or not public , any more than it covers the electronic editions of newspapers , for they have nothing to do with its primary purpose .

In the European Union , the country of origin principle is the foundation upon which the freedom of the media rests , and that same principle is very definitely present in this new directive , although it was also necessary to take account of the concerns of those Member States who see it being open to misuse or being circumvented or who fear that it will be .
This , now , is where this House 's compromise is a very even-handed one , in that it takes account of both points of view with the end in mind of making the best possible use of the Lisbon process and hence of the economic strengths of the new electronic media .
This means that we have achieved broad agreement on the scope and the country-of-origin principle , not to mention on such other matters as the joint regulation and self-regulation of the protection of young people and consumers , the right to short-term reporting , the promotion of European content and of better access for disabled people .
It will become clear from the debate that we take a different line on advertising ; like the Commission , I am in favour , not of more advertising - 12 minutes - but of greater flexibility .
Even so , I had the painful experience of having to agree to a compromise on product placement .
I very much hope that we will be able , by means of better labelling , to achieve a maximum of legal certainty and clarity for the consumers .
Overall , though , the revision of the EU 's television directive is a real fitness programme for forward-looking European television , and I warmly invite you to give it your support .
( Applause )

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me say , as spokesman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , how pleased I am that our position , which was accepted with only two persons voting against it , is largely reflected in the report voted on by the Committee on Culture and Education , so many thanks to Mrs Hieronymi for that achievement .
In the last few weeks in particular , we worked successfully on keeping the country-of-origin principle at full strength , and I am of course grateful to all those who had a hand in this , for it is this principle that underpins the directive , and it is in the interests of a functioning internal market that we should not go soft on it .
I take the view that the opening up and liberalisation in respect of advertising is essential if our dual-system media landscape is to be preserved together with the free reception of advertising-funded television .
If this liberalisation is to be accomplished , then what is needed is the suspension of the requirement that commercials be grouped together in blocks , along with the abolition of the rule that requires thirty minutes between advertising spots in television and cinema films , in children 's ' and news programmes , and also for product placement to be allowed .
Product placement is a controversial issue , and I think that its being permitted subject to tight constraints is the only way to go forward ; banning it would be unrealistic .
A scientific study has confirmed that product placement , even though banned in many Member States , still goes on , and , moreover , any ban would push European investors towards the American market .
I believe that the positive list can be a way of offering a balanced solution that takes account of the way things are at present .
Another core aspect of the directive , alongside the liberalisation of the rules on advertising , is the rearrangement of its scope ; as we know , televised material can now be received over the Internet and mobile telephones as well , and to deal with this , we have opted for a technical approach that guarantees that the developments and platforms of the future will be taken into account as well .
Provided that the plenary takes these essential items on board when it votes , we will be able to face with confidence the challenges of the age of digital media while at the same time maintaining European televisual culture , which is so great a good .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like especially to thank Mrs Hieronymi and my own committee 's shadow rapporteurs , especially Mr Kamall , Mrs Hedh and Mrs Wallis .
Mrs Hieronymi has , through intelligent cooperation , worked hard with the other five committees , and the internal market committee started out by preparing a number of compromises , which have been taken into account by the Committee on Culture and Education and had an influence on the way it voted , particularly as regards the scope of the directive , which is a matter of some importance to us .
New technologies encourage new products and new forms of customer behaviour .
Digitalisation is causing new and strong actors - the telecoms companies , for example - to force their way onto the market .
If the directive was to be made fit for the future , it was necessary to broaden its scope , but we also managed to frame that scope more clearly and more restrictively than in the original Commission proposal , and that is without doubt a success in which all the committees share .
( The President cut off the speaker )
I shall be happy to enlighten you , Mrs Rühle .
The fact is that you will , later on , have another minute when you speak on behalf of your group , but , as spokeswoman for a committee , you are entitled to only one minute .
I shall leave it to you to sort that out within your group to your own satisfaction .
You will , of course , be able to recapitulate the essential points when you speak later on on behalf of your group .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( FR ) Madam President , the minute 's speaking time I have puts me in mind of an advertising spot .
All right , then , I shall try to make something of it , even so .
Let us talk politics , first of all .
I wish to thank the Commissioner .
I remember the Liverpool conference .
The document that you presented to us on that occasion was already a good medium-term proposal .
I wish to thank Mrs Hieronymi . Because of her negotiating powers as rapporteur , most of the amendments by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs were able to be integrated into the report presented in plenary .
I have two reservations to express .
Firstly , I should like , on behalf of a number of delegations , to say how sorry I am that the compromises approved by the Committee on Culture and Education , which struck the right balance between , on the one hand , the broadcasters ' funding needs and , on the other , respect for the viewers , have now been brought into question .
That is a very bad idea , harmful to the audiovisual industry in general , because an industry that does not respect its consumers is doomed in the long term .
On the subject , therefore , of the rules governing advertising , I think it vital to respect the integrity of artistic works and - where I myself am concerned , and until I am more fully informed - I shall continue to give my backing to uninterruptible periods of 45 minutes .
The Committee on Culture and Education has been very precise in mapping out the issue of product placement , and I therefore support its amendment .
Finally , Madam President , I regret that this report and the political conditions in which it is presented do not make it possible to reflect in the medium term on the balance between public and private audiovisual media services .
We need to join forces in tackling these matters in the medium term if we want to ensure the survival of this report .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( DE ) Madam President , the Committee on Women 's Rights , too , is grateful for the good cooperation and willingness of the Commission 's rapporteur .
We do of course seek to maintain European quality television , which means securing the diversity and independence of the media .
The revision of the directive must not , however , be allowed to open up new grey areas , which is what we fear where product placement - formerly scorned as advertising by stealth - is concerned .
Product placement will now , in principle , be banned , yet numerous derogations make it possible for the Member States to blur the clear dividing line that separates editorial independence from the influences exerted by commercial advertising .
We , in the Women 's Committee , have firmly repudiated product placement , and also want better protection for the young , with pornography , gratuitous violence and images derogatory to human dignity banned from audiovisual programming .
We also want to see restrictions on advertising .
Advertising must not be free to do as it likes .
We must ensure that advertising periods are not extended .
I am in favour of retaining the 45-minute rule , and also of alcohol not appearing in programmes broadcast during the day , in the interests of better protection for children and young people .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , as well as on my own behalf , to congratulate Mrs Hieronymi who , on a human as well as a technical level , has brought us home safe and sound in spite of a very controversial debate .
To lay down precise rules in a technological environment that is essentially very much in a state of flux , is no easy matter .
The question might , moreover , be asked : to what degree is it possible to regulate ?
It was necessary to find a fair and equitable framework , involving strong and restrictive principles , in connection with sensitive issues such as the protection of minors , and this while ensuring that players in the sector were not penalised .
One strong and basic principle is the country of origin principle , which has been retained .
The current compromise enables the authorities of the Member States to settle their differences , on the basis described in the document , in the event of fraudulent and improper behaviour on the part of the broadcaster 's country .
Where advertising is concerned , the PPE-DE Group supports the methods described by the rapporteur , adding however that advertisements need to be broadcast at the same volume as the programmes preceding them , as recommended in an amendment by the Committee on Culture and Education .
I should simply like to point out that , in the ideological debates surrounding advertising , it should not be forgotten that advertising is a lively and creative sector that creates jobs and that also has a cultural dimension .
The controversy surrounding product placement leads me to make the following remark : the solution arrived at - that of banning product placement on principle and leaving it to each Member State to authorise it , or not as the case may be - is a strong message that calls on the Member States to take responsibility for funding high-quality television .
Finally , viewers are somewhat left out of account , as if the directive had nothing to do with them .
Care really does also need to be taken to ensure that television is without frontiers .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I too should like to thank Mrs Hieronymi for both the quality and the quantity of her work .
The directive proposed to us would enable us to retain the European audiovisual model in the new technological and economic conditions .
Advertising is still limited to 12 minutes per hour .
The Committee on Culture and Education has voted in favour of maintaining the period of time between two advertising slots at 45 minutes and of not reducing it to 35 - or , even worse , 30 - minutes , as desired by the Commission .
I hope that this amendment , supported by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , will be adopted in plenary .
The advertising revenue from which television channels benefit should not suffer thereby as , in our world of globalisation and of the proliferation of transnational enterprises , the demand for advertising is expanding and will continue to do so .
Product placement is banned . That is the first thing to say .
Admittedly , exceptions are possible when it comes to cinema films , television dramas and sports programmes but , in those cases , product placement is strictly regulated in order to prevent the abuses and pernicious effects noted in many countries , particularly the United States .
The regulations are extended , in appropriate forms , to the new audiovisual services .
I am thinking , in particular , of video on demand , which has a great future ahead of it .
Minors , consumers and people in general are protected against incitement to all forms of discrimination and hatred .
We note with satisfaction that the new services will also have to play their part in supporting the production and promotion of European works .
With an eye to a number of audiovisual enterprises possibly circumventing the regulations of the Member States , the Socialists propose simpler and fairer provisions that can be implemented more quickly so that countries that are victims of indecent channels or services are better able to defend themselves .
This compromise text , voted in favour of by the Committee on Culture and Education , preserves what is essential .
It can and must be improved , and that is the purpose of our amendments .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Hieronymi for her excellent work and also the secretariat of the committee for its work of handling so many amendments .
With effort on the part of everybody , I believe that we are going to be able to approve a directive which , on the one hand , can be effectively applied , which is not a letter to Father Christmas , since we are in the festive season , but rather a piece of legislation that can be put into practice and will not become obsolete in six months time , because it takes good account of the technical reality that we are talking about and is not drawn up according to any particular person 's philosophy , but according to the reality of today 's world .
At the same time , I believe that it is a directive that can avoid two extremes , and that will be the case if the amendments are approved , as some of us hope .
One extreme would be American-style television controlled and dominated by advertising .
There is also the extreme represented by those who believe that everything must be regulated by law , who want to change society solely by means of the law , sometimes on the basis of values that we may even share , or on the pretext of protecting the weakest members of society , the young and others whom we all want to protect .
Such people believe that that must be done solely and exclusively by means of the law , imposing burdens which make open commercial television impossible and unviable , or restricting legitimate business freedoms that exist in our market systems and in the European internal market .
I believe that we are achieving that balance between the two extremes . Certain extremes remain .
For example , there is still an amendment aimed at banning pornography on the Internet ; a very worthy objective .
I do not know whether it is the job of the European Parliament to ban pornography on the Internet , for example .
This has nothing to do with the values that any one of us defends , but rather with the reality of the field in which we are legislating .
I would like to end by expressing my support and praise for the efforts of the Commission and of everybody with a view to achieving a text that clearly opts for self-regulation and co-regulation .
It is an instrument that has brought very good results and will continue to do so in the application of this directive .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , take the view that it is right to revise the television directive in view of the fact that the real world has changed so much ; revision of it is a response to the digitalisation of the media .
Since we now have ' video on demand ' , Internet TV , ' webstreaming ' and whole new platforms , this directive needs to cover all audio-visual media services , and it is for that reason too that we have renamed it .

We are not , however , regulating the Internet as such ; nothing produced by private consumers , no private homepages will end up being subject to the revised directive .
Traditional broadcasting rules - prior control over content , for example - present no threat to press freedom or to the free expression of opinion .
We Greens claim three successes where changes to this directive are concerned , one being the greater opportunities afforded to independent producers , together with a clear definition of what is meant by that term ; another is greater accessibility for the disabled ; there is also the European right to short reporting , which is all about diversity and the public 's democratic access to information .
There are , though , two major points of criticism to be made .
We Greens do not want European television to become more American .
I am not , in principle , anti-American , but I do want to promote and maintain European quality television , while all the proponents of the Commission proposal - including Mrs Hieronymi - think that European television 's only chance of a future lies with American-style product placement and ' single spots ' , and that we all have to submit to the constraints of the advertising market .
I very definitely do not go along with this view .
I want content and advertising to continue to be kept separate rather than being mixed up together .
I do not want ' single spots ' every few minutes , or the six minutes ' advertising in the space of 36 minutes that the PPE-DE and the Social Democrats want for all formats ; I want to be able to watch a television programme without interruption .
The present opportunities for advertising are sufficient .

Perhaps Mr Schulz can tell me - although he is not here - whether he wants , in an episode of the crime series ' Tatort ' filmed in Munich , the detectives to be driving around in BMWs and drinking something that is recognisably Löwenbräu ?
Or perhaps Mrs Prets or Mr Poettering can tell us whether they would allow product placement in a television drama in order to promote the sale of Volkswagens , and I call on Chancellor Merkel and Mr Neumann , her minister of state for culture , now that the German Presidency of the Council is about to begin , to go beyond half-hearted resistance to product placement and give a clear indication of their opposition to it .
I have to tell Mrs Hieronymi that I regard her report as politically wrong-headed .
Its ban on product placement is superficial , in that it then goes on to allow the Member States to introduce it , so , in some formats , product placement will become a reality in all European countries .
Is that really what you want , ladies and gentlemen ?
I see this as self-deception ; on the one hand product placement is to be allowed , but , on the other , according to the directive , people are not meant to buy the products .

That , though , is ridiculous ; we are simply conning ourselves in what I regard as a typical sell-out .
I urge you to be courageous in voting against product placement and single spots , to defend European quality television , to vote for free production aids , for the Greens ' amendments relate to all of these things .
We should take pride in our quality television and it is this area that we should most distance ourselves from the Americans .
I would like to thank the other Members and the Commission , too , for their cooperation .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the review of the previous legislation - which is seen as a natural legal adjustment to new technologies - conceals a desire for the uncontrolled liberalisation of the advertising market : no daily limit on teleshopping , telepromotions that are not included in the schedule , unregulated small advertising spots and the introduction of product placement , an advertising practice that is so interwoven with programme content that it cannot be regulated either quantitatively or qualitatively .
The text of the directive also lacks binding references to the principles of pluralism , independence and free competition , which should instead form the basis of every broadcasting system in a modern democracy , as Parliament itself has repeatedly confirmed .
Closely associated as it is with the democratic and cultural life of a country , television is undoubtedly the most important cultural vehicle of our times , and it is dangerous to have its content and its functioning depend solely on market principles , without safeguarding viewers ' rights , for example to impartial information or to the protection of their children .
How do we go about protecting children when advertisements change their eating habits ?
It is indeed a fact that most children today only eat products that are full of sugars and fats .
In this Commission proposal , which talks about ' no frontiers ' , that is , no limits , there is nothing but advertising .
If we do not change the course of action in line with the amendments tabled not only by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , but also by a cross-party group of MEPs without political ties , the television of the future is in danger of becoming a slave to the laws of advertising , and to them alone .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , in an era of rapid technological progress on a global scale and the change that this progress brings with it , we should take care to ensure that change fosters cultural and economic development in the whole of Europe , as well as in individual nations .
That is why I welcome Mrs Hieronymi 's report , which is based on the country of origin principle .
Adapting rules and conditions at a national level will allow national products , including independent products , to be marketed in a way that is more productive and attractive for the consumer , thanks to the distinction between linear and non-linear services .
I would also like to express my appreciation and support for the rapporteur 's proposals concerning the protection of minors , the prevention of racial hatred , and surreptitious advertising , and for the distinction drawn in the document between sponsorship and product placement .
I am also pleased that the proposal to shorten the intervals between commercial breaks during films to 30 minutes has been rejected , as this prevents the distortion of the proportions of the film or a loss of its artistic value .
Mrs Hieronymi 's report is a good document and provides a basis for further work aimed at regulating linear and non-linear services .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , the Commission and the rapporteur intended a slight liberalisation of advertising law .
However , I believe it has been hijacked by extremists .
Here are some of the most damaging elements .
A ban on advertising during children 's programmes means there will be fewer of them and the remainder will be of lower quality . Jobs will be lost in the media and the toy industry .
The ban also extends to news , documentaries , advisory programmes , theatre , opera , any form of sponsorship and product placement .
The consequence will be to reduce revenue to the commercial media , bringing their very future into doubt .
The right to short reporting - 90 seconds of someone else 's broadcast for free - will destroy commercial news and sports reporting .
As you will see , I only have 90 seconds here .
The ban on some foods would be better addressed by working with the food industry to improve its products and safeguard jobs , rather than blaming the advertising industry for something it does not control .
A ban on advertising alcohol will not stop people drinking .
Prohibition did not stop it in the USA .
The directive seeks to use the country-of-origin principle to solve differences between Member States , yet it undermines that very principle .
It will not work .
I have time here for one example .
Many Swedish media companies have been based in Britain to enjoy our employment laws .
They are subject to British law , but they broadcast into Sweden .
Sweden has more stringent child protection laws than the UK . It is justifiably unhappy .
The IND / DEM Group and UKIP back Sweden 's right to decide what happens on Swedish territory and equally Britain 's rights on UK soil .
The directive offers no solution , only an ongoing problem .
I have introduced amendments to reject the Commission proposal .
Moderate Members will support this .
Madam President , President Reagan famously said , ' If it moves , tax it .
If it keeps moving , regulate it . And if it stops moving , subsidise it . '
I suggest to the House that this is the anti-business approach of the European Union when it comes to the television industry , especially with regard to regulating the industry .
We have here one of the most competitive industries that exists .
People in the industry fight to gain viewers , they fight to hold viewers and so , except in special cases , for example involving children , there is simply no need for regulation .
The operators are already working as hard as they can to make sure that what they present is attractive to viewers .
The second piece of damage that this proposal will do is to innovation .
Inevitably , what we are doing here is setting today 's technology in stone .
None of us in this Chamber knows what will happen next year or the year after ; we are creating , therefore , a barrier to innovation and we should reject the whole proposal .
( HU ) Madam President , I would also like to join those congratulating Mrs Hieronymi on the excellent job she has done .
The new Member States have specific problems with regard to the media market , and I am very confident that this workable compromise which has been adopted can lead to the creation of a media market with a more uniform structure in the new Member States , as well as to greater competition in these countries too .
The media system and market in a number of the new Member States did not develop as a result of organic growth , but originate mainly from the media and infrastructure which were under party control during the years of dictatorship .
Media wars have broken out directly in these countries , which includes my own , Hungary , due to the established monopolies , and the particular infrastructure and regulatory conditions favouring a plurality of views have not been established .
This is precisely why I think this matter is important , and I sincerely hope that this will help the situation .
As an elected representative , I also feel it is essential that our fundamental values , by which I mean our views on the protection of minors , human liberties , cultural and linguistic diversity and minorities , are given a high profile in these regulations ; after all , they are not only our common values , but also appear in any joint European basic document .
In order to achieve this , we cannot create unnecessary obstacles blocking the development of the media market in Europe .
This is why I am confident that the compromise reached will definitely guarantee that Europe can compete with the rest of the world .
Thank you for your efforts , and I wish this proposal every success in its implementation .
( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Reding , Mrs Hieronymi , the adoption of this amended TVWF ( ' Television without Frontiers ' ) Directive is going to enable the various players to develop within a clear framework , responding to the demands of the digital revolution and of the knowledge-based economy .
I would emphasise the positive point concerning the scope of application , with the inclusion of non-linear services and the unambiguous exclusion of private websites .
A balance needed to be struck between freedom of expression , the free movement of information and freedom of access to new services - such as VOD - and to valuable cultural and economic content .
The emphasis laid on quality will enable European production to strengthen its position .
The same is true of the promotion of European content .
The directive offers real progress with regard to the protection of minors and places ethical restrictions on advertising , but it must confirm matters , particularly with regard to the issue of health and of the fight against obesity .
I hope that our Parliament will confirm its support for my proposal to ban the advertising of products that do not comply with children 's labour standards .



( DE ) Madam President , heartfelt congratulations to Mrs Hieronymi and to Commissioner Reding ; television is about to undergo a revolution , and , although opinions differ as to how that revolution will turn out , there is no doubt about the fact that television is becoming more democratic .
In future , it will not be just for a few major broadcasters to make television and determine what is shown on it ; the example of YouTube already shows the way things are going , with the Internet as a new stage , and each consumer his own director .
Television is a living industry , and one that we in Europe must build up , in particular by opening the sector up as a labour market for creative people .
In the USA , more recently , all the new ideas in the audio-visual sector have originated from television , rather than from Hollywood , as in the past ; one may take the television series ' 24 ' as an example .
Let us not be guided by prejudice , or else there will be a rude awakening in store for us .
What is needed , here in Europe , is a creative industry ; too many restrictions - particularly on advertising , which is the only source of income apart from fees - harm the creatives in particular and ultimately result in more trash or cheap imports and to fewer European productions .
( PT ) Television lives off the interface between three conflicting interests , namely those of the programme-makers , the operators and the viewers .
The Committee on Culture and Education voted for a solution that I feel is , broadly speaking , a balanced one .
It is not television as I myself would have it , but it is at least governed by rules .
Unfortunately , under pressure from the Commission and some operators , proposals have arisen in this plenary session that jeopardise this balance , to the detriment of the viewers .
As regards product placement , the current wording is reasonable .
Product placement is on the whole prohibited , with exceptions that the Member States can authorise , but pressure at the eleventh hour has led the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe to table amendments that run counter to what had been accepted , and we object to this .
The Committee on Culture also voted for a proposal whereby programmes with product placement should be identified to the viewer for the purposes of consumer protection , but a signal that only appears every 20 minutes neither informs nor protects .
For example , when it comes to violent films , no one expects the warning only to appear at the beginning or before the interval .
As regards advertisement breaks , we would distinguish between 45 and 30 minutes depending on the type of programme . This is the right way forward .
It is a solution that does not alter the thrust of the policy and that avoids the excesses of moral prohibitionism , as Mr Guardans Cambó rightly pointed out .

( NL ) Madam President , one explanation for the fact that more and more time is spent watching audiovisual products is that moving pictures hold a huge attraction for people , and it is a generally know fact that viewing habits of this kind are bound to have an impact on human behavioural patterns .
The content of the products on offer can be useful , but can also be so depressing that many members of the public avoid them on ethical grounds .
It is up to the authorities to protect the weaker members of society ; they can do this by offering security , not only in the physical , but also the mental sense .
That being so , I am delighted with two sections of this report .
First of all , I am pleased with the stricter rules on jurisdiction .
It is right , in my view , that Member States should have more influence on what audiovisual services are offered within their territory , for every Member State has its own identity , and the audiovisual services provided should be in keeping with this .
It is not enough to comply with the rules of the country where the provider is established .
My second point concerns the position of minors and vulnerable people , both of which categories of persons are relatively easily led and can end up manifesting behaviour that is dangerous to themselves and sometimes to their environment as well .
It is up to the legislator to minimise the likelihood of damage .
First of all , my thanks to Mrs Hieronymi , Mrs Rühle and Mr Greg Paulger from the Commission for all their excellent work .
I probably got Greg into trouble there , but thank you very much for all your work .
There were a few issues that I had great concerns about right at the beginning .
One was the extension of scope .
I would like to see no extension of scope , because I worry about regulating services that do not yet exist , but I am very happy with the compromise that we have reached .
I am also very happy with the work that was done by the rapporteur in recognising the role of self-regulation .
We have to recognise that product placement exists .
There are examples of German car companies that have gone outside Germany and placed their cars in an American programme that is shown back in Germany , and that has led to a lot of revenue , not only for European producers , but also for European agencies .
Let us realise that there is a world outside the EU .
When it comes to advertising breaks , in a world of multi-channelled TV with thousands of channels and hundreds of devices , we should leave this to the market .
If you over-advertise , people will switch off .
Finally , we need to make sure that we have a strong country-of-origin principle .
We must not allow the enemies of the single market to win their arguments .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , it was a year ago , Commissioner , that you presented us with this document , and I think that a lot has happened in that time .
The report has undergone a lot of development , and we have been presented with plenty of acceptable compromises .
It is evident from the debate that one great central concern is advertising , and , as this is something with which a lot of us have a problem , we will have to discuss it ; the question is : how must we control the amount of advertising in order to protect consumers while at the same time enabling creative artists to bring good , high-quality products onto the market without charging even more ?
Advertising is something we are not going to be able to get away from .
We have spent a lot of time considering product placement , and have - albeit with certain exceptions - banned it .
We will have to keep an eye on what the Member States do with this , and how this ban is handled ; under no circumstances must we end up with a situation in which content is determined by the product advertised .
Clear boundaries have to be drawn , and I think that characters in Bavarian crime programmes have been driving around in BMWs for quite some time without anyone so far being bothered by it .
I would also like - very briefly - to say something about the country of origin principle , for that too is very important and must not be allowed to result in media service providers deliberately moving their production operations to other countries in search of less onerous requirements , and that is something else that we have to deal with .

Madam President , we know that revenue from advertising through traditional media has been reduced , so the equation is simple : if we do not allow more revenue for traditional TV to be earned , then all hopes of quality productions , documentaries and cultural vibrancy are lost .
I believe in the market power of the ' off ' button .
Advertisers will not pay for unseen adverts and viewers will not watch unacceptable TV ; but unacceptability refers as much to the standard of programmes as to the excessive presence of advertising , so we are back to my original equation .
On balance , allowing advertising breaks in programmes scheduled for 30 minutes is both practical and essential , as is cautious product placement .
On short news reports , we have been very exercised by sports events .
We need to take care with our words so as to allow some reasonable inclusion in general news programmes , while noting that public interest does not extend so far that on a day-to-day basis it undermines the value of copyright or other exclusive rights that have been purchased .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of this directive is to totally liberalise the advertising market , and that means a single kind of television , one that is exclusively for entertainment purposes .
It will become impossible to make quality , educational or cultural television .
European cultural production will be greatly harmed , and this directive will cause serious damage to the dailies , which will no longer be able to attract advertising .
Television often gives rise to superfluous needs , and advertising thus becomes a conveyor belt of induced needs : that is why we need to do more to protect the weak members of society , in particular children .
Outrageous as it is , product placement in fact changes the very nature of advertising , which goes from being the essence of selling to the very essence of television broadcasting .
The important liberal philosopher , Karl Popper , described television as a ' bad teacher ' .
Today , with this directive , the proclamations of the ' bad teacher ' become proclamations ' without frontiers ' .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen an Olympic marathon is nearing its completion .
The revised directive ' Television Without Frontiers ' is set for vote at the part-session of the European Parliament , in the hope of an approval that will bring to order the most widely known mass media that is television .
It was not an easy task for the Commission and especially for rapporteur Mrs Hieronymi , whom I must congratulate on her efforts but also my colleagues that contributed so that this directive could reach its final stage .
We will know the result this time tomorrow .
The only thing certain is that this race has no losers , because all of us gave our best so that the citizens can gain from this .
In a Europe without frontiers , this directive will harmonise the basic legal framework regarding mass media and will set minimum standards to protect even more the viewer who is surrounded by constant ' fire ' .
Television is a medium that has the power to educate , project , inform , entertain , spread civilisation , teach and open up a dialogue with the citizens .
This is its role or at least this is the television we want .
A pluralistic television .
Available to all .
A television without frontiers .
The directive we are called upon to vote should be comprehensive and moreover it should be implemented immediately .
This is our main consideration and what we are trying for .
The Council must be convinced that it is their obligation towards society and the generations to follow , to observe the rules of respect and harmonisation of the directive to national law , which is what every civilised nation deserves and what four hundred and fifty million citizens , viewing us now , demand .
( SV ) Madam President , the harmful effects of alcohol cost the European Union EUR 125 billion each year , corresponding to 1.3 % of the EU 's GDP .
Alcohol is , then , not just any product , and there must therefore be restrictions on television advertisements for alcohol .
Children who watch television during the day should not have to be exposed to advertisements for alcoholic drinks .
I therefore hope that Parliament will support Amendment 169 tomorrow .
The directive we are debating in this House is a minimum directive .
The idea , then , is that each country should be able to have its own more restrictive rules on advertising . In practice , however , this is impossible .
In Sweden , for example , we have banned advertisements aimed at children , but TV 3 and Channel 5 are nonetheless able to get around these rules by broadcasting from Great Britain .
That is absurd . Broadcasts aimed at Swedish viewers should follow Swedish rules , just as broadcasts aimed at British viewers should follow British rules .
I therefore hope that Parliament will vote tomorrow in favour of amendments such as numbers 246 and 153 that give the recipient country some say about the advertising content of broadcasts .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the directive has a great impact on two levels : firstly , on that of industry and technology , because we are talking here about an advanced sector of European industry , and , secondly , on that of public opinion , of the development of ideas - in other words , the cultural level of European society .
We therefore think it important to strike a balance between these two elements , namely technology and the content and characteristics of the product .
For this reason , we have asked for a great deal of attention to be paid to the issue of the impact on children , so that the media , as an instrument of growth , does not become an instrument of manipulation .
We are in favour , Commissioner , of finding substantial resources for investment through advertising and other methods of funding , but we want clear rules so that advertising does not stifle and destroy the creativity of production , artistic freedom and the importance of European cultural production , which must be supported .
I am therefore against advertising getting out of control .
I am in favour of 45 minutes between commercial breaks , but not of the kind of advertising that starts to predominate over the product and its quality .
Finally , talking about audiovisuals inevitably means talking about quality issues , and in this case , too , Commissioner , I appeal to your sensitivity : this is not only a question of business , but also a question of pluralism , insofar as a directive of this kind must necessarily include and respect plurality arguments , too .
It is in fact not just culture , but also democracy in Europe , that is linked to this issue .
( FR ) Madam President , television is the main source of information and entertainment in Europe ; it is watched by all individuals , of all ages , on a daily basis .
For more than 15 years , the ' Television without Frontiers ' Directive has been the benchmark where television regulation in Europe is concerned .
This directive has been able to guarantee a common level of protection for important general policy objectives and to make it easier for television services to be distributed beyond borders , thanks in particular to the country of origin principle .
It has also promoted freedom of expression and of information and has played a significant part in promoting the expression of cultural identities .
However , with the digital age , convergence and the arrival of new audiovisual media services , a new revision of this regulatory framework has proved necessary .
The text proposed to us today represents a major step not only for the audiovisual media sector , but also for the people of Europe .
It is the outcome of a real effort to cooperate and exchange views , overseen for several months by our rapporteur . I should like to congratulate her on the quality of her report and on the considerable efforts she has made to get through these most sensitive of subjects .
Taking account of the two sides - economic and cultural - of audiovisual services , the revision of the ' Television without Frontiers ' Directive enables us to draw conclusions from current technological developments and to adapt the Community legal framework to future developments .
In this regard , the very principle of extending the directive to new audiovisual media services is crucial .
Since non-linear services are competing more and more with traditional services , their contribution to the promotion of cultural diversity is crucial and conforms to the objectives laid down in the UNESCO convention .
Furthermore , a major step has been taken for linear services , with short extracts being granted a right of access .
This right will , however , have to be exercised under reasonable conditions and in compliance with exclusivity rights .
Finally , as regards advertising , we have been given the opportunity for the first time to have clear rules on product placements : with the guarantees proposed to us , product placements will provide new opportunities for European audiovisual production and creation , while guaranteeing consumer production and information .
( SV ) Mr President , I acknowledge that we need to overhaul the directive in the light of the developments , especially technical developments , that have taken place in the audiovisual sphere over the last 20 years .
However , the Commission proposal and the amendments to the directive all have some unhelpful features .
The directive is , in quite a few respects , in danger of bringing about a deterioration in consumer protection generally and , in particular , of exacerbating the effects of television on minors .
Just as there has been technical progress , the quantity and diversity of advertisements has increased over the last 20 years .
Advertisements are everywhere nowadays and are even aimed at children and other minors .
There must be regulations that create a balance when it comes to the quantity of advertisements permitted and to the particular consumer groups at which advertisements may be targeted .
Even though what we have here is a minimum directive , many of us in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament are in favour of stringent rules governing all advertising in children 's programmes and advertising aimed at children .
We understand why the Commission has banned advertisements in religious programmes but question why it is considered less important to protect children from commercial influences than it is to protect people who watch this type of programme .
Children cannot distinguish advertisements from other programmes and cannot , therefore , understand the ulterior motives behind advertising .
Like many others , I am opposed to advertisements aimed at children .

( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the new directive is to be welcomed , for it enables us to guarantee that the traditional television channels on the public network will retain a fighting chance in the digital era .
There is no point , as you know , in imposing stricter requirements on the traditional public network television , if these new rules did not apply to on-demand television , which is expanding at an enormous rate .
I would therefore like to offer the rapporteur , Mrs Hieronymi , and Commissioner Reding my heartfelt congratulations .
Nevertheless , I have two comments .
First of all , with regard to product placement : it is , of course , to be welcomed that this can be done , as it also benefits the television sector in enabling it to tap into a new instrument in order to attract advertisers and compensate for the loss of income from television commercials .
Needless to say , a sound framework needs to be worked out for this - one that safeguards editorial autonomy on the one hand and an announcement before and after the programme on the other , so that the viewing public would then know where they stand .
Secondly , Mrs Hieronymi , Commissioner Reding , in Flanders , we would like to see Europe approve a general ban on advertising in children 's programmes .
While this view is widely supported in Flanders , and also in Sweden , there is apparently - and regrettably - less enthusiasm for the idea in the rest of Europe .
What we can do , though , is to impose rules that are stricter than the European minimum we will be approving tomorrow , but as you know , those rules are at risk of being undermined by channels that transmit to the viewing public in Flanders from other Member States .
What is now before us is , unfortunately , not enough to stave this off , so I hope that , tomorrow , we will not weaken the Council compromise even further , and finally , that a code of conduct will be introduced for commercials for fast foods , for example , in our neighbouring countries , which , although this is to be welcomed , we would be better off banning from our screens altogether , and certainly from children 's programmes .
In fact , decision-making in this respect is still at Member State level .
This would be the best instrument in the fight against obesity , which we do , of course , all support .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has mainly emphasised the industrial and economic importance of television , which is indeed considerable , but , universally accessible as it is , television is above all the greatest information tool and the main vehicle of culture , as well as being an instrument of power .
There is currently a tendency to extend the space for advertising on television , and this is likely to limit the role of the press and its freedom to gain funding .
The article authorising product placement is based on a falsehood , because first this principle is denied and then it is sanctioned in a thousand different ways .
This will mean that the makers of all fictional programmes and of other shows will see their creativity not just used , but also contaminated .
I therefore understand the painful compromise reached by the rapporteur , Mrs Hieronymi , who has done an excellent piece of work . However , I , together with many others , have tabled an amendment aimed at eliminating the idea of product placement , in addition to other amendments .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that democracy is a system of public opinion , and the freer the media is , the better the democracy .
This directive regulates the media in the audiovisual sector and I believe that the question we should ask is : does it make it freer or less free than before ?
In order to respond to that question , we should consider this equation : the greater the interventionism of the authorities , the less free the media is , and vice versa : the less intervention there is from the authorities , the greater the freedom of the media .
In my view , ladies and gentlemen , this directive is unfortunately excessively interventionist : with regard to advertising , with regard to quotas of audiovisual production , with regard to unnecessarily extending the scope to non-linear services , but above all , with regard to giving the national regulatory authorities power to protect the fundamental right of freedom of expression .
All democrats know that protecting fundamental rights falls exclusively to courts of justice .
This directive , however , and through no fault of the rapporteur , who has fought extremely bravely - and I thank you for that , Mrs Hieronymi - gives national regulatory authorities the power to decide what is accurate and what is not , what may be broadcast and what may not or , as has happened in Catalonia , one of the European regions with the poorest level of democracy in the whole of the European Union , which operators may broadcast and which may not .
That is a way of opening ourselves up to prior censorship .
I would ask you , please , Mrs Reding , to take this seriously , to see whether we can avoid it , amongst other things because we will have to listen carefully to what organisations such as Reporters Without Borders , the World Association of Newspapers or the World Press Freedom Committee have to say about this issue .
They are going to embarrass us .
I hope that that embarrassment will at least force us to correct our mistake in time .
Mr President , as I am very well aware that time is pressing , I am not now going to read out the very long list of amendments that the Commission is in a position to accept and those that it has to reject .
Unfortunately , I will not be able to put forward any arguments either .
I am going to submit this list to you and to the political groups .
I must say , however , that the ' Television without Frontiers ' regulation , which has been in force for many years now , has proved its worth , by developing the television sector in Europe and by giving a real opportunity to European content .
We are now faced with a fundamental change where technology is concerned : we must therefore adapt the directive to the modern world , with new , fairly flexible definitions that can stand the test of time and the development of technology .
The great majority of Parliament is of this opinion .
We have here the prospect of quality television , where regulated advertising serves to fund European programmes and where media services can take advantage of the country of origin principle and , thus , of the single market : they must both comply with the basic values that are the protection of minors and the ban on incitement to racial hatred , while supporting the production of European works .
While we can thus summarise in a few sentences what Parliament is going to vote on , it is , of course , an imperfect summary , but at least we have tried .
The full complexity of the undertaking is illustrated by the multitude of amendments tabled .
I must say that , among the amendments of the report by the Committee on Culture and Education - once again , I am extremely grateful for the exemplary work done by its rapporteur , Mrs Hieronymi - the Commission can accept 44 of them and it can accept 59 of them in part : in other words , two-thirds of the amendments contained in the Hieronymi report .
That tells you something about the quality of the positive work done by Parliament : it should be congratulated .
As regards the amendments tabled in plenary , the Commission can accept eight of them in full and 24 in part : Mr President , as time is pressing , the list will be handed over to you .
Allow me , in closing , to thank the MEPs and the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs , who have really done a precise piece of work - one that is very complicated , but that is in the interest of our European television and media sectors .
European content , which will have a chance thanks to you , owes you a great deal !
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place on Wednesday at 12.00 .
Annex - Position of the Commission
Hieronymi report
The Commission can accept Amendments 6 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 16 , 20 , 25 , 30 , 32 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 48 , 49 , 56 , 62 , 67 , 78 , 79 , 81 , 84 , 85 , 86 , 88 , 89-92 , 99 , 115 , 117 , 120-125 , 128-130 , 132 , 133 , 138 , 144 , 154 , 212 , 213 , 215 , 221 , 222 , 224 and 226 .
Amendments 1 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 8 , 10 , 13 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 23 , 27 , 28 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 46 , 50 , 57 , 58 , 60 , 63-65 , 66 , 68-71 , 73 , 77 , 82 , 83 , 87 , 94-98 , 104 , 107-110 , 114 , 126 , 127 , 131 , 135 , 137 , 141 , 147 , 149 , 150 , 151 , 157 , 178 , 183 , 184 , 186 , 191 , 193 , 200 , 203-205 , 208 , 214 , 216 , 218-220 , 223 , 225 , 227-229 , 235 and 236 can be accepted in principle .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 2 , 5 , 9 , 15 , 21 , 22 , 24 , 26 , 29 , 31 , 37 , 44 , 45 , 47 , 51-55 , 59 , 61 , 72 , 74-76 , 80 , 93 , 100-103 , 105 , 106 , 111 , 112 , 113 , 116 , 118 , 119 , 134 , 136 , 139 , 140 , 142 , 143 , 145 , 146 , 148 , 152 , 153 , 155 , 156 , 158-163 , 166-177 , 179-182 , 185 , 187-190 , 192 , 194-199 , 201 , 202 , 206 , 207 , 209-211 , 230-234 and 237-246 .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( ET ) The Baltic States almost bloodlessly rid themselves of the Soviet occupation .
The greatest number of people gave their lives defending the freedom and objectivity of the press .
On 20 August 1990 , twenty Estonian patriots resisted Moscow 's OMON Special Forces soldiers to defend the Tallinn Television Tower .
On 13 January 1991 , fifteen people died defending the television tower in Vilnius .
Dozens more Lithuanians were injured in gas attacks against the television and radio building and transmitting centre .
In discussing the Audio-Visual Media Services Directive , the people of the Baltic States think about unbiased media more than advertising sales .
It is manifestly clear that the Kremlin has now once again reined in the media .
What is less well known is that part of the European Union media has been transformed into an obedient instrument of Moscow .
Our liberal attitudes permit the Pervõi Baltiiski Kanal , which has its headquarters in Riga , to turn the Russian-speaking inhabitants of the three Baltic States against our countries ' legal governments .
The channel is funded not by Russian businessmen , but by Russian propagandists .
Their skills have reached a new level , and the channel 's ideological message is skilfully concealed among entertainment .
This does not , however , fool media experts .
Every Member State must be able to defend itself against such hostile foreign propaganda .
My motion to amend was signed by all of the representatives from the Baltic States , regardless of their party affiliation .
We have already experienced the Kremlin 's ideological manipulation , and do not wish to endure it again .
( NL ) It is important to promote the free movement of European television programmes and for the production of these programmes not to be hindered by excessively strict legislation on advertising .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is opting for a realistic look on product placement .
Information is useful , but consumers are not waiting for a reminder during a television programme .
A reminder prior to and after a programme are sufficient .
Income from advertising and product placement is needed in order to help finance European productions ; the alternative to that is even more cheap American ones , full of product placement .
Children 's programmes must be subject to stricter standards , for obesity is an increasing problem .
Given the huge impact of advertising of unhealthy food on children 's menu choices , advertising directed at this target group should be restricted .
I would therefore argue in favour of developing an effective code of conduct with regard to advertising , product placement and other marketing of unhealthy drinks and food aimed at children .
Finally , I would still advocate a strong country of origin principle .
Television programme makers should not be made subject to extra rules and regulations when they want to offer their programmes elsewhere in the European Union .
What we must do is enhance the sales of European audiovisual products .
( IT ) The outcome of the vote on the Television without Frontiers Directive shows great maturity on the part of Parliament .
In fact , thanks to the excellent work of the rapporteur , Mrs Hieronymi , of all the draftsmen of opinions , of the Council and of the Commission , the directive provides an effective tool for promoting the competitiveness of the European audiovisual industry , leaving reasonable scope for private funding ( this is nothing new , audiovisual services live off advertising ) while guaranteeing an appropriate level of protection for consumers and , above all , for the most vulnerable members of society ( such as children and the disabled ) .
I would , however , have preferred more courage to have been shown , for example regarding the introduction of product placement .
While I agree with those who wish to safeguard the creativity and independence of writers , together with the quality of productions , I must nevertheless point out that , in 2007 , and on the international market , this practice is a reality , and denying this fact means risking a loss of competitiveness , funding and market quotas .
I hope that the majority of the Member States will be able to show more courage and more openmindedness than these institutions have so far shown .
( SV ) This difficult issue presented by modern technology produces a conflict in terms of goals , with freedom pitted against the interest we have in providing certain forms of protection .
On the one hand , it is awkward censoring programmes broadcast from other Member States but , on the other hand , we believe that each Member State must be able to make its own decisions on cultural and moral issues relating , for example , to advertisements for alcohol and tobacco and advertisements aimed at children and to rules governing discrimination and pornography .
Each Member State must be able to make its own laws in these areas .
Technical developments involving rapid broadband Internet and mobile telephony facilitate media services that are similar to television and in which compliance with the ethical rules is difficult to monitor .
In this area too , however , the Member States need to be able , if they so wish , to legislate in such a way that there are regulations governing child pornography and copyright .
This is undoubtedly a very complex matter , but we believe that Sweden 's position in the Council should have been given a better hearing at November 's Council meeting .
We believe , however , that the proposal by the Committee on Culture and Education is better than the Council 's , and we therefore support this report .
European Union annual report on human rights ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on the European Parliament 's annual report on Human Rights .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a pleasure for me to present to you today the European Union 's annual report on human rights .
The first report on human rights was published in 1999 , when Finland , as it was this time too , was involved in drafting the report in its role as Presidency of the European Union .
The purpose of the report has not changed since then .
It still deals , in a way that is unique , with the European Union 's human rights policy and what has been achieved within its framework .
The report now completed concerns the EU action and policies implemented in the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 and which were aimed at promoting a universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The report follows seven earlier annual reports published between 1999 and 2005 , in accordance with the declaration adopted in 1998 by the European Council .
Issued on the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , it urged the European Union to step up its work on human rights .
It also called on the EU to draw up an annual report on human rights .
The report on human rights presents an overview of the work done to promote human rights and democracy by the institutions of the European Union .
The EU 's external policies and internal circumstances are also subjects for scrutiny .
Furthermore , there is a separate section devoted to an examination of action on the part of the European Parliament to promote human rights and democracy .
To its credit , the European Parliament raises issues on human rights and makes certain that they also receive the attention they deserve in the other Union institutions .
The report highlights the special priorities of the EU 's human rights policy , such as the mainstreaming of human rights .
In practice , mainstreaming has meant increasing interaction between human rights experts and national think-tanks and presenting aspects of human rights in different EU areas of activity , such as crisis management and the export of arms .
The European Union has developed ways of dealing with special problems , such as women , security and children , in connection with armed conflicts .
The Personal Representative of the Secretary-General / High Representative has been actively involved in mainstreaming human rights in the area of the Common Foreign and Security Policy and in increasing awareness of the EU guidelines on human rights .
The European Union has adopted special guidelines on certain issues and in this way has determined the priorities in its human rights policy .
The Union is opposed to the death penalty under any circumstances and has highlighted individual cases where the minimum standards of international law have not been met .
During the reporting period , the Union drew particular attention to countries where policy on the death penalty has been changing .
The European Union has encouraged different countries to join the international Convention against Torture and thus reinforce action aimed at its abolition .
Moreover , the Union has specified certain priority target countries where it proposes to improve the human rights situation by trying in various ways to alleviate the suffering of children caught up in armed conflicts .
It has been important to highlight this issue in multilateral international forums and make the EU better equipped to deal with it in the context of European Security and Defence Policy operations .
With regard to the EU 's guidelines on human rights defenders , the Union has launched global campaigns on freedom of speech and women 's human rights .
Because human rights defenders very often come under attack themselves , their rights are still one of the EU 's priorities .
The Council appreciates the central role played by the European Parliament in our joint efforts to defend and promote the implementation of human rights .
The Sakharov Prize awarded yearly for those who speak on behalf of freedom of thought has a key part to play here .
Over the years Parliament has acknowledged the achievements of major figures , such as Nelson Mandela and Kofi Annan .
We welcome the fact that this year 's Sakharov Prize has gone to the Belarusian opposition leader Alyaksandr Milinkevich .
There is reason to believe that this internationally recognised honour will encourage Mr Milinkevich and others to continue their important work to strengthen democratic forces in Belarus .
During the period under review in the report , which is to say between the summer of 2005 and the summer of 2006 , there was a major change to the UN structures .
The negotiations on the creation of the United Nations Human Rights Council and , later , the first sitting of the new Council , provided a crucial framework for EU action in the area of multilateral human rights policy .
The EU 's goal the whole time was to establish a Council that would give human rights the status it had been guaranteed in the UN Charter .
Although we did not get all the issues that we had promoted in the final text adopted in March 2006 , the Union nonetheless believes that the establishment of the UN Human Rights Council will be an essential element in strengthening the UN Human Rights System .
It will also be a major step forward in the UN reform process as a whole .
The promotion of human rights , democracy and progress in the rule of law is hugely important in the fight against terrorism and various extremist movements .
In statements made in several UN and other forums , the EU has reiterated its opinion that a respect for human rights is vital in the work to combat terrorism .
The Presidency has emphasised on several occasions that effective action against terrorism and the protection of human rights are complementary and mutually supportive goals .
Political dialogue is undeniably one key tool in the promotion of human rights .
The mainstreaming of human rights has involved an attempt to guarantee that human rights issues will be dealt with consistently in contact between the EU and third countries at different levels .
This also applies to countries with which the EU is involved in a special human rights dialogue , such as China and Russia .
The human rights report this year for the first time underlines the EU 's commitment to enhancing dialogue between cultures , both within the Union and with third countries .
The victims of breaches of human rights and the defenders of human rights around the world expect a lot from the European Union , and for a reason .
The European Union , as a Community based on values , may be expected to strive to promote human rights and democracy with clear goals in sight .
This report will help us judge how well the Union has been able to respond to this challenge .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I very much welcome the publication of the 2006 annual report on human rights .
This is the first time that this report has really been a combined effort .
We have battled for that .
Last year we had the debate here in plenary and I said that I would be very happy if we could prepare the report together .
I would have liked to have one of the prefaces .
Unfortunately it seems it was too late , but I think the Commission should have been visible .
It now seems to be an established practice always to have a special session on human rights and democracy before Christmas .
It is a good tradition ; it is a noble tradition , to see what has been implemented and what the new developments are .
The annual report this year is again a valuable record of the combined efforts of us all in promoting and protecting human rights around the world , and a reflection of the positive way in which the European Union has come together to produce it .
This debate gives me the opportunity to quickly highlight some activities in 2006 .
First , mainstreaming human rights into external policies ranked high on our EU priority list in 2006 , thanks to the Austrian and Finnish Presidencies .
It is indeed a source of satisfaction to note that all actors within the EU are more and more committed to this very important aspect of our policies .
However , let us not forget that mainstreaming or , as I also like to call it , ' integrating ' human rights into all policies , is not an end in itself , but an approach to achieving overarching goals .
For the European Union , these goals have a clear basis in our Treaty , which calls on us to develop and consolidate democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through our various external policies .
In this context , we are particularly pleased that human rights and democracy issues have been integrated into the legal texts of all the new financing instruments under the 2007-2013 Financial Perspective .
Secondly , mainstreaming is a never-ending process ; we need to constantly maintain our efforts and introduce new tools .
I am happy to inform you in this context that last June the Commission revised the mandates of its heads of delegation , following up on the report by Mr Agnoletto .
These mandates now specifically mention human rights and democracy issues , and therefore place greater priority on reporting and acting in this regard .
Similarly , in the context of the ' human rights clauses ' of our agreements , we have seen the creation of the new forums for dialogue or exchanges of views with third countries .
The number of occasions to discuss the promotion of and respect for human rights has been growing , from Argentina and Bangladesh to India , Jordan , Morocco , Turkmenistan and Vietnam .
That is in addition to the institutionalised human rights dialogues and consultations and the various political dialogues where human rights issues are regularly raised .
Last but not least , the Commission continues to include the human rights and democracy ' essential elements ' clause in the negotiation of the new bilateral partnership and cooperation agreements .
This is , for instance , the case for the agreement with six ASEAN countries .
Likewise , preparations are being made for negotiating an agreement with China , and the Commission remains fully committed to the inclusion of this clause in conformity with our standard practice .
Thirdly , while mainstreaming or integrating human rights issues in all our policies , we also need to focus on some specific aspects of the human rights policy .
These have been exemplified by two communications from the Commission : one called ' Roadmap on equality between women and men ' and the other ' Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child ' .
The year 2006 has also been characterised by the pivotal changes seen within the United Nations human rights machinery , with the new Human Rights Council that has already been mentioned .
Whilst there was initially great cause for optimism , for example the active participation of NGOs in debates or the desire to move away from the failure of its predecessor the Commission for Human Rights , the overall picture at the end of the year is a cause for concern , not least because of the discouraging signs of politicisation of this new forum .
We , the European Union , have to renew our efforts and engage more with a number of actors in Geneva in order to convince them that the international community needs an effective Human Rights Council .
We still have the possibility to make this new body work and deliver .
Indeed , we have to remain hopeful that today 's special session on Darfur will yield some positive results .
I cannot conclude without indicating once again my personal satisfaction , as well as the Commission 's satisfaction , with the vote that took place earlier today on the proposal for a regulation establishing the new European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
This instrument will make it easier for the Commission to establish priorities when implementing the objectives contained in the regulation and in keeping with its scope .
However , we know too well that measures to promote human rights and democracy deserve to be as worldwide , numerous , multisectoral and cross-cutting as possible .
The fact that the number of beneficiaries has expanded will also have to be taken into account .
But the enhanced complementarity with the various tools , which range from political dialogue and diplomatic demarches to various instruments of financial and technical cooperation , including both geographic and thematic programmes , is warmly welcomed .
Finally , we are looking forward to developing more integrated approaches to human rights and democracy under the new instrument .
There continues to be some debate about human rights and democracy as if they were two different issues . However , we think that human rights are the foundation for democracy and democracy is necessary to develop and protect human rights .
Therefore , let us not create artificial demarcations .
In any case , we think this is a good basis for continuing our work in the year to come .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Mrs Lehtomäki has called the Sakharov Prize into question and I would like to say to her that the Women in White are defenceless women , wives , mothers and daughters of Cuban political dissidents , who make a huge effort to come from many different Cuban towns to meet peacefully and silently on Sundays and to walk together through the streets of Havana dressed in white . They were doing so this Sunday , when they suffered harassment , threats and insults from people who saw fit to celebrate human rights day in that way .
It is absurd for me to have to point out that these women are not dangerous counter-revolutionary terrorists funded by the CIA , but simply women who are not willing to give in to injustice and the trampling of their most fundamental rights as human beings .
It is therefore also ridiculous that the Cuban regime should still not be allowing some of its representatives to leave the country to receive the Sakharov Prize that the European Parliament awarded to them last year .
We do not know what has happened with the efforts that the President of this Parliament promised to make a year ago now , but if he has done anything , then its results are plain to see .
I am therefore pleased with the initiative by Mrs Flautre and Mr Brok to send a delegation to the island .
Personally , I would not be opposed to that delegation also taking advantage of that trip to talk with the country 's authorities and hence to gauge the changing political climate .
I would however call upon the European Parliament 's services immediately to begin the formal procedures for requesting the relevant permits for entry into the country .
I would also call upon the Commission and the Council to apply all the pressure it can to ensure that those permits are granted .
If the response is favourable , as I hope it will be , we could express a minimum but effective degree of solidarity .
If it is negative , however , Mr President , then that would demonstrate the attitude of the current Cuban Government , something of which the European institutions should take very good note .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I would like to thank the Council for coming for the second year running to present its annual report on human rights at this December sitting , which the European Parliament is in fact dedicating to human rights .
I naturally welcome the work that the Council has done on this eighth report and I would like in particular to congratulate it on the paragraph dedicated to action by the European Parliament .
It would appear that they are beginning to listen to us .
I also share the Council 's view on the importance of the Community acting in a consistent manner .
This principle is valid in all fields , but it is particularly important when it comes to human rights .
The European Union must not just be consistent , but exemplary , in its fulfilment of its international obligations .
It is our moral duty to stand firm in our defence of our values and to place human rights , the rule of law and international law at the centre of our actions , particularly at times when any of these principles are called into question , even on occasions by democratic governments .
We must make it clear that breaches of human rights cannot be allowed in European Union territory and act firmly in order to counter the deterioration that has taken place in respect for the instruments providing safeguards and guarantees .
I would like to see greater commitment from the Council with regard to this concern , and I would like to take this opportunity to correct the report 's reference to the Temporary Committee on the Alleged Use of European Countries by the CIA for the Transportation and Illegal Detention of Prisoners , since the Council has confused the investigation being carried out by the Council of Europe with the one we are carrying out in this Parliament .
There is an ever greater connection between human rights in the Union 's external policy and in its internal policy , and one example of this is the growing link between security , development cooperation and human rights .
The European Union must accept its responsibilities as a global player and , to this end , it must stand firm and speak with one voice on the world stage .
Greater visibility and more decisive action on the part of the European Union with regard to longstanding conflicts , such as the Palestine conflict or the Darfur crisis , will undoubtedly be a way for Europe to contribute to these human rights that we are all defending here today .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would be grateful if you could add my time to the time that I was given before , so that , on behalf of the ALDE Group , we have two minutes .
I would like to apologise for Mr Cappato 's absence .
He has had a personal emergency and , therefore , I am speaking on behalf of the group .
I would like to thank the Council and the Commission for their hard work , and I am glad we have moved away from just a list of countries where human rights abuses take place .
I am pleased that there is a section devoted to the European Parliament this time .
I find it difficult , however , that when we are talking about human rights in the subcommittee , we are told that we cannot look at abuses within the EU .
I know that is covered by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , but we must find a way of bringing together what we are doing in the Committee on Civil Liberties and the Subcommittee on Human Rights .
One area where we need to be more proactive is the use of cluster bombs .
I know a lot of people say it is a defence issue , but I think it is also a human rights issue .
Although it is not covered by the 1997 Treaty on Landmines , it still has the same devastating effect on civilians .
I call on the Council and the Commission to join the growing opinion that cluster munitions should be banned completely , and I hope that the rumours that the Commission is going to reduce funding for mine clearance are inaccurate , because it is a human rights issue if people cannot move around freely .
Another concern , which is mentioned in the report - and I am very pleased about that - is the continuing existence of the Guantánamo Bay detention camp , an issue we have raised many times over the last year .
Can the Council , in particular , give an assurance that it will step up its efforts to put pressure on the American Government to close it down once and for all , which is , indeed , what Parliament has called for ?
I am pleased also that trafficking in human beings has been fairly high on the EU agenda , but pressure must be put on those Member States that have not already done so to sign up to the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings .
Finally , I am pleased that we have a section in the report on disabled peoples ' rights .
This is timely as , tomorrow , as you are very well aware , the signing of the UN Convention on People with Disabilities will take place .
Let us hope that it is speedily ratified .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , last Sunday the former Chilean dictator , Augusto Pinochet , died , by a strange coincidence precisely fifty-eight years after the signature by world leaders , in 1948 , of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
As we often state , the European Union is a project founded upon values , the foremost of which is respect for , and promotion of , human rights .
Many of us believe that that is right .
The fight for human rights must increasingly involve cross-cutting aspects , such as the promotion of democracy , governability , conflict prevention , crisis management , humanitarian law etc .
It is also important to stress the universal and indivisible nature of those rights .
That is precisely why it is so sad to see certain principles and values being so horrendously eroded .
Specifically , we must remember how necessary it is to tackle and correct the effect of the European Union 's internal policies , such as the fight against terrorism or the management of migration , on human rights in third countries .
Furthermore , it is important to acknowledge that the Council is making a considerable effort to ensure transparency in the EU 's human rights dialogues with China , Iran and Russia , but it is still worrying to see the double standards applied when it comes to judging actions and attitudes depending on whether or not the country taking them is a potential economic ally or not . This is also of concern when it comes to assessing compliance with the democratic clauses in certain association agreements .
Finally , the European Union must tackle head on the serious crisis of legitimacy and credibility affecting our arguments in support of human rights , particularly following the regrettable cases of cooperation or tacit collusion in illegal detentions and transportation , which in some cases amounts to directly condoning torture .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , a major element of the European Union 's activities in the coming year should be to continue its support for the fight for democracy in Belarus .
Initiatives such as assistance for students who are victims of repression and funding for independent educational institutions or radio broadcasts are excellent ideas , but more could be done .
Around 20 % of Belarusians watch EuroNews and 40 % have access to the Internet .
These are opportunities we need to exploit .
An Internet service should be set up that is specifically aimed at these people .
A series of programmes should also be created within the framework of EuroNews which , if possible , would be broadcast in the Belarusian language .
I would like the Commission to consider this proposal within the framework of the European financial instrument for supporting democracy and human rights in the world , which was adopted today .
It is vital to continue exerting pressure on the Lukashenko regime using all possible means .
I strongly believe that this pressure will one day result in the European Parliament welcoming the president of a democratic country , rather than the leader of the Belarusian opposition .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , this report presents many positive things about the EU , for instance what it is doing to promote human rights and democracy .
However , the report has several glaring omissions - more than I can mention , so I will confine myself to the subject of China .
China is the only country in the world where the suicide rate is higher for women than for men .
Approximately 500 women commit suicide in China every day , and yet the report does not say one word about China 's ' one child ' policy , which denies women the right to make real choices in their lives .
What is more , it says nothing about disabled people in China .
I met with a disability group when I was there last year , and everything pointed to the fact that people with disabilities like Down 's Syndrome are simply eliminated before or after birth .
In China the children of prisoners are ostracised by the Government and by society and they often - indeed , usually - have a worse chance of survival than their parents in prison .
And those parents may have been imprisoned for any reason .
When you allow this kind of omission and , at the same time , sit down at friendly trade negotiations with China , you are in danger of signalling EU approval .
Mr President , today has been a day when Parliament has focused on human rights , with this debate and with the presentation of the Sakharov Prize earlier on , and I welcome that .
The Council report itself covers the EU external and internal policies , as well as bilateral EU human rights policies with regard to third countries and action on multilateral fora , in addition to analysing a range of thematic issues .
In terms of the process of putting the report together , I am still not satisfied that there has been sufficient consultation between the Council and Parliament and , in particular , with the Human Rights Sub-Committee .
Last year the Finnish Presidency was invited by the Parliament 's annual report to consult actively with Parliament in the drafting of its own annual report .
However , this did not take place in as active a way as we had hoped for .
As agreed last year , Parliament supports the idea of a single EU report on human rights , representing the three institutions , to avoid unnecessary duplication of work .
However , that can only be achieved if there is increased consultation between the Council and Parliament .
Ideally , we should see the Council bringing a draft before the relevant committee so that we can have an exchange of views on the text before it is finally adopted .
I am rapporteur for the 2006 European Parliament report and I will continue to urge the Council to produce an all-encompassing cross-institutional report .
I will maintain the narrow focus of last year 's report , to constructively assess and criticise the performance of the three institutions in the field of human rights .
Today , the Sakharov Prize was awarded to an outstanding candidate .
He is the leader of the opposition in Belarus and we have a responsibility to continue to support him .
I want to encourage the Council and Commission to continue to raise the profile of the Sakharov Prize in general .
In that regard , it is regrettable that two past award winners , Aung San Suu Kyi of Burma , and Ladies in White from Cuba , have not been able to come to Parliament to collect their awards .
I hope we will succeed in going to both of those countries with an EP delegation to deliver the awards .
( PL ) Mr President , I am speaking today in the European Parliament on the 25th anniversary of the introduction of martial law in my country , Poland .
Martial law brought with it violence , arrests and imprisonment for thousands of people .
I spoke about this yesterday in Parliament , and now say these words again , appropriately enough , a few days after the death of General Augusto Pinochet , one of the world 's cruellest dictators during the second half of the 20th century .
The European Union 's annual report on human rights is one of its most important documents .
The European Parliament plays a key role in shaping the European Union 's human rights policy .
In the future , I think that work on this report should be better coordinated with the work of the European Parliament in this field .
I refer in particular to the coordination of work on this report with the activities of the Subcommittee on Human Rights within the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I would like to draw your attention to the issue of coordinating the human rights policies of the European Union Member States with all European institutions .
There should be better coordination of work done in this field , so that we can avoid overlaps between human rights policy at a European level and the policies of individual Member States .
The human rights situation outside the European Union should be monitored on a systematic and transparent basis , so that appropriate measures can be taken in relation to countries which infringe these rights .
Human rights policies should be synchronised and should also be linked to all the financial instruments included in the European Union 's budget .
A clause on human rights should be included in all agreements signed by the European Union with other countries .
Finally , I would like to stress the importance of the European Parliament 's delegations to countries where infringements of human rights take place .
I would particularly like to emphasise the importance of the European Parliament 's mission to Cuba during the period of change that this country is currently experiencing .
British Antarctic Territory , British Indian Ocean Territory , British Virgin Islands , Cayman Islands , Gibraltar , Montserrat , Pitcairn Islands , St Helena , South Georgia , South Sandwich Islands , Turks and Caicos Islands and the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia in Cyprus .
The above - 14 in number - are reported as being British Overseas Territories , previously known as British Crown Colonies .
All but one are outside the EU .
They are 21st-century colonies that are located across the globe in strategic positions .
They are collectively inhabited by many thousands of human beings .
They have no elected governments and almost all have no law-making elected parliament .
They are not represented in the UN .
The Queen of England is their head of state and most are run by a governor or an administrator appointed by the British Government .
They are under the sovereignty of Britain and are occupied by the British army .
Yet , in this 250-page report on human rights and democracy , as in all previous reports like it , there is not a single word about them .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner why this is so . I await their answers with keen interest .
Mr President , I too should like to thank the Commission .
This is a very important debate which goes to the very heart of Europe , and is what this Parliament is all about .
This is a fine report , but it is only a report .
Very often what we need in these situations is action .
I should like everyone here to put their hands on their hearts and ask themselves whether we have done everything we possibly can to stop the massive abuse of human rights in Darfur , which continues as we speak .
Over 200 000 people have died and two and a half million people have been displaced .
It goes on , and on , and on .
I do not believe we can honestly say that we have done everything we can and that we have thrown Parliament 's full weight behind diplomatic initiatives to end what is going on and put pressure on the Sudanese Government to stop what it is doing .
They are playing cat-and-mouse while hundreds of thousands of people are dying .
This is a fine report , and I support it .
However , as we debate the issue of human rights and the EU 's position on them , I really do not believe we are doing enough to stop what is going on in Darfur .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the Finnish Presidency , both for its work on human rights and for attending this plenary .
One of our aims has been to make this part-session a ' human rights plenary ' every year .
On this , the day the Sakharov Prize was awarded , the Finnish Presidency has honoured its role , and I believe every other Presidency will now follow suit .
At the same time , I would like to thank the Presidency for taking on board a number of points which I suggested as a former rapporteur for human rights .
The references to the European Parliament are more numerous this year , and it has been involved more closely .
I look forward to that developing still further in the future .
The list of countries for priority action in your report very much matches my suggestions for the list of European countries of concern , which some people said was outlandish , but which you have adopted .
I wish to thank the Presidency for that too .
I would have liked to have seen more on the impact and implementation of the EU guidelines on human rights - there was just one page in 260 - but very much welcome the transparency of having a list of demarches relating to different countries .
However , I would ask the Presidency to recall the suggestion made by Parliament in my own report that a group of MEPs should become available for confidential consultation on those demarches in much the same way as for security issues .
I would ask the Presidency to consider that issue again .
In conclusion , I would ask both this and future Presidencies , together with the Commission , to bear in mind the need to undertake impact analyses , and to look not just at the direct work done on human rights , but also at the human rights impact of other external policies , particularly those on trade and development , so that we can mainstream human rights into all the European Union 's work .
It is not just one report that counts , but what that report represents .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union does a lot for human rights in the world and we are all proud of that fact .
However , it seems that sometimes we forget about the rights of the citizens of the European Union itself .
I am referring here to the right to religious belief and the right to self-determination .
Man is , in part , a religious creature and the upholding of human rights also includes showing respect for this religious nature .
There are countries among us that are more sensitive than others in matters of religion .
I sometimes have the impression that respect for atheism is more important to us than respect for religious beliefs .
A further issue is the right to determine one 's own future .
I have the impression that the majority of Europeans do not want Turkey to be part of the European Union .
However , in spite of this , we are in the process of negotiating with that country .
I think that this poses a threat , if not to the religious , then to the cultural identity of the citizens of the European Union .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank you for this excellent debate , during which we received some criticism about the drafting procedure from several Members of Parliament .
This criticism will obviously be noted and in future we will also try to improve our consultation procedures with the European Parliament also .
Perhaps because this report is based on a decision by the European Council from 1998 , the drafting procedure also takes place within the context of the Council .
We can , however , obviously improve the way we do things in this respect .
We also have to remember that the report does not attempt to cover all the possible human rights problems that exist around the world , but mainly focuses on a presentation of human rights work engaged in by the institutions of the European Union .
As I said in my opening speech , the main recent priority area has been the mainstreaming of human rights , as a component in other areas of policy , and obviously the enhancement of the European Union 's external activity is a very important part of that , so that human rights can be fully integrated with external relations and development cooperation and so that the link between human rights and security , for example , may be clearly apparent to us .
Last year there was significant progress made when we reached agreement on the establishment of a European Fundamental Rights Agency .
That will do much also to reinforce human rights work within the European Union .
The Commissioner mentioned the fact that consensus has been reached on the human rights instrument .
I would sincerely like to thank Parliament for its cooperation .
This instrument will no doubt contribute to a process where human rights work in the European Union can be made more effective .
We need to remember that human rights work is not just about dealing with contemporary , clearly visible issues : above all , it is painstaking work over a long period of time which also requires patience in order to get results .
This debate also raised the issue of the almost philosophical question as to whether we have done all we can to improve the human rights situation .
That is often to do with finding the right balance between persuasion and drastic action and finding the right balance between encouragement and restrictive measures .
Obviously , dialogue normally yields better results than severing relations .
It is important to show that the European Union employs the same norms in its human rights work with all partners .
Unfortunately , we also surely have to bear in mind that , although we have done all we can , our resources are nevertheless insufficient , perhaps , to improve the situation everywhere in the world .
The challenges in the human rights sector thus abound , and this debate will certainly serve as a good basis on which the European Union institutions can continue to do their work .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , as time is short , I shall answer specific questions .
I shall begin with the Damas de Blanco mentioned by Mr Galeote .
The intended visit by Parliament 's representatives to the Damas de Blanco is a good idea , and we hope , and we will do our best , to ensure that the EP delegation can meet a representative of the Cuban Government .
Under the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights , Cuba has been one of the countries targeted under Campaign 3 to promote the democratic process .
We shall try to go on with that .
We have also continuously requested the freeing of political prisoners and an end to the active repression of members of the political opposition and human rights activists .
Another Member asked what the European Union and the Commission are doing in Palestine .
If you consider human security - that is , freedom from want and freedom from fear - as the basis for human dignity , then no one else has done more than us to help the Palestinians with the basic services of health and energy and to at least maintain those basic services under very difficult circumstances through the Temporary International Mechanism and additional measures .
In particular , we have funded two elections - presidential and parliamentary - and we have also sent observers to observe those elections in order to create the basis for democracy .
On the whole , human rights , democracy and the rule of law have a fundamental place in all our ENP action plans ; they are not only written into them but are also implemented , and we try to monitor their implementation .
On China , let me just say that in the future the inclusion of human rights , an essential clause in the new agreement that will be negotiated with China , will also hopefully reinforce the human rights dialogue that has been going on for 11 years , thus demonstrating our firm adherence to the principles of human rights and democracy in EU external policy .
As we have all seen today , with the new winner of the Sakharov Prize , we are working very strongly towards a democratic society in Belarus .
On 21 November we launched a non-paper , in which we show the Belarusian people what they could have if the regime changed and if they engaged in more democratisation , improving human rights and the rule of law .
Those are only a few examples , but I know time is pressing and therefore I cannot go into each and every question that has been raised here .
I thank you for the debate .
It has given all of us a chance to follow on .
I hope that next year we shall be ready to work together on a joint human rights report by the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament .
Mr President , with respect , these debates are useful if they provide answers to our questions .
I asked a very important question about human rights and democracy in British colonies .
I have been given no answer .
I have received one motion for a resolution in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.00 a.m.
Draft general budget for 2007 , amended by the Council ( all sections ) - Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities - Draft amending budget No 6 / 2006 ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the reports :
by Mr Elles and Mr Grech on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the draft general budget of the European Union for 2007 amended by the Council ( all sections ) ( 15637 / 2006 - C6-0442 / 2006 - -
and letters of amendment 1 / 2007 ( SEC ( 2006 ) 0762 ) , 2 / 2007 ( 13886 / 2006 - C6-0341 / 2006 ) and 3 / 2007 ( 15636 / 2006 - C6-0443 / 2006 ) to the draft general budget of the European Union for 2007
Section I - European Parliament ,
Section II - Council ,
Section III - Commission ,
Section IV - Court of Justice ,
Section V - Court of Auditors ,
Section VI - Economic and Social Committee ,
Section VII - Committee of the Regions ,
Section VIII ( A ) - European Ombudsman ,
Section VIII ( B ) - European Data Protection Supervisor , and
- by Mrs Gräßle , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the amended proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 1605 / 2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities - C6-0207 / 2006 - , and
- by Mr Pittella , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on draft amending budget No 6 / 2006 of the European Union for 2006 , Section III - Commission [ 15635 / 2006 - C6-0441 / 2006 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to draw the strands together as this will hopefully be our last debate on the 2007 budget .
I should also like to welcome the Council and its representatives , who have been somewhat confused at some points in our procedure , which has led to misunderstandings that we hope will be clarified before we come to the final vote .
I should like to thank the Commissioner very much for all the support she has given to most of Parliament 's ideas .
Her support has been very helpful during this procedure .
I thank my colleagues on the Committee on Budgets for their support and input into this procedure , but above all I should like to thank the Committee on Budgets staff who have enabled all of this to be put together .
Without them I do not think we would be at this stage in the proceedings .
At this juncture I should like to raise a couple of points as general rapporteur .
Not only have we been able to achieve - I believe it will be clarified that we have achieved this - the substantive negotiation on the Financial Regulation , which my colleague Mrs Gräßle will deal with in a moment or two , but we have been able to establish in our way of doing things for the 2007 budget a very prudent approach on payments below the 1 % , largely because we are at the stage of having new programmes for the Financial Perspective .
There are no particular requests or demands from the groups or committees .
That is something we can no doubt expect in future years .
So basically we re-establish the PDB , but with emphasis on our political priorities concerning research innovation where we have had additional appropriations .
Secondly , we have taken what I would call a sensible approach to the use of the reserve .
Often in this House we have been able to put particular funds on reserve at first reading , but perhaps the conditions for release or the way in which this has been approached have not been sensible or coherent .
Here there are three examples that I would like to mention where I believe the conditions for release and the policy for reserve use have actually been helpful in strengthening Parliament 's position in the budget process .
Firstly , I would cite the common foreign and security policy where we have a much clearer definition of what we gained in the interinstitutional agreement .
We would very much hope now that the Council will hold to this , as we have had a very clear exchange of letters and we should not then have the same misinterpretation in the 2008 budget .
Secondly , on the question of staff , here too Parliament has been able to provide a way of sensibly dealing with that process , rather than what might have been an immediate surge - as the Council wanted - of productivity gains but maybe not achieving very much .
We have been able to ask the Commission - and it has agreed - for a proper screening process to be established by 30 April 2007 so that we can have a substantive justification for staff increases over the next few years .
That will be very welcome as part of the conditions for release of the staff reserve will be a statement from the Commission in February next year .
So we will know exactly what the legislative programme for the Union will be in February 2007 .
Last but not least in the use of the reserve is the question of value for money .
We had an excellent discussion and debate on 15 November at our last session with the Commissioner and the Secretary-General , who came to show exactly where we had taken lines in reserve and where we could now release them .
We have very few of those lines left available now .
That has been a very useful process in getting a much better perception as to where the lines are weak and where we have weak implementation .
We welcome the Commission 's participation in that .
Looking ahead , it seems to me that we now have to implement this resolution on the proper implementation of the budget .
Perhaps the Council could come along and sign the resolution on value for money .
If it does not do it now , hopefully it will do so under the German Presidency .
We need to maintain our priorities .
We have been very clear .
We have taken on the priorities of the Financial Perspective .
As we now look further forward to the 2008 and 2009 budget years , there is a lot of work to be done .
We are not going to escape from the speed of globalisation .
That was the first point we made when we looked at the APS back in May .
We are going to have to adjust the programmes for financing , looking forward to seeing where our money can be best spent .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , this year budgetary requests were considered on their own merits , and the actual needs and priorities of the institutions were taken into consideration .
At the same time , all forms of expenditure were critically examined in order to cut down on waste and bad practices .
It was equally important , however , for me to ensure that the institutions were given the necessary tools and funds to function and operate efficiently .
One general observation I would like to make is that not enough efforts are being made by the institutions to present clearer , more accurate and more analytical estimates .
Were this to happen , the amounts that are put in reserve would be markedly lower , and there would be no need to provide unduly inflated margins , with the result that we end up cancelling appropriations at the end of the year and carrying out last-minute transfers .
Once again , I would like to emphasise the need for all the institutions to present more detailed and informative reports about their activities every year , stating whether their objectives have been achieved and how allocated funds have been utilised .
Another major point in this budgetary procedure was the policy related to the recruitment service , which must be improved .
Both Parliament and the Council have , in principle , approved every request for posts related to enlargement of the Union .
However , it is becoming increasingly difficult to understand or justify the delay in the process of staff selection related to the 2004 enlargement .
This shortcoming should be remedied , and the institutions , together with EPSO , should solve this pressing problem of the filling of vacant posts .
Hence , the decision taken by Parliament and the Council to monitor the recruitment process closely is a necessary one .
The 2007 budget framework concentrates also on another important point , namely cooperation beween the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee .
In the coming budgetary year , a realistic analysis should be carried out to ensure that the agreement between them is renewed without other forms of cooperation being excluded .
The point of departure of every exercise should be cooperation that respects separate identities .
More equitable governance of the joint service must also be guaranteed .
In view of this , it would be advisable to set up a working committee which would address this matter and which would examine the impact of the opinions issued by these two committees and of other work carried out by them .
In 2007 we should have fewer problems with regard to assistance to Members and the Visitors Programme .
I feel we have achieved tangible progress as regards these two services and that its impact should be felt in 2007 and 2008 .
It should , however , be stated that the information given to Members about the services available should be more effective .
Next year we expect an upgrade in the institutional structure in order to achieve a greater degree of streamlining , as well as a more determined implementation of the redeployment policy , which I believe will have a positive impact over the next few years .
On the other hand , multilingualism has been disappointing .
In this regard , we reiterate our support for the initiative taken by the Parliamentary Bureau to establish a good practice guide , which should include sanctions and penalties .
Good management of this useful , though expensive , service next year should be on the agenda of all the institutions .
Mr President there is not enough time to speak about other priorities that have been addressed in this budget , such as the information policy , where we expect to observe further progress in 2007 , and the acquisition of property - especially property held jointly with the Commission - in relation to which we expect a great deal of improvement , as well as information science , security , training , the simplification of legislation and so many other issues .
It should be pointed out that , during the planning and development phases of this budget , we felt the need to maintain contact with all the institutions .
The last budget level obtained during the first reading was a result of this process .
In fact , during the conciliation process with the Council and the Commission , the parliamentary representatives did their utmost to find a balanced formula , and we are assuming that all parties , including the Council , will honour the agreements reached during these meetings .
The primary aim of these trialogues and reconciliation meetings would otherwise be lost .
We could not accept a situation in which procedures no longer made sense or , worse still , were counterproductive for this Parliament .
In these circumstances I feel that the Committee on Budgets should address these questions urgently over the next few months .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today is a great day for this House .
For all of two years , we have been working together on the Financial Regulation , and have , most recently , been cooperating outstandingly well with the Commission in this .
This House has made it clear to all the importance that we attach to the legislative process associated with the Financial Regulation ; what we were aiming for was better budgeting , the correction of the 2002 reform 's excesses , and the taking on board of justified criticisms of highly bureaucratic procedures and laborious ways of getting things done , and in that we have succeeded , with the help of the Members who sit on the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control , primarily my good friend Mr Pahor , the members of our working party , the secretariats and my personal assistant , to all of whom I extend the warmest of thanks .

The Budget DG , under Commissioner Grybauskaitė , has also played its part in a most felicitous and sympathetic way , so warm thanks go to them as well .






The Council , too , started off by playing the game , only then to suffer a failure of nerve ; that was actually a shame , since that is no way to treat friends , so let us hope that they do not do the same with the implementing regulations .
The improvement of monitoring quality in the Member States is a recurrent issue in this Europe of ours , and it calls for more commitment on the part of the Council ; perhaps Mrs Wideroos , the minister , will be so good as to affirm that the Council accepts the result from conciliation with this House achieved on 21 November , for if she does not , this House will not be voting on the 2007 Budget on Thursday .

Having negligently and wilfully interfered in the interinstitutional balance , the Finnish Presidency of the Council leaves a truly bitter taste in this House 's collective mouth , and has denied itself the great success of its presidency that the achievement of real de-bureaucratisation in Europe - mainly on the basis of our amendments - would have represented , but we are very grateful that the Council has been supportive of this and has moved it forward , particularly in relation to the need for more customer-friendly administration , for more transparency , for improved monitoring to protect European funds and for a database listing those criminals who , having acted to the EU 's detriment , are excluded from receiving EU funds for a period of ten years , all of which are milestones on the road to better management of EU funds , and in which you - like us - can in fact take pride .

We will give these things tangible form in the implementing regulations and make them usable ; in doing this , we are guided by the Financial Regulation and by the need for these quite new items to be dealt with one by one .
What I need to clarify is that the enactment of the implementing regulations is a matter for the Commission alone ; Parliament and the Council can do no more than be consulted .
We see it as unacceptable that the Commission should be as readily put under pressure as you have tried to do over recent days , for by doing so you will end up curtailing this House 's right to be consulted , and it is only because the monitoring of EU funds , the recovery of them and the enforcement of uniform transparency requirements are a problem that we have tabled amendments in relation to them to the Financial Regulation .
I urge the representatives of the Member States to once and for all come up with some answers to these problems , instead of imitating the three monkeys in hearing nothing , saying nothing , and seeing nothing .
This House will not be denied its right to voice an opinion when what we are trying to do is to play a constructive role in the handling of the EU 's money .
We have learned our lesson from the past and wish to forge an alliance with all those who want to show that they have learned it too .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is an honour for me to be here in Parliament discussing the 2007 budget , in a situation where the template for a very lengthy drafting process is clearly apparent .
I am relieved that the budgetary authorities have reached agreement on the budget for 2007 .
That is the job of the Council and Parliament .
I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for their cooperation over the last six months .
There has been more open dialogue among the budgetary authorities than before , and that makes it possible for us to reconcile our varying views more easily .
My special thanks go to the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Lewandowski , and to the rapporteurs , Mr Elles and Mr Grech .


That said , I think that it is only right that I should assess the package from the point of view of the Council .
The increase in the 2007 budget matches the objectives of the Member States fairly well and does not place too great a burden on the taxpayer .
Fortunately , the Council and Parliament reached agreement on a realistic figure for payment appropriations .
Strict budgetary discipline has therefore now been included as a key principle .
This should continue to be the approach in the years to come .
Overall it has been a significant achievement to adopt the amendment to the Financial Regulation in a situation where there are ever-growing pressures on making financial administration more efficient .
In connection with the Financial Regulation , I might say that the Council this morning began a written procedure .
That way this Council Regulation can be passed this Wednesday , that is to say 13 December , after Parliament has delivered its opinion on it .
Regarding that , I would have liked to hear the Commission 's commitment to the letter sent yesterday by the Director-General of the Directorate-General for Budget on the topic of the rules for the implementation of the Financial Regulation .
On behalf of the Council , I wish to thank Parliament for allowing both budgetary powers to decide jointly now on pilot projects .
The Council will act responsibly in the years to come .
Similarly , compliance with the new interinstitutional agreement , especially with regard to the appropriations for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , is to be applauded .
The budgetary powers are showing a sense of responsibility and realism in not using the Flexible Instrument in 2007 .
This will provide a firm basis for budgetary practice in future years .
Budgets need to be drafted within the context of frameworks .
The budget for 2007 contains clear priorities .
The promotion of competitiveness , the introduction and monitoring of posts in association with enlargement , and the commencement of new generation programmes are practical examples of these .
This budget process also , however , contains some worrying prospects for the future .
We did not make sufficient progress in making administration more efficient .
The Commission and Parliament cannot ignore their responsibility for making the Union 's administration more efficient .
If people in the Member States feel strongly about cuts in the number of posts , why are not the same measures , with nobody suffering personally , approved at Union level ?
This is a matter of the credibility of the work of the EU as a whole from the public 's point of view , and that means the budget , which the citizens of the Member States are responsible for financing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is important that the Council and Parliament should have finalised this package adopted jointly within the framework of this budget process .
I want to say again that I am glad that the budget approved for 2007 will contain adequate margins in almost all categories .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , today we are finalising our work and debates on the 2007 budget .
This is very important for all of us because it is the first budget for the ' new Europe ' of 27 Member States .
It is the budget of a new financial framework ; it is the budget of new Financial Regulation ; it is the budget of a new financial legislative package , which we agreed to start fully from 1 January .
So that means that this budget is not only a budget about figures , it is a budget of many things that we have achieved this year together with Parliament and the Council .
In our negotiations today 's budget required a huge effort from all sides and huge efforts of compromise .
The result was achieved when we met on 21 November in conciliation and finalised in a week .
For this package , the Commission always keeps its word and never changes the opinions reached in the conciliation negotiations .
I would like to thank the whole team that negotiated on Parliament 's side , as well as their staff , for helping us to find the solution , and all Members , especially the rapporteurs of the Committee on Budgets , for helping us to achieve this package .
I am talking not only about the package for the 2007 budget , but also the Financial Regulation package .
I also want to thank the rapporteur who is not here now , Mr Pittella , who also helped us go through the 2006 budget implementation .
I would like to say that today the discussion is very important as a final stage for Thursday 's vote and I am very grateful to all who made this day happen .
I wish you a good debate and a very fruitful and positive vote on the 2007 budget on Thursday .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control . - ( SL ) Although I only have one brief minute at my disposal , I cannot but express my sincere admiration for the contribution made to the debate on the budget by Mrs Gräßle .
Why ?
There are , in my opinion , at least three major problems with the European budget .
In the light of the Lisbon Strategy , the budget is : firstly , badly structured ; secondly , too small ; and thirdly , of too little practical effect .
Mrs Gräßle 's contribution has done away with at least one of these problems , this being the third one , namely its minimal effectiveness .
The reform proposed by this report will make financial procedures less bureaucratic , more easily comprehensible , simpler and , above all , user-friendly .
For these reasons , Mrs Gräßle deserves a great deal of gratitude for her contribution .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , firstly I wish to thank both rapporteurs , Mr Elles and Mr Grech , for their excellent work and levels of cooperation .
With regard to Mr Elles , I would just like to say in brief that I am especially pleased with his ' value for money ' idea .
It will also be an extremely important tool in the years to come and will help us when we are drafting the budget .
With regard to Louis Grech , I want to say that his levels of cooperation were excellent and that we finally agreed on all the main budget lines .
I would just like to raise one issue , which concerns the report that we asked the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee for .
There is no intention here to criticise them , but they must not ignore this ' value for money ' notion .
We will then see what the report brings when it eventually comes along .
What is particularly important about this package for the budget as a whole is that we can adopt the Financial Regulation which Ingeborg Grässle has worked so well to promote .
It is really like she said : the prevention of criminal use of funds , transparency , and many other good things will ensue if this Financial Regulation can be jointly approved .
It will be a major step forward in the decisions on this year 's budget .
Minister Lehtomäki , as has been mentioned here , this process has perhaps been somewhat confusing in Parliament .
It is important now to find consensus so that the budget can be signed on Thursday .
This proposal regarding staff cuts , however , was unrealistic .
I myself always think it is advisable to question institutions and bureaucracy and what everyone is doing .
The idea was not bad , but perhaps the proposal that Finland made was just too general in nature .
The main thing , however , is that there have been good levels of cooperation and the budget will be signed on Thursday .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Grybauskaitė , Mrs Wideroos , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I should like to say a big thank you to all of those involved in this budgetary procedure and , in particular , to our rapporteurs , Mr Grech and Mr Elles , without forgetting Mrs Gräßle and Mr Pittella , and our secretariats .


Thanks to them , we have been able to establish a budget that fully respects Parliament 's budgetary powers .
This draft budget on the financial perspective is particularly sensitive .
We have taken account of the time needed to launch the new programmes , while prioritising what are crucial actions for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament : policies on research , transport , innovation , social Europe , an environmental and knowledge-based Europe - in short , a People 's Europe .
The budgetary instrument of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund puts in place a new instrument of European solidarity .
As regards external affairs , we are following the guidelines of the specialised committees , which respect the balance between the thematic approach and the geographical approach .
We hoped , thanks to the new financial perspective , to succeed in establishing better interinstitutional relations , and I will not hide from you my disappointment on this matter .
Even our relations with the Council are deteriorating .

Firstly , Mrs Wideroos , you have just reassured us about the commitments made by the Council regarding the conciliation procedure : indeed , we value this agreement on the financial regulation .
However , you have often lost sight of Parliament 's powers , and we have often had the impression that our rights were not being respected .
Moreover , we take a very dim view of the contempt with which the new Member States are treated ; you intended to deprive them of resources in terms of recruitment and structural policies .
We have therefore faced difficulties , before coming up with an appropriate programme for 2007 .

Commissioner , Parliament puts all of the resources that you requested at your disposal : reasonable commitment appropriations , a low level of payments - 0.99 % of GNI - which you nonetheless regard as sufficient , and , above all , very few reserves .
In return , we will watch over matters very closely to ensure that our vote is not distorted during implementation .
Let me be clear : the global transfer votes or the SABs , which are as important now as they were in the past , are excluded .
We will not stand in the way of the Commission 's exercising its prerogatives .
Instead , we should reconsider whether the resources , in terms of staff , are adequate for the implementation of the policies we are seeking to promote .
In future , if we reduce the budget too much , we will no longer be able to develop any of these policies that the citizens expect .
Disrupted , as it is , in its project , the Union is a seriously ailing body , and we are providing it with a particularly modest budget for 2007 !
For the forthcoming budgets , we need to adopt a constructive approach , which looks to the future , and no longer a defensive stance , aimed at containing national self-interest .
For Parliament , for the Socialists , the European project consists of genuine , financial solidarity , which the Council sadly overlooks on a daily basis .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , this budget process has been essentially uncomplicated .
It is less than a year since we reached agreement on the budget for the next seven years , and the budget on which we will be voting on Thursday sticks within the agreed framework beautifully .
Through this budget agreement we have achieved sound results .
We have ensured a Financial Regulation with less bureaucracy , with more transparency about who receives agricultural aid and with a common blacklist of those companies that have fiddled EU funds .
We have ensured a budget that fulfils our political desires within the framework drawn up .
The 2007 budget is the first within the new seven-year framework and it is characterised by the fact that many new programmes for , for example , structural funds , research and training and education are to get under way .
This is the first budget where actual agricultural aid amounts to less than appropriations for the development of poor regions .
Agricultural aid accounts for approximately one third of the nearly EUR 126 billion of the budget .
Most of the 2007 budget is thus being spent on ensuring growth and solidarity within the EU .
We have secured more resources for the Common Refugee Policy and for foreign policy and ensured more transparency in relation to the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
As regards administration , Parliament was more willing to grant the necessary resources than the Council was , but we do , of course , agree that the administration of the EU needs to be flexible , more efficient and tailored to meet new needs .
I find it regrettable that we still have not had any statement from the Council and the Commission making it possible to remove the reserve on the appropriation for the development of rural districts .
It must be stressed that voluntary modulation must not impinge on Parliament 's budgetary powers .


Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Elles , Mr Grech , Mr Pittella and Mrs Gräßle for the substantial , constructive and serious work they have done - work that , I believe , has been topped off with positive results .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , having heard the Commission and the Council , I am delighted that an agreement is in prospect .
I would remind you that Parliament is prepared to increase funding for the CFSP from EUR 102 million to EUR 159 million , but it is prepared to do so because the Council accepts its amendments - at least a large part of them - on the financial regulation .
This is an overall package that must not be undone at the last minute !
As far as the financial perspective is concerned , you know that our group voted against , because it felt that the framework was too tight : we are going to do our best now to make changes to it .
Among the changes is support for studies on the added value of the programmes , but we , for our part , are already looking ahead to the thorough review announced for 2008 and 2009 .
Make no mistake - for us , doing better does not mean doing less !
There is no question of our freeing ourselves of our obligations : that is why we declare ourselves in favour of doing away with the reserves .
As regards the financial regulation , we also agree on the need to simplify the procedures , so that everyone can get more involved in the European project , and we believe that we can simplify the procedures while maintaining their transparency and control with a great deal of rigour : both seem possible to us .
Finally , our group has presented an alternative package of increases for the external policy programmes because we believe that the instrument for stability , which includes a section on prevention , has suffered too much from the reductions imposed in the financial perspective .
We must be careful not to focus our attention only on issues that are under the full glare of the media spotlight !
It is true that the Middle East is very much affected at present but , in the Balkans , the fire is still smouldering ...


I shall conclude by thanking the four musketeers from the Committee on Budgets -Mr Elles , Mr Grech , Mrs Gräßle and Mr Pittella - without whom nothing would have been possible .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister Lehtomäki , next year 's budget is less than 1 % of combined GDP .
The majority in our group are dissatisfied with this figure and with the fact that the Council does not want to build a more social Europe .
Instead , it wants to militarise the EU and is proposing more expenditure for the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
In negotiations on the budget , Parliament agreed to increase this militarisation expenditure when the Council agreed to compromise on the wording of the new Financial Regulation .
The Finnish Presidency showed a lack of skill in the conciliation process and harmony over the budget was only achieved after further talks .
Hopefully , Parliament will not have to witness another failure on the part of the Presidency , as the outcome of conciliation has not yet been approved by the Council with regard to the Financial Regulation .
It has remained unclear as to whether it will be approved .
Given these circumstances , it would suit our group very well if Parliament were to use its budgetary powers and cut militarisation expenditure , which the Council has set as a priority area .
There are special circumstances prevailing next year .
It is the first year of the new financial framework and not all the structural or other programmes are yet ready .
The new Member States might not be ready either to utilise all the funds that have been allocated to them .
If the low level of budgetary expenditure is approved , it will not be acceptable if again the Commission fails to spend EUR seven billion , as was the case this year .
We hope for an improved implementation of the budget , Commission .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , taking the floor in the debate on the 2007 budget on behalf of the UEN Group , I would like to remind you that this budget is an extremely important financial plan for the European Union for at least two reasons .
First of all , it is the first budget of the Financial Perspective for the years 2007-2013 , which is especially important to the new Member States .
Secondly , it is the first budget of an enlarged European Union , a Union of the 27 Member States .
These two facts alone mean that the level of spending proposed in the budget should be as high as possible .
The European Parliament has proved itself up to the task and has proposed spending of 122 billion euros , in other words 1.04 of the GNP of the European Union .
Unfortunately , despite long negotiations with the Commission and the Council , the latter agreed to a figure of only 115.5 billion , that is , 0.99 of the GNP of the European Union .
In this way the wishes of the wealthiest Member States , the so-called ' one per cent club , have been fulfilled .
This Group did not want budget spending to exceed 1 % of the GNP of the European Union .
Fortunately , the unavoidable financial cuts resulting from the Council lowering the level of spending have only affected the new Member States to a limited extent .
I would like to take this opportunity to express my hope that the solution proposed by the European Parliament which involves moving 30 % of the funding for many budget lines , 400 million euros in total , will significantly contribute to rationalising budgetary spending .
The European Parliament 's agreement to return the funding for the Common Foreign and Security Policy to a level of nearly 160 million euros should mean that the Council and Commission will , more than they have so far , take into account the suggestions of Parliament regarding the direction and implementation of foreign policy .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , there is a copious stream of exhortations from various EU institutions to the Member States about how important it is for them to reduce their public expenditure .
At the same time , this House constantly demands increased expenditure at EU level .
The whole thing is absurd .
The Member States spend public money on schools , health care , research , infrastructure and support for vulnerable groups in society , while most of the EU 's expenditure goes on a lunatic agricultural policy , misdirected Structural Funds and the financing of EU institutions that should have been closed down a long time ago .
The Member States ' expenditure is subject to continuous democratic scrutiny .
Officials who are guilty of inefficiency , negligence , fraud or corruption are not granted discharge and are in many cases dismissed .
Politicians who are not as honest and effective as voters demand are replaced in democratic elections .
The EU 's expenditure is scrutinised by the Court of Auditors , which has still not , however , been able to issue a clean auditor 's report .
When OLAF uncovers crimes , these do not go to court .
Essentially , this House grants discharge irrespective of what emerges about the way in which the EU 's budget resources are used , and politicians never lose elections in their own countries because they have mismanaged EU funds .
In brief , the Member States have some effective democratic control over the way in which taxpayers ' money is used , while the EU institutions and this House have not .
( SK ) It is generally true that what is approved by democratic agreement with a large majority of votes tends to be good .
I assume that this premise will also apply after the voting next Thursday on the European Union 's general budget for 2007 .
In this context I would like to congratulate in advance the rapporteurs and the entire team , which has been negotiating the budget .
On the other hand , the budget parameters suggest that there are continuing problems .
The gap between commitments and payment allocations , as well as , the relationship between the available funds and envisaged spending is still too great .
This suggests that the arrangements for the draw-down and use of funds leave much room for improvement and , paradoxically , this is particularly true of countries that require the most development funding .
This also applies to the new EU Member States , where actual drawdowns are now ranging between 20 % - 30 % .
As countries report that the funding available to them fully matches approved projects , it would appear that the basic problem at the moment is the implementation of those projects and the payment of their costs .
The governments of EU Member States hold the key instruments necessary for dealing with the situation .
Unless a turnaround is achieved , they will limit their potential for economic development and the aims of the long-term financial framework will remain nothing more than scraps of paper .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for allowing me to take the floor , despite my absence at the start of the debate .
I should like to thank the Commissioner and my fellow Members , Mrs Guy-Quint and Mrs Jensen , for their words of appreciation to me , as well as Mr Elles and Mr Grech , for the positive way in which they carried out this budget procedure .

With this amending budget , we are giving the Member States back more than EUR 7 billion .
This amount is partly due to the inclusion in the budget of a substantial increase in estimated revenue , and is partly attributable to a high level of under-utilisation of the appropriations voted on and available in the budget , in particular EUR 4 billion .
This under-utilisation mainly affects the expenditure headings for agriculture , the structural funds and the pre-accession strategy .
We wanted to incorporate this debate in the one on the general budget precisely because the return of EUR 7 billion is not a trivial matter , but one that ought to worry us .

There are two aspects to the problem : on the one hand , the Member States constantly undervalue revenue , and this distorts people 's ideas about the percentage of wealth set aside by the Member States for Europe - in the light of these data and of the previous amending budgets , it is in fact quite clear that the amount of resources set aside by the Member States for the European purse is still less than the 1 % prized out of the miserly national accountants .
It is like me agreeing to allocate 1 % of EUR 100 each year to a good cause and then , in fact , invariably earning more at the end of the year .
Therefore , even you will admit that this operation by the Member States is not as generous as it appears .
On the other hand , even the resources that are actually available are not being fully used : if we analyse the typology of the under-utilised resources , we realise that the ones responsible for the under-utilisation are always the Member States , and not the Commission .
I am not particularly generous towards Mr Barroso 's Commission but , in fairness , I must say that , where this issue is concerned , there is no direct responsibility on the part of the Commission , but rather that the main burden of responsibility lies with the Member States .
We must take the opportunity afforded by this debate to encourage the Member States to be more effective in their monitoring and their controls and to be more vigilant so that allocated and appropriated funds are properly utilised .
Thus , instead of limiting ourselves to what is , by now , the tiresome exercise of blaming the European bureaucratic machine - the so-called Brussels eurocracy - let us also take a little look at our national situations , because if we more closely analyse the way in which our national public apparatus works , and if we call on the governments to work together in improving their administrative performance , then we might not have this figure of a EUR 7 billion return next year .
( ES ) Mr President , I have been taking part in budgetary debates for twelve years and I have never seen a President of Parliament withdraw the microphone from the main rapporteur .
I believe that your manner of presiding in this case has been rather unfortunate .
I would like to congratulate the four rapporteurs on their reports and on the consensuses that they have achieved under particularly difficult conditions .
My political group placed particular emphasis on the quality of spending - value for money - and on the parallel negotiation of a review of the Financial Regulation .
In both cases we hope for a satisfactory resolution following the vote on Thursday .
At a time of great budgetary restriction , with budgets of around 1 % , the only way this Parliament can improve the efficiency of Community policies is to set up an in-depth assessment of the resources applied and the results achieved .
I believe that this ' value for money ' approach will be widely applied in the future .
As a complement to this approach , we have the review of the Financial Regulation , which we need in order to increase the spending discipline of the Member States and of the Commission itself .
With regard to payments , I must point out that this is a budget that has been very cheap for the Council and that may be insufficient for the European Union , but it is the case that in the years to come Parliament will be much more demanding in terms of obtaining a sufficient level of payments to meet our commitments .
I shall end by considering what the President-in-Office of the Council has said about the effectiveness and the responsibilities of each of the institutions : we are demonstrating them .
We are a particularly responsible institution and therefore from the outset we have supported the posts in the Commission and we have rejected the Presidency 's approach .
I also regret having to chair this debate under these restrictive conditions .
Let me state that , should there be time at the end of the debate , Mr Elles may ask to take the floor again .
I am aware that I made my interruption at the end of the speech and do not think Mr Elles had anything else of substance to say .

( DE ) Mr President , before I deliver my speech , I would just like to say to Mr Garriga Polledo that I , too , can look back on 12 years of budget debates in this House and in those 12 years I have never before seen a rapporteur on the Budget , once his own speech was over , simply get up and not listen to what the Members of this House had to say .
In the course of a Budget procedure , the European Parliament , being an assembly of politically thinking heads , engages in a certain number of internal debates , but , when it came to the subject of agencies , there were no differences between the various groups ; we agreed that cooperation with the agencies had been improved over the last three years , although that does not mean that the good cannot be made better .
It is for that reason that we gave the agencies some homework to do before they could make use of all the money allocated to them .
They have to send us their work programme with a list of tasks and information as to what has changed since the previous year and why .
They are also required to implement the personnel policy guidelines already agreed to .
Such are the tasks for the agencies , which they are able to deal with themselves .

Others , too , however , need to take action , the Commission for a start , whose function is to promptly - and I emphasise ' promptly ' - coordinate their personnel plans and put them before us , but also those of us who sit on the specialised committees , who are called upon to evaluate the work of each individual agency by reference to the work programmes , and that has to be done in pretty short order too if the agencies are not to be penalised for something for which they are not responsible , so please let there be no cliquery , and when I say ' prompt ' , I mean that everything has to be sorted out in the first quarter of the following year .



( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister Lehtomäki , firstly I would like to thank the general rapporteurs , James Elles and Louis Grech , for a job well done .
Next year 's budget shows budgetary discipline ; its expenditure levels are less than 1 % of GDP and clearly below the financial perspectives .
This year the debate was overshadowed by certain difficulties with the Council .
There was no great difference of opinion on budgetary expenditure .
It was not so much about money as procedure .
The Council reopened the debate on the agreed details a couple of times .
At the moment , the decision on the new Financial Regulation is still open .
At one time it was agreed on to the letter , but the Council has not as yet confirmed it .
The written procedure to adopt it that has begun will salvage the situation tomorrow .
It is important that the Council should do all it can to allow Parliament to approve next year 's budget in its negotiated format on Thursday .


( DE ) Mr President , I can go along entirely with what Mr Virrankoski has just said , in that I see the Budget Regulation as a really important matter , and would also like to reiterate my thanks to the Finnish Presidency of the Council for having picked up a really live issue by at least proposing that we might take a look at what posts might be saved in the Brussels institutions by reason of the changes this European Union of ours has undergone .
Your inability to get this through is a lamentable sign of just how resistant to change everything here is , but you are passing on the baton to the German Presidency of the Council , and so one can indeed hope that it may be enabled to make headway against the red tape that it has announced its intention of doing something about - ' red tape ' being understood to mean bureaucracy , unnecessary regulations and the difficulty of getting one 's hands on grants - while at the same time reducing the numbers of civil servants .
That would be a way of saving a lot of money , and would also do something to restore the credibility of the institutions .
( PL ) Mr President , last year , when we were concluding the annual procedure , we were uncertain about the fate of the multiannual Financial Perspective .
This year , some uncertainty has re-emerged as to whether all the elements of our agreement with the Council will be fulfilled .
Of course , I am referring here to the financial regulations and would like to clearly state , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets and in the presence of the Minister , that we need a guarantee and that the approval of the budget next Thursday is conditional on receiving this guarantee .
In 2007 we will have a new generation of multiannual European programmes for the twenty-seven Member States and this budget will have a number of specific characteristics .
The first is the importance given to financial regulations , which are supposed to be more ' user-friendly ' and , at the same time , more transparent .
The second characteristic involves the exploitation of ever richer sources of information on the use of particular budget lines in order to ensure better planning and achieve what James Ellis calls ' value for money ' in the future .
The third feature involves the careful planning of spending over the next year , bearing in mind possible delays .
Fourthly , there is an effort to achieve greater democratic control within the scope of the Common Foreign and Security Policy , whilst still respecting the specific nature of this field .
In fifth place , there is a move to end the argument regarding employment in the Commission .
Having been provided with additional information , we agree to free up the reserves for Commission salaries , but still insist on a staff review .
We expect that this will facilitate the recruitment of staff from new Member States in particular .
These are the main points of the strategy for 2007 .
I sincerely hope for a successful conclusion to this procedure , which will end the uncertainty regarding the financial regulations .
I would like to sincerely thank the rapporteurs , the coordinators of the political groups and the Secretariat .
I would like to thank Mrs Grybauskaité for her cooperation with the Commission which , in our view , has been better than it was last year , and I would also like to thank Minister Wideroos .
I am sure that a successful end to this procedure on Thursday will compensate for certain understandable tensions .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate both the rapporteurs on their work .
Despite this effort , however , it cannot be said that Parliament has achieved much as a result of this year 's budgetary procedure .
I deplore the fact that the Council has shown a worrying lack of respect for the views of Parliament throughout .
We are the only democratically elected institution tasked with promoting the views of EU citizens , so I wonder whether the Council will even bother to respect its commitment to the agreement finally reached with the secondary budgetary arm .
I sincerely hope so .
I would like very briefly to make a few comments , not just in respect of the 2007 budget , but also bearing in mind the 2008 review .
First , our key ambition for the EU budget is that it must focus on priorities that deliver on the objectives set by us and our leaders .
So it is with regret that I note that , although there has been some increase in the programmes , such as the Seventh Framework Research Programme , it is nowhere near the amount requested by the Commission and Parliament .
This is an extremely important policy area with a direct impact on the way the EU develops its global economy and how we are seen by the rest of the world .
The Council knows this and has very vociferously tried to push the need for an increase in R [ amp ] D spending .
However , we are still at 1.5 % .
It really is time for the Council to put their money where their mouth is .
Secondly , if the EU is to be taken seriously as a global player , it must back up its position with the funding necessary to play its role - for example in Asia , which is the largest and most populous continent , with 60 % of the global population in some of the world 's poorest countries .
Therefore , the continuing trend of reducing resources to that region is a disastrous policy .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me say just a few words about the key points of the 2007 Budget , which will be the first under the new Financial Perspective .
I think we have to very seriously ask ourselves whether it makes sense to first , through a laborious and bureaucratic process , extract money from the pockets of citizens and businesses , expend a lot of bureaucratic effort on transporting it to Brussels and then expend even more of the same on distributing it among the Member States .
This is where a great opportunity was missed by reason of the curtailment of the Financial Perspective and the failure to reformulate a plethora of legal bases , so that practically all the multiannual programmes had to be adopted afresh .
In particular , Commissioner Grybauskaitė , I can only urge the Commission to seize the initiative for 2008 and 2009 , when we will have to give some thought to the preparatory work for the next Financial Perspective .

The second key point I would like to mention is that the Commission is delegating more and more of its functions to agencies and to executive agencies .
I look forward to the day when the Commission will submit proposals indicating its willingness to take staff back .
We have just completed the biggest round of enlargement in the European Union 's history ; by 1 January 2007 , twelve new Member States will have joined it .
Since many of the tasks it used to perform have been handed over to agencies , the Commission needs fewer staff , and I am waiting for it to produce very definite proposals as to how it is going to make Europe less bureaucratic , something that is not accomplished by what Commissioner Verheugen is doing , namely looking at laws , but by making cuts in personnel so that red tape is not generated in the first place .
I would like to close on a self-critical note with a thought that we might well take away with us , namely that we ourselves need to give rather more thought to our own strategy too .
I think it highly regrettable that we have not done this as much as might be desirable when debates in this House are in the offing .
( PT ) I wish to thank Mrs Gräßle , Mrs Grybauskaitand , of course , the Council on the success of negotiations on the new financial regulation .
Congratulations are due in particular to our rapporteur for her hard work , persistence and tenacity .
I must say , though , that in the years ahead we will have to carry out a thorough assessment of the effectiveness of this financial regulation in order to gauge the extent to which the rules contained therein may or may not be excessive and whether or not they are the cause of the abnormally large number of material errors detected every year by the Court of Auditors .
What we need is a financial regulation that naturally imposes budgetary discipline and the effective use of budgetary resources . We cannot , however , have a regulation that causes endless errors and puts us in our current , extremely embarrassing , position as regards the discharge , with the Court of Auditors systematically refusing to approve our accounts .
I shall finish , however , by simply expressing the hope that the Commission and our rapporteur will build on the work they have done thus far .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am a firm believer in development .
In 2007 the cost of the Community budget will be less than 1 % of the Community 's GNP .
Is this an achievement for which we must be proud ?
Some of my colleagues are .
' At least we managed to enforce budgetary discipline ' they say .
I am sorry if I cannot share their feeling of high achievement that has engulfed them .
While the European Union is expanding we , at the same time , limit our community budget , which does not make us more financially disciplined but less visible in the eyes of the European citizens .
I do not wish to be misunderstood , I believe deeply in the concept of financial discipline .
If pointless expenses are being made then we should stop them .
However , pointless expenses only exist in national budgets of Member States , not in our tiny community budget .
Nevertheless , national expenses are outside the European Parliament 's jurisdiction and because we cannot make expense cuts on national budgets we are forced to make cuts on necessary expenses of our community budget .
However , we will not be taken seriously on matters of discipline and neither will we be taken seriously on matters of European integration .
How are we supposed to go to Lisbon like this ?
The USA spends more than 20 % of its GNP on its federal budget .
We spend less than 1 % !
How are we supposed to compete with them ?
The truth is that we cannot compete with them .
A continuously shrinking European budget seriously undermines our status , our credibility and our capacity to impose any changes .
The inadequacies of the Finnish Presidency , which we all viewed in the Committee on Budgets , only made things worse .
Therefore , I fear that on a collective basis we are well below 1 % of our capabilities as Europeans .
I am sorry to say this , but I think we are heading towards the wrong direction .
( SK ) The 2007 budget is the first in a seven-year programming period and as such has undeniable strategic significance for the years ahead .
It is extremely important that we step into the new financial period resolutely and sensibly .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs , the members of the Committee on Budgets , and all negotiators for their work in negotiating the European Union 's budget for 2007 .
In particular , I appreciate the support of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament for the effort made by the new Member States in reducing the administrative reserve by EUR 50 million .
This issue is especially important to the new Member States .
The essence of the problem is that keeping a large financial reserve would seriously jeopardise the recruitment of new staff .
This is particularly true of the new Member States , as their quotas are far from being exhausted .
During their meetings with MEPs in the Committee on Budgets your officials , Commissioner , repeatedly drew attention to the problems that put the selection of staff for European Union institutions at risk .
Thanks to their warnings and to the united stance of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , things have moved ahead and we are now close to substantially slashing this unnecessary reserve .
The common achievement of this objective will be an excellent gesture vis-à-vis the new Member States of the European Union , which now include Romania and Bulgaria .
The citizens of our countries are watching closely the interplay of words and deeds within European institutions .
May I therefore urge your support for our efforts in achieving this common objective ?
( FR ) Madam President , at the beginning of December , NASA announced that a budget had been adopted with a view to the installation of a space station on the Moon in 2020 .
We , for our part , have a draft budget in 2020 that is designed to allow a train to make the journey from Hendaye in France to Irún in Spain .
Thus , the United States have a budget to go to the Moon in a rocket and we , we have a budget to cross the Pyrenees by train !
How can we explain this difference ?
The United States provides itself with a budgetary policy equal to USD 2 500 billion per year , while we , we toy with a budget of EUR 122 billion .
We toy with 1 260 amendments , we toy with partnerships at international level , with Europalia , with Daphne , with Plan D - in short , we spread ourselves too thinly .
We have only two serious budgetary policies : agricultural policy and regional policy .
The remaining budgetary headings , in particular heading 3 ' Citizenship ' , represent a communication budget , for women , young people , consumers , the unemployed , people who have been made redundant , people who have been assaulted ...
The real cause of this situation is not the lack of own resources : while there is indeed a real standstill , it is due to the ideology of balanced budgets , which prevents exceptional costs from being funded by exceptional resources , that is to say the loan , the loan intended for the major European networks , the rail network , for example .
The real budgetary debate , ladies and gentlemen , does not consist in coming out for or against a European tax in 2014 , but in coming out for or against a European loan to fund the future of research , of transport , of health care and of education .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , I must now , so to speak , ' avenge ' our Mr Elles , and so I am happy to accept the speaking time and would like , speaking on my behalf and his , to thank the House for its praise and its suggestions .
As regards the Financial Regulation , and the completion of reforms , I would ask that we should present every bit as united a front as we have done to date .
Mr Casaca has bidden me keep to the subject , and that I am happy to do .
There is , in fact , a homepage - set up by me - on the subject of our experience with the Financial Regulation , on which the EU institutions or their advisors can provide us with information on how things are working out with the changed Financial Regulation .
I believe that we have , for the first time with this Budget , succeeded - and this is Mr Elles ' great achievement as rapporteur - in bringing planning , implementation and monitoring closer together , and these are tasks that we will have to take very seriously in future .
Before the Commissioner takes the floor , I will ask once more if there are perhaps any other questions that she might be able to help answer .
( FR ) Madam President , I should simply like to say that we deplore the organisation of the debate on second reading in its current form .
Indeed , every time , the Committee on Budgets does a huge amount of work , and we find ourselves penalised by the time allotted to us to present our work and to explain the way in which we have worked and the outcome we have achieved .
It would have been extremely interesting to have seen other Members take part in this debate and to have heard the Commissioner 's and , perhaps , the Council 's , response .
All too often , we are overlooked when it comes to organising plenary sessions .
We note , once again , that more than ten minutes remain , which several of our fellow Members could have used in order to outline the work they have done this year .

( DE ) Madam President , since the Finnish Presidency has shown that the Budget Regulation can work with the seventh research programme , I would like to ask our Commissioner to again enlarge upon the rules applicable to the Budget , which we regard as being of particular importance .

The European Union comes in for much justified criticism , and this is where we want to see really visible progress within a short period of time , so I ask that these issues be taken seriously , particularly as regards their technical aspects , for they strike us as particularly urgent in political terms .
Madam President , this is not on the substance , but may I just congratulate you on putting into practice exactly what I suggested at voting time this morning , namely , to take catch-the-eye speakers at the end of a debate .
I think we should do this for a short period at the end of every debate , but certainly when there is time available , as there is now .
That is an excellent initiative , well done !
You will be aware that that actually works only if there is a little time left over .
It is not actually possible to plan plenary debates down to the last minute .
Member of the Commission .
( LT ) I would like to thank all participants in the debate for today 's discussions .
Truly , a very large job has been completed - all political groups and the Committee on Budgets have really worked quite intensively , so I would like to thank them too , because it was a task involving political responsibility .
Political opportunism was avoided and all the decisions were adopted with regard to the interests of Europe and all the people of Europe .
I would also like to thank my people , my Directorate , who is sitting here and who put in a lot of effort so that we could discuss this today , that is , what we are now doing .
In addition , I would like to thank the Secretariat , both the Committee on Budgets ( in French COBU ) as well as the Council personnel , who equally managed to see beyond their personal ambitions and overcome their errors so that in the end we could obtain the solution that we now have on the table .
Therefore , I urge you all , including Europe 's budget and finance leaders who have spoken here today , to try and , as always , to impress on your colleagues in the European Parliament to vote positively and , on Thursday , to approve the budget of the new Europe , the expanded Europe of 27 countries .
That brings the joint debate to a close .
The vote on the Elles and Grech reports will take place on Thursday .
The Gräßle and Pittella reports will be voted on tomorrow .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( HU ) It seems that we have prepared the 2007 Union budget without any fierce clashes , even though in July there had been no agreement reached on financial regulation , for instance .
The budget will not work without valid regulations .
This is why Parliament will not sign it , unless the new financial regulation comes into force .
In the 2007 budget , Parliament has , in accordance with the Council , increased disbursements , in return for which expenditure will not exceed 1 % of the Union 's GNI .
Why did we not put up a harder fight ?
A new financial framework plan will come into force in 2007 , various programmes will be relaunched , which is why only a small disbursement will be required .
It has now also transpired that Member States have not used six billion euros of the total resources which were increased last year following some hard battles .
This year a new element has been introduced by Parliament in the form of a ' value for money ' analysis , proving that the Union is putting the money to good use .
Unfortunately , the solidarity between Member States is decreasing from one year to the next , with contributors citing difficulties with their national budgets for this , while failing to mention the benefits they have gained from the market opening up .
We should not chip away at the budget , but what we need to do is allocate more resources where cooperation goes hand in hand with added value .
Such areas include research and development , as well as cohesion .
We can only win in the global competitive environment if we work together .
But the will of Parliament is not enough for the European Union to grow to its potential .
What we need is to have statesmen at the helm of our Member States and not politicians who only live for the moment .
Agenda : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 6.25 p.m. and resumed at 6.30 p.m. )

Commission Question Time
As a matter of principle , the Commission is in favour of full application of the four freedoms , including the freedom of movement of workers in the European Union .
One should remember that this freedom is one of the core principles of the Treaty of Rome .
However , the Accession Treaty with Bulgaria and Romania , like those of the previous enlargement , lays down transitional provisions on the right to free movement of workers .
Essentially , these provisions leave it up to each current Member State to determine whether , during a transitional period , to grant Bulgarian and Romanian nationals access to their labour markets .
This is thus a prerogative of each and every Member State .
The Commission plans to send a letter to all the Member States recalling their obligations under Community law and asking Member States to provide the details of any national measures that might be introduced for the first two years that follow the accession of Bulgaria and Romania .
At the same time , let me draw your attention to the Commission 's report on the functioning of the transitional arrangements for the enlargement of 1 May 2004 , and in particular to the finding that the arrival of workers from the accession Member States has had a beneficial effect and actually helped to reduce imbalances in national labour markets , without the newcomers largely taking the place of local jobseekers .
This applies , of course , to those Member States that have facilitated the free movement of workers .
This report also found that there have been overall positive effects on the economies of the EU 15 Member States , with workers from the new Member States contributing to a better functioning of the labour markets , to sustained economic growth and to better public finances .
It also found that restrictions on labour market access may increase the incidence of undeclared work .
The Commission believes that those findings are still valid and trusts that the Member States will consider them closely when deciding whether to introduce transitional measures applicable to Bulgaria and Romania .
We know that in the future there will be a shrinking workforce trying to support more pensioners .
In the light of that scenario , which is not that far away - in fact , much of it is upon us now - do you think that the countries which boosted their workforce by being more liberal and allowing free movement and migration have stolen a march on the other countries that have been more restrictive ?
Member of the Commission .
Thank you for your question .
It is perfectly possible that this might happen , but only time will tell , which is why we are constantly analysing developments in the labour markets in the EU and its Member States .
There are two basic scenarios , which may vary from one Member State to another . Namely , a given Member State may benefit from having the possibility of receiving workers from the new Member States , owing to its demographic profile and the challenges posed by an ageing population .
At the same time , it may be that another Member State has labour market problems , and higher unemployment , and that the national government consequently decides that , given the circumstances , it would benefit from the transitional arrangements .
That is why we have decided to leave this matter to the Member States to judge , and why we have given them the option of applying the transitional measures .
The original written question from the questioner focused on the relatively minor transitional restriction that Ireland and the United Kingdom have brought in regarding the two latest Member States alone .
Do you agree , Commissioner , that it would be far more important to focus on the continued restrictions on all the new Member States that are still enforced even now by the majority of the old fifteen ?
Member of the Commission .
I have taken note of the decisions of the United Kingdom and Ireland .
It is without doubt a prerogative of those countries , as for any other Member State .
Prior to these decisions , I used the United Kingdom and Ireland as a benchmark when arguing the case for opening the labour markets of the other Member States to the candidate countries .
I am proud of having in my previous capacity helped the Prime Minister of the Member State I know best to draft his speech on 1 May 2004 when he declared that Member State - Finland - was likely to remove the restrictions on free movement of workers from the new Member States .
That particular Member State maintains the same liberal practice for Bulgaria and Romania .
The point is that on the basis of very reliable studies there are overall positive effects , but at the same time we want to leave it to the Member States - and we have to leave it to the Member States because that is the decision of the Council of the European Union , which is the highest decision-making body in cases of this kind in the Union .
I would just like to respond to Mr Corbett .
The interesting thing is that when you go to a restaurant or pub in the UK nowadays , the service you get is not in the Queen 's English .
We Finns would find it very exciting to have 500 000 people speaking even a little bit of unusual Finnish .
I should firstly like to congratulate the Commission on its efforts in the area of free movement .
Secondly , I would like to congratulate those Member States which have opened their borders to the free movement of labour from the new Member States .
My question is simple and straightforward .
What is the Commission going to do to keep up the pressure on all the old Member States to open up to the free movement of labour , just as the UK , Ireland , Sweden , Denmark , Finland , Holland and a few others have already done ?
Member of the Commission .
I thank Mr Martin for his question .
The aim of Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 1546 / 2006 is to address the new threat to civil aviation that is posed by homemade liquid explosives .
As such , it prohibits passengers on flights departing from Community airports from taking liquids in hand luggage in individual quantities greater than 100 ml .
However , an exemption has been granted for liquids sold at airport shops and on board aircraft when certain security conditions are met , including the tamper-evident bag system .
Given that Community legislation does not apply in third countries , it is currently not possible to ensure that airports in third countries or non-Community air carriers have security requirements that are equivalent to those applied within the European Union and the European Economic Area .
Consequently , such airports and airlines cannot benefit from the exemption .
The Commission will consider whether it is possible to work with third countries to develop a means of establishing equivalence of security measures .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
However , I wonder whether you appreciate the anger that will be felt by many EU citizens and visitors from the rest of the world coming to the European Union this Christmas who , having brought premium Scottish whisky and other products into an airport like Frankfurt or London , from where they are going on to other airports like Edinburgh or Glasgow , discover that their duty-free goods are confiscated at that airport .
It is going to create a lot of unhappiness and a lot of dissatisfaction .
Commissioner , would you agree that we need some sort of publicity campaign in third countries to make people aware of this situation ?
Secondly , will you urgently engage in discussions with international aviation organisations to see if we can arrive at a global common standard so that this problem does not arise ?
Member of the Commission .
Thank you for that question .
I wish to begin by underlining the fact that one cannot compromise on security .
The Commission and the Community is doing what it can to further open up the system in place with regard to the European Union , although it will probably be quite difficult to achieve significant results in the very short term , and therefore before Christmas , as this calls for negotiations with third countries in order to achieve similar positions to ours .
Regarding your point concerning the publicity campaign , the Commission has been working with the international airport and airline stakeholder organisations concerned so that they can inform their members in third countries about the new EU rules .
In addition , the Commission has assisted those stakeholders in their campaign to inform passengers by developing standardised information posters and leaflets that their members can use as part of their own information campaigns .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I know that flight safety matters are not within your direct remit , but you will probably have no trouble answering this supplementary question .
Day in and day out , we get innumerable complaints from airline passengers , and have ourselves had personal experience of all these things .
A very large number of us regard the action taken as no more than diversionary measures that do nothing to add to passengers ' security , but make things considerably more difficult for them ; in particular , they add up to more business for the manufacturers of toothpaste and contact lens solutions , while , in reality , doing nothing for security .

Member of the Commission .
The Commission is of the view that in fact they do contribute to increased security in real terms , because , obviously , physical checks are carried out on passengers in order to determine that there are no such liquids .
Any liquids would be carried in transparent bags .
Secondly , there is also the question of perception : passengers feel that something is being done and that one would think twice before trying to take on board things which could be suspect and which would be spotted .

( DE ) Madam President , I have a supplementary question which leads me on to a matter related to the original question , since whisky is made from water , and it is with water that my question has to do .


I live in a country where water is universally available , and people are not accustomed to paying high prices for it , but , if you look around European airports , the tiniest quantities of water are on sale there at incredible expense , with a small bottle of it costing between EUR 3 and EUR 4 .
That is something I do not regard as acceptable , but it is a consequence of the security system that is currently in force .
What , Commissioner , is the Commission contemplating doing about this specific matter in order to protect European consumers ?
Member of the Commission .
According to the air passenger rights Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 , airlines are not obliged to offer passengers financial compensation when stranded for long delays .
However , the regulation requires that passengers receive assistance from the airline , including food and drink and accommodation as necessary .
In addition , the Montreal Convention , the updated version of the Warsaw Convention which was transposed into Regulation ( EC ) No 889 / 2002 , dealing with rules for international carrier liabilities , provides for certain rights in case of delays , from which the airline 's liability is limited to 4150 Special Drawing Rights , which is approximately EUR 5000 .
In this case , the passenger must demonstrate a causal link between the damages he or she has suffered and the incident provoked by the airline .
According to Article 17 of Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 , the Commission will submit to Parliament and the Council a report on the application of this regulation in the EU Member States .
A call for tenders has been launched in order to contract an external consultant to give input with regard to quantitative and qualitative data .
The study will deal in particular with issues related to delays and cancellations , as well as with the enforcement of the regulation concerned .
The Commission cannot at present prejudge whether additional measures will be proposed to improve the protection of air passengers .
The Commission will have to wait for the final results of the assessment made by the external consultants .

( DE ) There are two things I would like to point out .
The compensation rules in international law , to which you refer , represent precisely the sort of compensation that we are not willing to allow our citizens to have , in that they should not have to take upon themselves the burden of major court proceedings in order to get what is rightfully theirs , and so I have to ask whether there can be changes in this area , and whether we can come to a clearer definition of the concept of ' force majeure ' .
According to the airlines , an aircraft 's breakdown is ' force majeure ' , but the fact of the matter is that the aircraft breaks down because the airlines , increasingly , use old machines on their flights .
Member of the Commission .
I would like to point out that the important difference between the previous regulation and the present one which is based on the Montreal Convention is that passengers are entitled to receive direct and on-the-spot information , assistance and rerouting facilities , whereas the Montreal Convention only covers ad hoc claims to be presented in a court , as you rightly indicated , for possible damage caused because of a delay .
I will , however , pass on the remarks that you have made to Vice-President Barrot in order to see whether anything further can be done , although as I pointed out in my reply to the question , the Commission does not envisage coming up with additional measures before the final results of the assessment - which is being carried out by an external consultant - are known .
Thank you Commissioner for those remarks .
I would like to draw to your attention that yesterday evening Air France cancelled the evening flight form Gatwick to Strasbourg , quoting technical reasons , but refused support to passengers and refused to provide hotel accommodation for them .
Will the Commissioner take this opportunity to make it very clear to Air France and indeed to other airlines that current EU legislation - this legislation - applies to them and that they should not look for loopholes and try to wriggle out of it , but should respect EU legislation and support passengers when flights are cancelled , as they were yesterday .
Member of the Commission .
As a general comment , Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 does not provide for any extraordinary circumstances linked to denied boarding .
If because of technical failure an airline replaces the original aircraft with a smaller type , and some of the passengers are denied boarding because not all of them can board that aircraft , and they have to stay behind at the airport , those stranded passengers have to be assisted and offered financial compensation as provided for in the regulation .
It is only for reasons of health , safety or security or inadequate travel documentation that passengers can be refused embarkation on a flight .
I will also refer to Vice-President Barrot for his attention the specific comments you have made with regard to last night 's events concerning Air France .
( DE ) Madam President , the extreme security precautions in response to the threat of terrorism are more and more frequently the cause of extreme delays , and such security measures do , of course , also cost a great deal of money .
As these costs are currently borne by the general public , is the Commission considering transferring them , in effect , to the airlines or the passengers , or is it intended that the state , so to speak , should continue to bear these additional expenses ?
Member of the Commission .
You are right that security measures and additional security measures - and this links up to the previous question - have a cost .
However , one needs to underline that if we really want to tackle the question of security on board aircraft then cost considerations can only be secondary .
However , having said that , I will again pass your remarks on to Vice-President Barrot , to see whether there is scope for trying to identify possibilities of cost-sharing in this regard .
Member of the Commission .
I hope I do .
In response to the question by Mr Davies as to when the Commission will introduce measures to end the discard of by-catch by fishing vessels , I should like to point out first of all that the Commission considers discarding to be a serious problem in European fisheries , and is committed to acting on this issue as a priority .
The cause of discards is that unwanted by-catch is taken in many European fisheries and then discarded .
Discarding can primarily be reduced , and eventually eliminated , by reducing unwanted by-catch . This can be done through legal regulation or by providing incentives for the development of fishing technologies and fishing practices which produce little by-catch and therefore little discard .
In early 2007 the Commission will present a communication on reducing discards .
The instruments that will be considered in this context include selective fishing areas , closed areas , requirements to change fishing grounds when significant by-catch is encountered and the economic penalising of by-catch .
The Commission will outline the main elements of a new policy on discarding and open a debate on the implementation of that policy .
Following a debate in early 2007 , the Commission will develop implementing regulations on a fishery-by-fishery basis , the first of which will be presented in 2008 .
I should like to thank the Commissioner .
I met with the Fleetwood Fish Producers ' Association recently .
They tell me that their inshore fishery currently produces some 70-80 % discards on vessels above 10 metres .
They told me : ' he Irish Sea is full of fish , but we are murdering it by catching fish too small to breed ' .
They say that if they use larger nets they are regarded as going out to catch cod and , therefore , they have to go out for fewer days , they lose income and it is a vicious circle .
Commissioner , I know that you want to do something about this .
I have talked to you about it over the years .
However , you have been a Commissioner now for more than two years and you are talking about something happening in 2008 !
Are you satisfied with this rate of progress ?
This is an obscenity and it must be stopped !
Member of the Commission .
As in all aspects with regard to fisheries , I am certainly not satisfied .
The rate of progress is not attributable to a lack of willingness on our part , or to a lack of means to try to achieve results , or a lack of determination on the part of the Commission .
More often than not it is attributable to the fact that we have very complex fisheries in Community waters .
It is far simpler to operate a decent discard system further north , where fisheries are relatively clean , where you go to fish for mackerel and you catch virtually only mackerel .
In Community waters most of the time you target a particular species , but you have what is essentially a mixed fishery and that is much more complex to manage .
We are looking at ways and means of introducing measures which will reduce discards significantly .
This year we have tried to introduce an effort-management scheme for the Kattegat .
The North Sea Regional Advisory Council was heavily involved in this .
We had hoped that at the December Council I would be able to announce that this would start in 2007 .
However , after considering the various proposals being made to operate such a scheme , the operators ' representatives asked us for more time , because they realise that the impact on fisheries could be significant .
The North Sea Regional Advisory Council is of the same opinion and therefore I shall not be proposing that it starts in 2007 .
I hope that during the course of next year this will materialise and that it will come with a much more general position with regard to the management of fisheries whereby discards are reduced as much as possible .
The fishermen you spoke to may be partly right , but there is also a significant element of exaggeration .
In the Commission documentation published for the upcoming Fisheries Council , reference is made to the prospect of cod fishing being brought within the framework of a ' cod bycatch fishery ' .
Could the Commissioner elaborate on this , and could he define what is meant by a ' cod bycatch fishery ' ?
What would this mean in practice ?
Will it involve a percentage limit , and will we still have the lunacy of valuable fish being discarded ?
Could the Commissioner please cast some light on what is intended by the phrase ' cod bycatch fishery ' ?
Member of the Commission .
It is somewhat premature to give details because if one starts going into detail now before discussions with the stakeholders , it could be somewhat alarmist , as always happens in fisheries .
Our intention is to heavily involve the regional advisory councils and to involve the stakeholders in how to manage fisheries in a way in which we try to tackle the cod problem effectively .
There is , as all of us know , a serious problem with regard to cod sustainability .
In most , if not all , Community waters it is in a virtually depleted state .
It is possible for it to be rescued , but we need to be inventive in this regard .
The general idea behind a cod by-catch fishery is that , for as long as cod is not recovered , you do not target cod .
Thus fishers would not target cod , but they would be allowed to land cod caught as a by-catch within certain limits .
In that way you can provide an incentive for the diversification of fisheries into other fisheries so you would not thereby be targeting cod and at the same time you would reduce the unnecessary and very costly discarding of cod .
These are initial ideas which we need to ponder further and which we need to discuss primarily with the stakeholders , to see whether there is a way forward , or whether , as in many other respects , we end up concluding that the system as it operates is giving better results in certain respects .
But I hope that we will manage to work out a system which will give much better results than those we have at the moment with regard to cod and to cod recovery in particular .
Question No 41 has been withdrawn .
Subject : Action taken by the Commission on the recommendations set out in the report on women and fishing
A number of recommendations from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality were incorporated in the report on women 's networks : fishing , farming and diversification adopted by Parliament on 15 December 2005 .
They included a call for action to secure better living conditions for women working in the fisheries sector and for the communities in which they live .
What steps will the Commission be taking in support of the efforts being made by such women to guarantee their social and economic rights and secure greater legal and social recognition ?
Are steps to be taken to ensure full implementation of the principle of equal treatment and opportunities for women and men in relation to training and access to funding and loans , including micro-loans ?
How does the Commission intend to step up direct involvement by women in representative , decision-making and advisory fisheries bodies at European , national and regional level ?
Has it launched a project covering the specific situation of women shellfish gatherers ?
Member of the Commission .
I should like to thank the honourable Member for her question concerning the Commission 's follow-up to the recommendation set out in the report on women 's networks , fishing , farming and diversification adopted by Parliament on 15 December 2005 .
The Commission considers the situation of women working in the fisheries sector , and in particular their legal and social recognition , to be a very important issue .
It is using all the instruments at its disposal to promote equal treatment and opportunities for women and men in the sector concerned .
As regards the four specific questions raised by the honourable Member , the Commission would like to point out the following .
Firstly , the European Fisheries Fund , which is the new structural instrument for fisheries for 2007-2013 , explicitly states , in Article 4 ( g ) , that one of its objectives is to promote equality between men and women in the development of the fisheries sector and fisheries areas .
The EFF is based on the principle of partnership with all stakeholders in the fisheries sector , and this explicitly covers partnership with bodies responsible for the promotion of equality between men and women .
The EFF contains specific provisions promoting gender equality , both through better women 's representation in decision-making processes and in the programmes to be implemented by Member States .
In particular , the Commission is encouraging participation by women in the various stages of implementation of the European Fisheries Fund , including the design , monitoring and evaluation of the Member States ' operational programmes for the next programming period .
The Fund can also support measures aimed at promoting equal opportunities between men and women through networking and the exchange of best practices among relevant organisations .
The Commission will strive to ensure that Member States reflect these provisions and priorities in their operational programmes .
Secondly , the Commission recognises the importance of training in the fisheries sector , and education and professional training are eligible for support under the European Fisheries Fund .
Training measures are also expected to promote access to employment for women .
Moreover , under the Fund 's new priority axis 4 on the sustainable development of fisheries areas , support can be granted for the diversification of activities and the promotion of alternative employment for fishermen through a large variety of measures .
Under this axis , special measures for the improvement of professional skills , work adaptability and access to employment for women can also be supported .
It should be stressed that the Commission is promoting the involvement of women in the local bodies , managing the measures supported under axis 4 .
Thirdly , as mentioned above , the EFF requires Member States to ensure broad and effective involvement of all relevant partners in the different stages of programming , and this includes bodies responsible for the promotion of equality between men and women .
The Fund also requires the operational programmes to contain information on how the partnership principle has been implemented , the list of the parties that have been consulted , the results of those consultations and how they have been taken into account .
The new priority axis 4 on sustainable development of fisheries areas , supported under the Fund , will be implemented through a bottom-up approach .
It will be the local players , including women 's associations , that will serve as the engine for designing and implementing local development strategies .
This allows women 's organisations to get involved in decision-making at the local level and ensure that their specific concerns and suggestions are taken into account in local development strategies .
Women and their representatives are also encouraged to participate in the Regional Advisory Councils , which were set up to improve the governance of the reformed common fisheries policy .
For instance , women 's associations already have a seat in the North Sea RAC , which was the first RAC to be formed .
Women are also represented in the North Western Waters RAC .
Finally , in the present programming period , under the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance , Member States can co-finance studies and innovative projects covering the specific situation of women shellfish gatherers .
This possibility is also offered under the European Fisheries Fund , under priority axis 3 on collective actions .
The Commission has since 2003 been launching a series of calls for proposals for innovative actions in the fisheries sector .
These actions are now almost completed .
In 2005 the Commission conducted an ex-post evaluation of these actions in order to assess their impact and added value .
The results of this evaluation showed clearly that such actions do not have an added value , whereas innovative actions included in , and financed through , the operational programmes of the Member States , were more successful and better monitored .
Taking into account these conclusions , the Commission decided to integrate the implementation of those actions into the European Fisheries Fund Regulation and to support their implementation through the operational programmes of the Member States .

( ES ) Commissioner , thank you for your explanations , but I would like to refer to the specific situation of women shellfish gatherers , the majority of whom are over fifty , who suffer health problems as a result of their work and who , in many cases , also lack the right to unemployment benefits , health services and safety at work .
In our report we therefore call upon the Commission to draw up a pilot project to deal with the specific situation of women shellfish gatherers .
Does the Commission agree with the implementation of this pilot project , as suggested by Parliament ?
We would like to know what the Commission intends to do in relation to this issue .
Member of the Commission .
I will look into the feasibility of creating such a pilot project which would be specific to shellfish gatherers and how their situation on all fronts can be improved .
I can only say at the moment that I am favourably disposed in that regard , but I need to study it further before I can give any commitment .
We now come to the next section of Question Time , with questions to Commissioner Špidla , whom I bid welcome .
Questions Nos 43 to 45 will be answered in writing .
Subject : Economic and innovative changes of demographic change
The ageing of the population and the demographic change it brings with it are regarded as a threat to the labour market and the EU ' knowledge-based economy ' , its Member States and regions .
However , it can be seen as an opportunity for new jobs in a growing market with new products and services which improve quality of life for older people , for economic growth and for improving Europe 's competitiveness .
This is the approach of the so-called ' silver economy ' .
Recent calculations for Germany have shown that a proactive response to the needs and interests of the sometimes increasingly rich elderly could lead to 900 000 new jobs in the next two decades .
There are no other sectors or businesses with a higher growth potential .
Until now the chances that the challenge of the ageing population brings with it have not been clearly set out horizontally in the Commission communications on ' Demographic future of Europe ' final ) , ' European values in the globalised world ' final ) , the Green Paper ' Confronting demographic change ' and the major Lisbon-oriented policy programmes such as the Structural Funds , the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development and the Competition and Innovation Framework Programme .
An exception is the Commission 's Innovative Actions , ' Ambient Assisted Living ' , the i2010 initiative and its eAccessibility communication , now part of the eInclusion programme in the third pillar of ' i2010 ' .
What does the Commission intend to do to encourage Member States and regions to take on board as a horizontal policy the ' silver economy ' concept in its 2007 and beyond innovation driven Lisbon reform programmes ?
Will the Commission envisage to coordinate policy making in the different ' silver economy ' issues ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission agrees entirely with the honourable Member that the silver economy is a very promising area of development and should be boosted at local , national and European levels .
The silver economy is one example of how we can make the most of the fact that people are living longer .
In its recent communication 2006 / 571 entitled ' Demographic Future of Europe - From Challenge to Opportunity ' the Commission used the silver economy as an example of the positive effects of ageing in terms of fresh economic growth opportunities .
The Commission welcomes initiatives like the Silver Economy Network of the European Regions ( SEN @ ER ) .
At the first European forum on demography , which was held recently , a politician from North Rhine Westphalia gave a presentation , in one of the workshops , of activities that Germany is pursuing in the area of the silver economy , within the framework of the SEN @ ER network .
On 25 and 26 January 2007 the Commission will hold a conference on the theme of the regional response to demographic change , where a series of examples of successful regional silver economy projects that often receive support from the structural funds will be presented .
I should also like to mention that on 17 and 18 April 2007 , the German Presidency , with the Commission 's support , will hold an important conference in Berlin entitled ' Demographischer Wandel , Chancen erkennen , potenziale Nutzen , Wachstum fördern ' ( Demographic Change : Recognizing Opportunities - Tapping Potential - Fostering Growth ) on possible synergies between ageing and the economy .
The silver economy is a new issue that , in the context of the Commission , touches upon a number of different policy areas .
The Commission has set up an internal working group to coordinate the various European policies on demographic change and in this regard the Commission will continue to work , in general , on the issue of demography , and , more specifically , on the silver economy .
This work may lead to a number of Commission initiatives , for example on the consequences of the ageing population and the opportunities provided by the silver economy .
In response to the ageing population , the Commission has also launched the key initiative i2010 , which proposes a holistic approach and practical measures relating to development and to the innovative and more intense use of information and communication technologies .
This initiative will draw on all available instruments including the Seventh Framework Programme initiatives under Article 169 in the area of Ambient Assisted Living , the new programme for competitiveness and innovation in the area of the best use of information and communication technologies relating to ageing , including measures for raising awareness and political measures .
The Commission communication on this issue is expected at the start of 2007 .

( NL ) Madam President , whilst I should like to thank Commissioner Špidla for his pro-active stance in this matter , the scope of the silver economy market for services and products is left a little vague at the moment .
In addition to the five instruments mentioned in the communication ' The demographic future of Europe : problem or challenge ' , the silver economy approach must be added as the sixth separate track .
Are you amenable to this idea ?
I also have the following suggestion to make .
As you have already mentioned , on 25 and 26 February , the regions will be meeting in connection with this senior people network .
Are you prepared , on this basis , to look at what this might mean in terms of future adjustments in Parliament , for example by organising , together with this House , a hearing during the course of 2007 ?
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , demographic ageing , its effects and the silver economy - in other words , complete awareness of the changes brought about by demographic ageing in both consumption and manufacturing - are such important issues that if Parliament adopts this initiative , all I can say is that I shall follow it closely and give it my full support .
As regards the search for organisational structures , I feel that at the moment we cannot yet opt for one fixed structure , but whatever happens , we will monitor the progress of the Silver Economy Network of European Regions , and we will also look at how effectively the relevant national coordination structures work .
Honourable Members , the Commission communication on demographic ageing clearly points out that demographic change is one of the most important changes facing our society ; it pervades every area of society and has a cross-sectional impact .
The Commission has therefore opted for the concept of mainstreaming , that is to say , application across all policy areas , including consumer policy and consumer protection policy , as well as the economy as a whole .
( LT ) Mr President , Commissioner , in the Lisbon Strategy it was already planned that competitiveness would be achieved by increasing the retirement age to 65 years .
In Germany , the retirement age has been increased to 67 years .
In the 21st century , instead of introducing new technology , we are increasing the retirement age and working time .
What , in your opinion , should be the age at which a person can retire to well-earned leisure ?
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) The retirement age is a highly sensitive issue , and we cannot go for the easy option and simply stipulate a particular age on the basis of a decision taken at a European level - this matter falls entirely within the competence of the Member States .
I should like to emphasise the fact that this is a legitimate question and that the Commission 's strategy is not to set a particular age .
The Commission 's strategy , of which I am a firm advocate , is to extend people 's active age and working lives .
The notion of stipulating an age at an administrative level is not especially important .
It is much more important to create the conditions under which people can continue in work for longer .
The administrative age is often set at 65 , whereas , the average working life currently ends at the age of 59 in Europe .
I should also like to point out that life expectancy in good health is longer , and currently stands at an average of 62 in Europe , although this age varies greatly between different Member States .
This , too , is an issue that must be taken on board in the debate .
I should like to emphasise that the concept of an inclusive society is based on the fact that work not only has its economic aspects but is also about active involvement in society .
Scientific research has clearly shown that early retirement before a person has not made full use of his or her potential is felt more as a burden than a benefit .
I should like to come back to your original question .
The Commission is not planning to stipulate or recommend any fixed retirement age at an administrative level .
On the other hand , it takes the view that , in the light of demographic ageing and the longer period over which pensions are being drawn , it is right to extend people 's working lives .
To this end , a range of measures should be adopted , of which , in my view at least , an administrative extension of the retirement age is among the less important ones .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , at the same time as there is increasing interest in getting the older generation to spend money , that is , to be consumers , people in their forties or fifties are already finding it more and more difficult to get work , and low pensions are , of course , a reflection of this , with women in particular risking the prospect of a poverty-stricken old age .
How does the Commission think it is going to deal with this dichotomy ?

Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has not yet carried out a study into the effects of the various benefit systems on the birth rate .
Demographics experts are generally agreed that it is difficult to separate the effects of different kinds of financial benefits from other , perhaps decisive , factors influencing the birth rate .
The Commission feels , however , that the search for examples of tried and tested approaches should not be restricted solely to the EU Member States ; we could certainly learn from what the Northern European countries that are not EU Member States , in other words Norway and Iceland , have done to solve the problem of demographic change .
Following its communication ' Demographic Future of Europe - From Challenge to Opportunity ' , adopted on 12 October 2006 , the Commission decided to set up a group of government experts on demographic and family issues , which will help the Commission in future activities and act as a basis for exchanging tried and tested approaches .
I also wish to point out that as well as adopting the communication on demography , the Commission decided to consult with the European social partners over the issue of harmonising professional , private and family life .
The social partners have been called on to assess whether further improvement is needed , especially when it comes to working time , flexible working conditions , the new opportunities provided by information technology , the accessibility and quality of childcare , care for the elderly and other dependent persons and holidays , including family holidays and holidays taken with the aim of caring for dependent persons , children or disabled family members .
In view of the fact that the Norwegian social partners are members of the European organisations representing social partners , their experience with family contributions will be taken into account .
The Commission will also support the German Presidency in creating a European alliance for families .
The Commission takes the view that such an alliance would help identify tried and tested approaches and enable their exchange between Member States , with the aim of improving family conditions in the EU and of giving Europeans the opportunity to have the number of children they want to have .
Honourable Members , as you may have gathered from my long speech , the Commission has yet to assess directly the issue of financial payments , which will be examined at a later date .
( DE ) Thank you very much , Commissioner , for that very good answer and for having the courage to address an issue from which many of your predecessors had shrunk back .
I would just like to put a supplementary question and ask you whether you are planning measures to promote the non-material aspects of a favourable attitude towards children and families in European societies , and whether you are giving consideration to involving non-governmental organisations , private associations and individuals in this , in order to enable civil society to play a part in this work ?
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) As time is very tight , I shall be brief .
Indeed , given that material conditions are a substantial component of our lives , of the quality of life and of support for people and families , it is clear that we will only move forward on this issue if we harness the capacities of non-governmental organisations .
Accordingly , we are counting on the extensive involvement of various non-governmental organisations and associations , as Mr Posselt said in his question .
Questions Nos 48 to 53 will be answered in writing .
Subject : Failure of consumer policy in the internal market
The most recent Eurobarometer survey , carried out in March 2006 , highlighted once again consumers ' total mistrust of the internal market and their complete ignorance of their rights and the legal remedies available to them .
Can the Commission explain why the existing body of legislation is so ill-suited to its task and / or has been so badly implemented to the point of deterring consumers and making them mistrustful of transfrontier purchases ?
How does it intend to protect consumers against the ever increasing number of illegal practices of which they are now the victims following the rapid expansion in Internet sales ?
Why is it ignoring the thousands of complaints it receives through its own networks concerning transfrontier purchases , travel , healthcare , etc . ?
Member of the Commission .
( EL ) Madam President , the research that the Parliament Member referred to does confirm the Commission 's opinion that a lot of things need to be done to improve consumer confidence in the internal market .
However , if we consider where we started , where we begun , and where we are today , we should not adopt such a completely negative view .
The progress has been significant and we can witness it through the measures we have taken and implemented over the past years .
However , the Commission does not rest and continues to act in the direction of boosting consumer confidence , but the Member States have also an important role to play .
Despite low confidence , which is due to several factors , one of the most important ones is the lack of a harmonised consumer protection system ; this means that consumers do not know what to expect when they go shopping outside the country 's borders .
However they must acknowledge that a lot of things have been achieved during the past years in the direction of solving these problems .
Moreover , it is clear that a lot more needs to be done to increase consumer confidence , especially with respect to the existing legislation and its implementation .
Both the measures that have been taken as well as those that are being planned are intended for dealing with the increasing number of unfair or illegal practices .
Has anything been done at European Union level ?
First of all let me reassure you that the Commission has never ignored any complaint that it has received or continues to receive through its networks .
On the contrary , in the past such complaints have made things happen , for example the approval of the legislation against unfair trade practices .
Moreover , they play an important part in the data and information base for future actions , for example for time-sharing .
With the legislation on time-sharing we will cover travel products that are not covered by law and therefore do not provide an acceptable level of consumer protection .
The other legislation I mentioned , namely directive 2005 / 29 on unfair trade practices , prohibits aggressive practices such as sale under pressure , misleading market promotion methods and unfair advertising .
European Union consumers are protected equally whether shopping in their own country or in other Member States or over the Internet ; moreover the horizontal nature of this protection will allow it to control new practices that will arise as the market develops .
Apart from that , directive 2000 / 31 on electronic commerce has imposed information requirements with the purpose of guaranteeing total consumer information regarding the trader 's identity with respect to the commercial nature of communication over the Internet , actual price and technical means .
Regulation 2006 / 2004 on cooperation regarding consumer protection will allow national competent authorities to take swift action for dealing with ruthless and unfair cross-border traders , wherever they might be in the European Union .
In the proposal for a regulation regarding the law that will be applied in the agreements that is ' Rome I Regulation ' , the Commission 's proposal will significantly increase consumer confidence bearing the benefit of a legislation with which they are already familiar .
Moreover , we have the European Consumer Centre networks or Economic Conflict Resolution Networks that will inform consumers on their rights and assist them in guaranteeing their rights through court appeals or out-of-court settlements in cross-border cases .
As Parliament is aware , in the future the Commission will proceed to review the legislation on consumer protection .
Quite soon a Green Paper will be approved for wider public consultation .
Its goal is to find a way to modernise and improve existing legislation with the purpose of increasing consumer and enterprise confidence so that they can buy and sell within the borders of the internal market .
Moreover , the issue of consumer protection will be examined within the context of the upcoming strategy on consumer policy .
As you can see , on the one hand our investigations do indicate that there are still serious problems but on the other , I believe you understand that the Commission does not rest or remain passive .
On the contrary , it is taking steps which are part of a complete programme for dealing with the drawbacks that have been noted by the investigation .
. - ( FR ) Thank you for your response , Commissioner .
It does not surprise me insofar as it confirms precisely the Commission position expressed in the action programme that has just been adopted for the period 2007-2012 and that has the sole aim - I quote - of guaranteeing a high level of consumer protection and of guaranteeing the effective application of consumer protection rules .
How does the Commission intend , in practice , to bring proceedings against those Member States that , regarding guarantees or distance selling , for example , do not properly apply the existing directives and that expose consumers who try to take advantage of the internal market to very serious risks ?
Finally , do you not think that , contrary to the spirit of the Treaty , the policy of this Commission has turned the citizen as consumer into the poor relation and the reject of this internal market ?
Member of the Commission .
It is true that this is a very important issue for us and it is clear that no unauthorised product can enter the market in the European Union .
We have a very strict system in place to ensure that no product slips through the very high standard assessment procedure .
The question of the contamination of US long grain rice , involving unauthorised GM LLRICE 601 , proves that this is not just a statement but a fact .
Our reaction has shown that we intend to apply our legislation in every possible case .
As soon as the Commission was informed of this contamination of US rice , we took every possible measure to prevent unauthorised products from entering the market .
First , we introduced a requirement for certification of every single consignment arriving in the European Union .
But when we became aware that shipments of US rice certified as GM-free tested positive at the port of arrival in the European Union , the certification requirement was strengthened by the imposition of systematic counter-testing of each consignment originating in the US .
Furthermore , it is also important that this counter-testing be carried out on the basis of a harmonised and very strict sampling and testing procedure , which guarantees reliability and comparability of the results , so our consumers can be assured that every consignment of US long grain rice is tested twice , both in the US and on arrival in the European Union .
I have to remind you that Member States bear the primary responsibility for enforcing these requirements and verifying that they are fulfilled by business operators .
The Commission has systematically reminded national authorities of this obligation to carry out adequate checks and withdraw contaminated products .
The UK Food Standards Agency has clarified its approach by agreeing to the conclusions of the Standing Committee on 11 September 2006 .
In that context , Member States commit themselves to checking all stored bulk consignments of US rice already on the European Union market .
When it comes to products on the shelf , our legislation provides that Member States will take all appropriate measures to ensure that these are tested and removed from the market if necessary .
But the aim is to provide the legislation .
It is up to the Member States to ensure that measures are taken in the most effective way .
On the issue of cross-pollination , it is important to remember that no GM crop can be grown in the European Union unless it has been evaluated as safe for the environment and human and animal health and authorised for cultivation .
Member States are developing coexistence strategies to ensure that they can limit as much as possible admixtures of GM and non-GM crops and address the economic consequences .
The competence for this lies with the Member States , following the recommendations and guidelines of the European Union .
However , the special characteristics of each Member State - the landscape , the environment , climate conditions - make it important for them to take the most appropriate measures .
We know that many Member States , including the United Kingdom , have defined or are in the process of defining approaches to ensure that GM crops can coexist with conventional and organic crops .
Member States are obliged to notify national coexistence measures to the Commission and the Commission follows this very closely .
Commissioner , you may say that it is clear that no unauthorised product can enter the EU market , but that has simply not been the case .
The fact that the US certified this rice as being GM-free turned out , as you have said , not to be true , and now you require testing .
You say that the FSA has clarified its position , but can you say what explanation you received from the FSA ?
Was it correct in telling shops that they did not need to withdraw this rice ?
Given that it is illegal to sell GM rice , how can the conduct advised by the FSA possibly be legal ?
Have you reprimanded it ?
Does this whole episode not go to show the attempts to pretend that organic and conventional food can be protected from GM contamination to be utterly unconvincing ?
Member of the Commission .
As long as we have GM products throughout the world that are not authorised by us , we will always have to be alert and to take all measures available .
I think the fact that we identified early on that we could not rely on US certification and that we introduced our own testing system proves that we are very serious about this .
On the UK issue , any product containing an unauthorised GM component has to be withdrawn because it is on the market illegally .
That is an obligation for all Member States including the UK ; this was made clear to them and they understood that .
It is true that the European Food Safety Authority said that there was no imminent danger to human health , and the UK repeated that , but , as far as the Commission is concerned , any product of this sort that has not been authorised through our procedures is on the market illegally and has to be removed .
After we made it clear to the UK authorities that this was the legal position , they adjusted their position .
In this respect , we make sure that Member States also apply the legislation , which is very strict , and no unauthorised product can reach the consumer .
After some discussions , the UK has corrected its position .
Those questions that it has not been possible to take for reasons of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.50 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Establishing the European Globalisation adjustment Fund ( debate )
The next item is the report by Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Globalisation adjustment Fund - C6 0082 / 2006 - .
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Mr President , I should like to thank Parliament and in particular Mrs Bachelot for her unstinting efforts towards progress in negotiations on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank the Finnish Presidency for its hard work in securing the adoption of the EGF proposal at first reading .
The adoption of the fund will send out a clear political signal that the EU depends on its citizens .
We should keep in mind why this fund came into being .
Nobody is in any doubts as to the contribution made by world trade to our labour markets and economy .
In some areas , however , the opening up of world trade has led to changes in the structure of our economies , which has in turn led to substantial job losses .
We are often able to predict change and to react to a particular situation by establishing support mechanisms such as the European Social Fund .
Sometimes , however , it is not possible to predict where and when job losses will occur and the extent of the impact .
We now have the EGF to react to such crises .
The Commission has , from the outset , highlighted the importance to European citizens of this fund , which is a tangible expression of European solidarity .
In recent years , the EGF has , for example , played a role in compensating for the serious job losses arising from changes in the textiles industry .
When quotas were abolished in the textiles and clothing sector at the end of 2004 , as part of the WTO textiles and clothing agreements , many workers in the sector in Europe were threatened with redundancy .
Among the affected regions were Valencia and Catalonia in Spain , and the south west region of the Czech Republic .
There were also significant job losses in the footwear industry , for example in the French region of Pas de Loire and the Hungarian region of Western Transdanubia .
In this case , the EGF was able to help workers to find new jobs , develop new skills , obtain qualifications , or take the major step of starting their own businesses .
The Commission based its proposal on the Council 's mandate to establish a fund specifically aimed at providing additional support for employees who have lost their jobs following major structural changes in world trade .
The criteria for assistance proposed by the Commission reflect the Council 's requirement that the assistance from the fund should be subject to clear criteria concerning the extent of economic disruption and its impact on local , regional and national economies .
In the existing version of the adopted text , the positions of Parliament and the Council are perfectly in tandem .
The Council and Parliament supported the criteria for providing assistance in relation to cases , on the one hand , of large corporations and , on the other hand , of SMEs .
The amendment on flexibility , which should take into account the fears of Member States with smaller labour markets and should cover exceptional cases , also won considerable support .
The regulation also provides Member States with an opportunity to support aid from the fund more broadly , with measures that are dependent on the nature of the crisis and the actual situation in the individual countries .
Once again , I should like to thank you and in particular Mrs Bachelot for your efforts in getting this fund off the ground at the beginning of 2007 .
We must now get down to work together so that all of our instruments and policies bring benefits to the people of Europe .
I am sure that the combination of policies and efforts at national and EU levels , with the European Social Fund and now the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , will bring benefits to our citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow , we shall in fact give our verdict for the third time on the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The founding act of the project was the adoption of the Böge report on the 2007-2013 financial perspective .
In addition to the draft Fund , Article 28 of the interinstitutional agreement thus defines the annual sum of EUR 500 million , budgeted over seven years , together with part of the budgetary procedure .

The second ratification was expressed within the context of Mr Cottigny 's own-initiative report on restructuring and employment , which was adopted in March : the latest events in the automobile sector tend to make us more vigilant regarding the future of weakened or declining economic sectors .
I should like , on the occasion of our debate , to pass on my thoughts and to give my support to the employees affected by the social disaster at the Volkswagen plant in Forest .
Parliament has therefore twice voiced its support for the conclusions of the Hampton Court Summit , which ratified the draft fund devised by the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the report on the draft regulation on Thursday 26 October by a very large majority , and this serves as a basis for the negotiations in trialogue , the aim of which is to obtain an agreement at first reading , such that , as you said , Commissioner , the fund might be operational as from 1 January .


The negotiation in trialogue ended positively on Thursday 30 November , with my agreement and with that of Mr Andersson and Mr Lewandowski , together with that of the draftsman of the opinion , Mr Seppänen , on the budgetary part , where he had access to enhanced cooperation .
I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their constructive spirit - this report belongs to you , Mr Cottigny , Mr Beaupuy and Mrs Schroedter - as well as the group coordinators .
I am also grateful to the representatives from the Commission and from the Finnish Presidency .
The day after the trialogue , the agreement was ratified at the Council by Coreper : an agreement at first reading on the creation of the EGF is therefore in the hands of the MEPs , who will vote tomorrow .
Four principles have guided the work of our Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and we have preserved them throughout the debate .
The first principle is European added value .
It is by no means a question of substituting for the Member States when it comes to dealing with the social effects of industrial disasters .
The EGF 's operations will be focused on cases symbolising European-wide social disasters , which take place following a change in the structure of international trade .
The European Parliament has therefore specifically insisted that the 50 % cofinancing rule be laid down in Article 10 of our regulation , thus marking the European ambition and not the provision of European aid for international issues .
Equally , we have introduced the transnational element of certain issues .
The second principle is responsibility .
Responsible , as it is , for international trade negotiations , the European Union thus accepts the potential consequences of its strategic decisions .
Our responsibility is indeed to accept the positive aspects of globalisation , but also to take account of its potentially negative effects .
The third principle is justice .
Justice firstly , because we are addressing men and women .
Territorial justice , too , because all of the Member States are involved , and we have rejected discrimination against small labour markets , which will be eligible from now on via the safeguard clause and the extension of the provisions of Article 2 b ) .
The fourth principle is effectiveness .
In Article 3 , on eligible actions , we have clearly prohibited passive social protection measures .
We want proactive measures aimed at getting workers back to work , particularly older workers , who should not be condemned to compulsory early retirement or to prolonged periods of unemployment .
The EGF programme thus has a place in the Lisbon Strategy , in that it helps European competitiveness .
Effectiveness also means controlling and evaluating the process , on which our Parliament has laid a great deal of emphasis .
Our objective is well and truly to provide Europe , thanks to the EGF , with a similar instrument to the one that has already existed for 40 years in the United States in the form of the Trade Adjustment Act , which last year helped more than 170 000 US employees , over 70 % of whom found a long-term job .
Many of my colleagues support the idea of the Fund , but regret the lack of money involved .
I understand them .
Nevertheless , I would emphasise the fact that this is an experimental move , which will have to be analysed , then refined and enhanced .
This experimental move will constitute the first stage in the establishment of a genuine global European strategy on globalisation .
There is no such strategy today , and not for long will we be able to remain the only strategic trade actor in the world to do without such a road map .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , globalisation does not just make victims of developing countries , but also of countries in Europe .
The main victims of globalisation have been the populations of those developing countries where the abolition of tariffs by the WTO has not had any tangible effect .
However , there are sadly victims in Europe , too , where the living conditions of many Europeans have dramatically worsened .
There are no jobs , or they do not pay enough , or they are no longer secure .
The welfare state and social security are in crisis .
The Globalisation Adjustment Fund is important , insofar as it sends out a positive message , but unfortunately this is more or less just a symbolic message .
The appropriations are not actually sufficient to meet the ambitious objectives stated , and the number of workers that will be able to be helped - between 35 000 and 50 000 - is also more or less symbolic .
We can therefore expect the Fund to be spread here , there and everywhere , leaving the many applicants empty-handed .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( FI ) Mr President , we on the Committee on Budgets are particularly interested in how money that has been saved in other areas of expenditure is to be transferred to this fund .
If the budget is drafted for year N , the Council wanted to use the money according to the following procedure : first the unused margins for year N minus 1 preceding the budget under debate would be transferred to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and only then would the unused commitment appropriations for year N minus 2 preceding it be transferred to the fund .
Parliament , however , could not accept the logic of this order of events .
We wanted first to use the known commitment appropriations for the year N minus 2 preceding the drafting of the budget and only then the margins for the year N minus 1 .
The Commission supported Parliament 's position , a strong indication of which is the letter on fund transfers sent to Parliament by Commissioner Dalia Grybauskaitė .
The Council accepted this arrangement at the trilogue meeting .
I want to thank Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin for her excellent levels of cooperation .
The Committee on Budgets can thus adopt the outcome of the trilogue discussions .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , despite differing opinions over the existence of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy has concluded that the fund might act as an expression of EU solidarity with workers who have lost their jobs owing to changes in the structure of world trade .
In my view , the Commission 's original proposal , which was based on the discussions and compromise proposals in the committee , was better suited to the needs of most Member States , including the smaller ones , and also to the conditions faced by SMEs .
The key criterion remains access to the fund .
Unfortunately the document before us today concerning the establishment of the fund fails to take sufficient account of the - unanimously adopted - conclusions of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
For example , the provision of financial aid still depends on reaching a minimum threshold of a thousand workers who have been made redundant .
The EGF should be a source of rapid assistance .
As we say in our country , ' He who gives quickest gives twice . '
Yet there are no deadlines set out here by which the Commission must issue decisions on the provision of resources from the funds .
The fact that EGF is restricted to compensation for relocations of production outside the EU is also , in my opinion , an unpromising sign , although I am aware that under Community law no other options are possible .
Nevertheless , I have often heard a similar opinion being expressed during negotiations in Parliament and the Commission , and the European trade unions have also criticised the double standard in the approach to the unemployed .
The proposal before us today to establish the EGF , as distinct from the version adopted by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , does not reflect the conditions faced by the small Member States or the SMEs , which are the very backbone of the European economy .
For this reason , I will not be alone in finding it difficult to lend my full backing to this version of the EGF .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund came about as an attempt to address social emergencies that have arisen in EU Member States .
The economic scourge of unemployment , caused by globalisation-related phenomena , is clearly one such emergency , and , with 19 million people unemployed , solutions must be found .
This Fund is to be supplied from the unused amounts from other headings , up to a maximum of EUR 500 million per year .
It will not have its own funding line , nor will it be possible for the fund to be brought forward from the following year , as is the case with the Solidarity Fund .
This is a serious problem because we may be declining to intervene in clearly eligible situations owing to a lack of available funding .
I broadly welcome this regulation . I must , however , register my scepticism as regards the tight eligibility criteria laid down in Article 2 .
We managed to bring in a flexibility clause , but I fear that it may be insufficient to protect smaller countries and regions that may not have met the quantitative criterion but in which the impact of globalisation may be extremely serious .
It is essential we contribute with an instrument that strives to preserve the European social model , which lies at the very core of Europe .
For this to happen , we must use the Globalisation Adjustment Fund to support our workers and support the workers of the rest of the world by making social criteria a barrier to the import of certain products into European territory .
Only in this way , and by promoting fairer trade , shall we defend our social model and champion the interests of millions of citizens throughout the world .
Lastly , I wish to say that we must respond , as a matter of urgency and before it is too late , to these serious economic and social problems caused by globalisation .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the Council has , in its infinite wisdom , decided to set up , at Mr Barroso 's suggestion , the globalisation fund that is the subject of today 's debate .
We could have also opted to convert the ESF , for example , but we did not .
On the positive side , I think , is the fact is that we are acknowledging with this proposal that globalisation has implications .
It has positive implications in the sense that it is the best development aid , while the negative implications are to be found in our own labour markets .
We are now trying to cushion this with EUR 500 million annually , which will not be enough .
I would , however , thank the rapporteur for making a huge number of improvements to this proposal in recent months , and I should like to give you a thumbnail description of them .
First of all , the unemployed within the somewhat smaller labour markets will now also be able to tap into this fund , 15 % of which has been set aside for this purpose .
Secondly , if thousands of people are made redundant within the next nine months , they will be able to enjoy the benefits of this fund and that is vitally important to the SMEs .
Thirdly , the 50 % cofinancing measure has been removed , which is excellent .
Fourthly , the definition of the SME has been extended .
Fifthly , there is no longer any passive support , as this is termed in the proposal , for social security ; instead , an active employment policy is pursued with means of this fund .
Finally , we can decide on spending together with the Council .
To sum up , I am pleased with the way in which adjustments have been made .
Even if a disaster were to strike in my region , this Fund can be used to enhance further employment .
I would extend warm thanks to Mrs Bachelot , as well as the Committee on Budgets and my own Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for this .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Špidla , Mrs Bachelot-Narquin , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating our rapporteur , Mrs Bachelot-Narquin , not because it is customary to do so , but because she has been able to put her stamp on this report .
During our work , she has been able to establish a constructive frame of mind with all of the draftsmen and the groups , which now enables us to examine a report at first reading , something that we could not have hoped for only a short time ago .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , to the great displeasure of those who think that Europe is nothing but a large market with no political objective , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is going to come into being .
It is true that the delivery has been painful and that , sadly , the case of the Volkswagen-Forest employees , about whom I cannot help but think this evening , has hung in the balance .
It has enabled the detractors of the project to realise how useful and , moreover , necessary , this Fund is .
It is quite clear that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament was unwilling to accept just any compromise when it came to reaching this agreement at first reading , but we are genuinely satisfied with the results of the trialogue .
We particularly welcome the integration of the Fund regulation ; the assurances that we have obtained thanks to the tenacity of the members of the Committee on Budgets ; the implementation of the safeguard clauses , which will enable us to support employees who have been made redundant ; the creation of a European one-stop shop , which will guarantee everyone equal access to information ; the certification of acquired experience , which recognises employees who find themselves out of a job after years of work ; the funding of cooperative projects and the obtaining of micro-credits ; and the maintaining of Article 10 , which sets a rate of 50 % for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund 's contribution to the funding of issues , which makes this tool an entirely European fund .
An agreement is never perfect , of course ; it is the fruit of compromise .
The Socialists regret , for example , that , as regards the resources allocated to this Fund today , the European budget does not exceed EUR 115.5 billion .
It is a pity that we did not see more money go into this budget .
Thanks to this agreement at first reading , this Fund will be operational as from 1 January .
It gives rise to a hope , that of seeing work finally begin on a social Europe .
It is important to understand that job insecurity and the pitting of European workers against each other is not the norm .
It is up to Europe to guarantee employee protection .
Social Europe is the only Europe that can now bring the citizens closer to their institutions .
This Fund represents the first stage towards a more united Europe .
Today , Europeans expect Europe to contribute to their job security and their lifestyles , in the same way that it has been able to guarantee peace and stability for almost 50 years .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Špidla , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for being present and , above all , thank you to Mrs Bachelot-Narquin who , as my fellow Member , Mr Cottigny , did such an excellent job of saying just now , has succeeded in uniting the ideas of various parties within Parliament : it is most certainly not the case that she lacks ideas , but the fact of supplementing them with the ideas of various parties has actually enriched the debate .
I should like to thank you too , Mr Špidla , for the participation of the Commission which , acting on the Council 's wishes , has proposed a text on which we have been able to work .
I note that the Council is not very well represented this evening : without doubt , the low turnout is compensated for by the quality of the persons present .
We have finally reached an agreement : that is the crucial point .
Once again , if anyone should doubt Parliament 's ability to enrich the texts proposed to it by the Commission , well , this evening , we can prove it to them !
I do not wish to go back over what Mrs Bachelot-Narquin ably summarised .
However , I should like to highlight a point that I feel is crucial in terms of the positive aspect of the text submitted to us , which I have no doubt we will adopt tomorrow : it is the very proactive aspect that we are going to provide in the area of retraining , of reemployment , of the reemployment of employees who are going to be affected by these globalisation-related developments , at a time when they are going to lose their jobs .
We have insisted in our various debates that , thanks to training schemes , business start-up assistance and skills appraisals , to mention just a few examples , workers can immediately benefit from this money with a view to finding a job .
Over and above these congratulations , however , I should like to guard us against a great danger : the illusions created by the communication on this Fund .
Mr Cottigny , who is clearly highly motivated by human kindness and by his desire to create a social Europe , etc . , did a good job just now of outlining all the hopes presented to us .
I would advise caution : we only have EUR 500 million and , even if we had more , is it up to the European Union to take the place of training bodies , of the State , of the regions , of the local councils and of all the contributors , of which there are many ?
Next , it is quite important to understand that this system only exists when , unfortunately , a business winds up and has to file for bankruptcy , has to stop its activities .
The same goes for its suppliers , its various service providers .
Last week in Brussels , under the chairmanship and on the initiative of Mr Špidla , a two-day forum was held on restructuring .
Well , I should like to say at this point that the work done by the European Union on these restructuring arrangements is very important because it is precisely going to allow us to take a dynamic approach to preventing a number of negative effects and , therefore , factory closures .
I believe that the message that we , and particularly you , Commissioner , together with our Commission bodies in general , should send out is that , on the one hand , there is a human desire to provide new resources through this Globalisation Fund , and that , on the other hand , Europe , using the bulk of this budget , is dedicated to adapting to the modernisation of our European Union so that our general economy , and therefore , in fact , our employees , are better able to dominate the world 's developments .
I believe that this is the message that we must send out , so that we do not have the kind of communication that is simplified in the extreme and that penalises the entire European Union .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if you expect me to join in singing the praises of this Globalisation Adjustment Fund , then you are making a mistake , for , as we recall , the fund was made necessary by the unwillingness of the Commission and the Council to include consideration of the social dimension in their international trade policy from the very outset .
If European economic policy does not run in tandem with social cohesion , then the fund is , in essence , a fire extinguisher , one reliant on modest , indeed minimal resources in a reserve the funds for which have to be collected together as and when European policy , being socially unbalanced , has failed .

This House was then left with no option other than to help establish this fund , but it would have been better if the Council had topped up the Budget with more money for the long-term restructuring and modernisation of , and job creation in , regions and sectors , so the rapporteur , Mrs Bachelot-Narquin , really does deserve gratitude for having - in the face of resistance from both this House and the Council - ensured that a draft with real improvements in it can become , in a single reading , the legal basis for this Fund .
It really is good that she has agreed to our amendments .
This House has done away with discrimination against older workers and enabled them to have the same opportunities for continued employment as their younger colleagues ; it has caused the same weight to be given to the principle of gender mainstreaming as it receives in the European Social Fund , and - crucially - this Fund has been enabled to make microloans enabling workers to acquire the capital they need if they are facing unemployment and want to become self-employed for lack of any alternative - and that is precisely the point : they have no alternative , because Europe 's trade policy has been wrongheaded from the word go .
In this area , too , we have supported the rapporteur , since she has done her bit to improve the opportunities for making use of this fund .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) The Commission 's proposal is no more than a palliative for the serious problem of the impact of globalisation in a number of Member States .
The restructuring and relocation of multinationals are , alone , known to cause many thousands of redundancies and to hamper development in large parts of various countries in which there are no employment alternatives .
Apart from the obvious inadequacy of the overall amount proposed , restrictions have been imposed that , in practical terms , prevent the Fund being used in countries such as Portugal , which is experiencing serious problems due to multinationals relocating their factories .
By not allowing the use of the Fund when companies are restructuring and relocating within the EU , we are preventing the workers in well-known cases such as that of Opel in Azambuja , which is to relocate to Spain , from receiving support .
The same could happen in other cases , such as that of Johnson Controls , which is threatening to move to Romania , that of Lear and those of many other firms relocating to Poland and other EU countries .
In reality , then , this Fund is a symbolic measure that does not provide solutions .
Its budget is limited and its eligibility criteria are restrictive .
The Commission estimates that between 35 000 and 50 000 workers could benefit from the Fund , but , by 2005 alone , the number of workers laid off as a result of restructuring had topped 570 000 , most of the redundancies being due to relocations within the EU .
Despite its grandiose name , the Globalisation Adjustment Fund is no more than a smokescreen designed to conceal the serious consequences for workers of the neoliberal policies pursued and implemented by the EU .
The Fund is not intended to stop the redundancies , factory closures , relocations and the quest for the maximum profit at the minimum cost , with the workers treated as mere numbers to be cut back on .
The only intention is to soothe the consciences of those responsible for such actions .
( PT ) Mr President , globalisation is one of the defining features of our times and should be seen in a positive light because , first and foremost , it puts everyone in contact with everyone else , which is a good thing .
Globalisation has already pulled millions of people out of poverty , and that is another good thing .
In coming to terms with globalisation , Europe is doing what it has always been able to do well : it has opened up to other cultures .
Yet we must be aware that globalisation also has some worrying aspects , for certain regions of Europe in particular .
There is a political angle to the decision to set up the Globalisation Fund , which was taken simultaneously by the three most important EU institutions .
This was the first time that the three institutions had acknowledged the existence , in the European area , of the negative aspects of globalisation .
With the closure of industrial units , there are clear signs of major concern in certain strata of our societies .
People are not so much concerned at the moment with fighting for more rights , but rather with trying at least to keep things as they are .
In broad strata of our society , there is a feeling that I have no qualms about describing as a certain fear , a fear of the future , which I feel will only be overcome if people are prepared to change .
When people are concerned and fearful , it is very difficult to accept any kind of change .
To my mind , this fund is , more than anything , a way of helping to encourage the most vulnerable workers to change .
It is not , and nor , in my view , does it seek to be , a miracle cure for redundancies and for the consequences of company restructuring , closures and relocations .
The Fund 's raison d 'être relates solely to people in a very precarious situation , whom we want to help regain a high level of self-esteem as quickly as possible .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur and to say that I support this report .
( SV ) Mr President , I want to begin by thanking not only the rapporteur , Mrs Bachelot-Narquin , for a quite excellent piece of work but also the shadow rapporteurs , including Mrs Schroedter , who became involved .
I also wish to thank the Council , which is not present , for being so attentive , and the Commission for its constructive approach to the trialogues .
Others have talked about the improvements made , for example , when it comes to cofinancing , small labour markets and such like .
A host of improvements were made .
I want to emphasise what Mrs Bachelot-Narquin said , namely that the fund will not solve all the problems , that what we have here is European added value and that the Member States , regions or companies are not relieved of their responsibility to face up to globalisation .
What we are talking about is added value .
Do not imagine that this fund will solve all the problems , most of which will have to be solved in the Member States .
It is an important contribution , however .
Secondly , the fund is not about supporting companies or specific regions . We have other aid for those purposes .
It is about reintegrating workers who , through no fault of their own , have been affected by globalisation , so that they might re-enter the labour market as soon as possible .
Fortunately , the proposals will enter into force as early as on 1 January .
I should like to thank everyone for their constructive cooperation .
- ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate Mrs Bachelot for preparing this complex report .
I am sure that the authors of the Globalisation Fund idea and the rapporteur herself had a lofty goal - to help people who find themselves without a job .
However , ladies and gentlemen , before voting I would like you to ask yourselves a few questions :
1 .
Is it really the role of the Commission to regulate and interfere in the micro-management of enterprises in the entire Community ?
2 .
How will the Commission determine whether an enterprise is leaving the market because of the effects of globalisation or just because of normal competition ?
We know that every year thousands of enterprises go bankrupt due to the normal course of events .
3 .
How will we explain why no help is forthcoming for the employees of enterprises that go bankrupt in the normal course of events ?
Is this Fund likely to become yet another bone of contention among the people of the Community ?
4 .
Why would the programmes , that the Commission is going to offer for re-qualifying , help in finding employment and other consultations , work better than the programmes already in place that are often offered free of charge ?
As we know , they are not very effective .
The Globalisation Fund idea may make sense politically , but the proposed Regulation clearly lacks economic logic .
It goes against basic free market principles and particularly against the principle of competitiveness .
There is no guarantee that the funds will go to people who have found themselves without a job , rather than to consulting enterprises or other intermediaries .
Therefore , without clear answers to these questions I think it will be hard to vote in favour of this document .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Špidla , Mrs Bachelot-Narquin , as my colleague , Mrs Schroedter , has already pointed out , our group has indicated that it agrees with the outcome of the trialogue , and has done so in order to have the Fund implemented as quickly as possible .
I should like to stress in this House that this aid is intended directly for workers and that its primary aim is to get people back to work , which I feel is very positive .
Regarding the intervention criteria laid down in Article 2 , there remain some margins for interpretation , which the Commission will have to clarify in its guidelines .
The planned job losses are clearly linked to structural changes in international trade for the sectors concerned .
That being the case , what is regarded as a serious economic disruption remains subject to interpretation .
That is why we believe that the automobile sector can come under this plan and that , as such , the Volkswagen Forest workers and the sub-contractors should be able to benefit from this extra aid .
As desirable as it is , this new Fund will obviously not prevent working conditions from continuing to deteriorate under the pressure of competition organised between various production sites of the same group , located inside and outside the Union .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance repeats its request for the Commission to propose a legal framework aimed at creating European , sectoral and group collective agreements , enabling us to anticipate restructuring and not to suffer it .
( HU ) We are all aware that views differ among the political groups in terms of an assessment of globalisation , but the same is true within European society as a whole .
Although nowadays it is mainly the relocation process in Europe the public is aware of , let us not forget either that Europe was the main beneficiary from globalisation during the last century .
Taking all this into consideration , it is possible , in principle , to agree to the establishment of this fund .
However , the draft text for this has also raised serious concerns in a number of respects .
It would not be appropriate if interfering in European funds only helped to cover up the lack of competition , or if the method of determining the criteria for the funds turned old and new Member States against each other .
As regards the first issue , we need to create the opportunity for improving and maintaining competitiveness within a European framework .
This is where legislation has a serious role to play .
I would mention , first of all , efforts to create an internal market .
This means that the globalisation fund cannot dispense with those whose job is actually to ensure that European companies , based in Europe and employing EU workers can not only continue to operate , but increase their revenue too .
The other issue is connected with this .
I would like to emphasise that it is not our job to create difficulties between old and new Member States , as is happening with the free movement of workers , but to work together to make the Union commercially competitive .
This is why the award criteria system needs to be just and fair to all Member States .
We have managed to improve the original proposal , thanks to Roselyn Bachelot , so that , in its present form , it is already acceptable , even if it is of mainly symbolic significance .
( ES ) Mr President , like other Members , I shall begin by expressing my satisfaction , though also a degree of caution .
We have reservations because , though it is a very appropriate response at this time of so much anguish for so many of our fellow citizens , it would be a mistake to raise expectations only for them to be dashed .
We can say , however , that a positive message will be sent out tomorrow , which will firstly show that a way of working has been employed that overcomes the differences amongst our parties , in order to reach agreement on problems that we have in common .
There is broad agreement between the Council , the Commission and Parliament , also demonstrating that a good method has been employed .
Above all , however , this legislation demonstrates that we are once again seeing that Europe means solidarity , that Europe provides a social model , and that we are sensitive to our citizens ' demand that Europe should exist between our States and the world in order to support the victims of globalisation , those who pay the price for globalisation .
Though in a symbolic and limited manner , we are prepared to provide them with a new instrument , which must of course be managed extremely efficiently , given its limited resources , and which is dedicated to those who suffer most , the workers , enabling them to return to the labour market .
Mr President , Parliament has done a good job and tomorrow I shall vote in favour , like the majority of my fellow Members .
( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in this Parliament , when we are discussing the effects of globalisation , we often hear certain countries expressing pride in having transferred manufacturing processes to third countries with cheap labour costs .
However , the transfer of manufacturing processes has another side to the coin - the loss of jobs and prosperity of EU citizens .
We can see the first sign of European solidarity with those becoming unemployed - Europe adapting to a Fund for the consequences of globalisation .
According to the Regulation , the Fund 's money will be used in accordance with strict criteria , having regard to the scale of economic disruption and the effect on the local , regional or national economy .
How is the scale of economic disruption to be determined ?
The Regulation suggests that aid be offered when job losses affect 1 000 employees ; the EP suggests that in exceptional cases it could also be offered for 500 employees .
However , in the small EU countries over 90 % of enterprises are medium-sized or small , and over 90 % of these are micro-enterprises .
Therefore , in reality the aid will go to large enterprises in large countries .
EGF aid is paid only once , but it should be tied to the creation of new employment opportunities in an endeavour to reintegrate workers into the employment market .


( DE ) Mr President , the approach taken by the Globalisation Fund is very much the right one , in that it is intended to act in solidarity with those workers who have lost their jobs as a result of international business relocations , making available temporary income support for the purpose of their further training and reintegration , in order to give them new opportunities for employment .
Having the right idea , though , is a long way from doing the right thing .
The people on the receiving end are bound to be bitterly disappointed when the money - which amounts to a maximum of EUR 500 million per annum - runs out ; raising high hopes and then dashing them is a sure-fire route to long-term frustration .
The fund goes about things the wrong way , in that it addresses the symptom rather than the causes of the lay-offs ; the authorisation procedures are too complicated , and there is loads of red tape , which makes for considerable expense , but , above all , it does not work for SMEs , in that , for example , a reduction in the threshold from 1 000 layoffs to 500 has been refused , and , moreover , when fewer than 1 000 workers are laid off , only 15 % may be paid out as against the 20 % that we seek .


The Fund is meant to kick in when a given Member State reports 1 000 layoffs from its SMEs over a period of nine months , whereas the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs had demanded a period of twelve .
There is a need for a great deal more structural investment in our Member States , not only in research and innovation , but also in high-quality education and training , which the European Union is supporting in both the short and long terms with programmes for lifelong learning .
Money from the ESF is also being used to fund older workers through retraining , the completion of their education , and their integration .
The Globalisation Fund was pushed through the institutions in short order ; in its present form , not even its basic approach is likely to meet the public 's high expectations .
( IT ) Mr President , Mr Špidla , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to say how satisfied I am with this important measure .
The fund is one of the most significant tools for forging a European identity .
This is true on both a symbolic and a practical level , since it provides backing for active policies for male and female workers who are at risk of losing their jobs , or who have already lost them , mainly as a result of company relocations .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs did not express its opinion because of an unexpected and inexplicable majority of votes against , which luckily I now see has been readjusted .
Thus , the committee has sidelined itself from being able to offer positive contributions , and has lost the opportunity to improve the text on matters that fall within its competence .
I would like to say that , despite the device of a reserve for exceptions , the setting of a quantitative ceiling is liable to make it difficult to perceive the diversity of individual countries ' productive systems , and risks failing to target the true losers : those who do not have effective national legislation to protect workers of both genders , small businesses and industrial areas .
Mr President , British Conservatives are not unreservedly enthusiastic that there should be a globalisation fund at EU level .
The good news is that this proposal is about helping people , helping them cope with the challenge of change , and we support such a principle wholeheartedly .
At issue is whether such help should be at EU rather than Member State level .
However , to be frank , the fund is also about helping certain governments sell the idea of globalisation to their voters .
This is not a criticism .
We support that idea too .
There is indeed unease in certain countries and certain quarters that the wind of global competition can be a chill wind for some .
This is understandable .
It is also true .
It is in all our interests that concerns regarding possible downsides of globalisation are addressed so that the upsides of globalisation can be released .
I congratulate the rapporteur on her thoughtful and considered report and for her positive work in the trialogue .
However , concerns remain about the fund itself and it has been no surprise that in the various discussions in committee voices have been raised saying : if there is to be such a fund , let it be bigger ; if there is to be such a fund , let it be easier for us to get our hands on it .
Once the EU proposes any new budget line , there is usually such a clamour .
But in this case there is not really a separate budget line , as the amount available will basically be made up of monies unspent elsewhere .
This is not just untidy , it is bad accountancy practice .
I am encouraged that the rapporteur and indeed the committee have supported a key amendment of mine to Article 18 ( 3 ) , which states that ' it is the responsibility of each Member State to ensure it has smoothly functioning management and control systems ' to track the expenditure and to make sure it is justified and that ' it is the responsibility of the Commission to verify that such systems are indeed in place . '

Globalisation can indeed be a challenge but , in the context of the auditors ' failure to sign off the overall annual accounts for the 12th successive year , the management and control of this spending is possibly the biggest challenge of all .
( FR ) Mr President , I , like my fellow Members , welcome the creation of this Fund , which gives great hope to employees worried about relocations and which has given rise to countless debates within our respective committees , particularly with regard to its amount , to the award criteria and thus to the risks of unfair treatment between regions that could result .
However , it is important for European workers to know that the Union has finally decided to take account of the job losses that badly managed globalisation can cause in each of our countries , particularly in traditional industrial regions .
I join with those who have congratulated Mrs Bachelot-Narquin and all the draftsmen on their thorough work , and I am delighted that the Fund will be operational as from 1 January 2007 .
Like many , I regret that the threshold for the granting of the Fund has not been lowered , that the sum is not larger and has not been definitively allocated and that the Fund cannot be harnessed for relocations within the European Union , where the majority take place .
However , this Fund does exist , and we need to get it up and running very quickly because there is a sense of urgency , as events frequently demonstrate , and then we need to assess its scope and usefulness , so that we can adjust it and replenish it if necessary .
I am also pleased that there is an obligation to inform the workers and the regions that will benefit from it , because anything that can help make our often sceptical fellow citizens more aware of the added value provided by the European Union in terms of cohesion and solidarity is most welcome .
( IT ) Mr President , Mr Špidla , ladies and gentlemen , in the face of the urgent need to restructure the fabric of European business , because of the process of globalisation , and prompted by the emergence of a large European market , we are concerned to ensure that the costs of such changes , which are in themselves positive , are not borne solely by the world of work .
We therefore welcome European initiatives such as the creation of a globalisation fund , which we are debating today , and the report on corporate social responsibility , which we shall discuss tomorrow .
The development of the free market within the context of a social economy must of necessity combine the creative impetus of economic freedom with the positive values of action to promote solidarity .
Only in this way will businesses and work be an asset to the European Community .
To that end , the creation of the globalisation fund is an important tool in achieving this balance , which would otherwise be lost , leading to social injustice and the loss of jobs .
At the moment , we can see significant examples of this in the difficulties of large firms such as Volkswagen in Belgium , and significant regional problems such as those of Magrini Galileo in the Veneto - my region .
We therefore hope that this initiative , although it is experimental , can produce positive results and can be properly funded . I would also like to thank the rapporteur for her commitment .
( HU ) It continues to be the Union 's job to remove the structural barriers which trade liberalisation and the open markets are facing .
We need to harness the benefits of globalisation to increase employment and raise our citizens ' living standards , as we will otherwise suffer its disadvantages .
While globalisation is associated with positive developments at a European level , it can cause serious problems leading to acute economic and social trauma in individual areas .
The Community , as a whole , enjoys the benefits of globalisation , but problems that may have a negative impact can arise at the local level .
The Community 's job is to provide workers with appropriate , effective support enabling them to access the labour market .
This is also dictated by the duty of solidarity .
Rapid , effective help is required in these areas , which is why I welcome this new fund , in addition to the existing funds .
But to ensure that this programme can provide a real panacea , a suitable budget is necessary .
We must not be prevented from doing this by the unrealistically high cofinancing commitment , nor is it ideal if we exclude smaller areas from this opportunity to improve their situation .
( EL ) Mr President , first let me congratulate rapporteur Mrs Bachelot-Narquin on her work .
Furthermore , I would like to say that from the list of speakers we have today it is clear that the issue we are discussing is very important .
We could not have it any other way considering that globalisation is an unavoidable reality , which has negative effects on the economy .
Its consequences have to be dealt with and I think that the idea of the Globalisation Fund handles them in a rather smart way , because instead of using new budget funds , it uses funds that were not allocated in order to cope with these adverse consequences of globalisation .
I feared that the implementation of the idea as proposed by the European Commission would encounter problems , but I am glad that Parliament dealt with them .
I am referring to small countries , in particular , which because of their size were running the risk of being left outside from the fund 's planning , given that the required amounts would be too high to apply to major enterprises in smaller countries .
The regulation that was adopted deals with this issue and at the same time we send out the message that the European Parliament cares about all European Union countries , equally .
For Greece , my country , the final amendment of the document is positive and I believe that the message that we send out to the citizens regarding the creation of this fund , is positive .
In this way the European Union shows sensitivity towards social problems and I believe that in this way the European Union 's credibility is boosted .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think you will agree with me when I say that globalisation begun , I would say , with the appearance of man on Earth ; it is a form of a natural phenomenon , namely an unavoidable one .
Now that we are feeling its intensity , our goal , our vision ought to be that of a globalisation with a human face .
Due to its special European history and culture , the European Union can have a major contribution to this process .
However , any negative effects should not , under any circumstance , cause us to take protective measures , which will have negative long-term consequences .
Therefore , I agree entirely with the Fund 's objectives and I would like to point out two important elements , first that all Member States should have access to it and second , that it should be dynamic in nature and adapt depending on market conditions .
However , the question at hand is whether , in reality , all Member States can benefit from the Fund .
The globalisation phenomenon affects all countries and more so the small and weak ones , which because of their size will never reach the one thousand terminations of employment per sector .
Therefore , it is a step in the right direction to adopt exceptions when serious consequences in employment and local economy are substantiated .
However , 15 % for aiding such exceptions , I believe is small .
I do , though , consider it a positive fact that the Fund will be dynamic in nature , which means that if the need arises , this percentage will be readjusted .
For all the above and for the facts that I did not mention , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , this fund is indeed creating an opportunity for us to bring Europe 's social dimension to the fore .
We will not leave the workers affected by the job restructuring out in the cold .
We will send out the message - and it is important that this signal is also sent out at European level - that , in those cases , we must , and indeed will , pull out all the stops to steer those people who lose their jobs as effectively as possible in search for another job , of course .
This is in the short term , as someone mentioned a moment ago , the case for the restructuring that is being conducted at the Volkswagen Vorst plant in Brussels , where thousands of people , not least the suppliers , are facing job losses .
Today , many of the workers affected are opting for a high redundancy pay-out , but this , Commissioner , does not make the need and support of those workers in search of new jobs any less urgent ; quite the reverse .
We are therefore relying on their being eligible for support from the fund , because this is very much a sector that is feeling the effects of globalisation .
By way of conclusion , Commissioner , I should like to add that a huge number of the workers are pinning their hope on the Commission in the next few weeks and months .
I take it as read that we will not let them down .
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank you for this debate , which has addressed the issue of the fund from a variety of perspectives .
I feel that every aspect has been considered and assessed .
I must be brief and would like to highlight just a few points that emerged clearly from the debate .
The fund is not a panacea , a cure for all ills .
It is simply one weapon in our armoury that is useful and that we have assessed from various points of view .
The conclusion we have come to is that this is an effective weapon that is capable of providing help for a large number of people in a short space of time .
A further important perspective that I should like to highlight is that this fund is earmarked for people , and should not , therefore , benefit large corporations .
This is a fund designed for individual workers , a point that must not be overlooked .
Another issue that came through implicitly from today 's debate was the fear of whether the criteria that have been established are actually the right ones .
I feel we can safely say that these criteria have been considered extremely carefully by all those with an interest in work and in the creation of this fund .
No human undertaking ever offers absolute certainty .
The regulation includes a concept relating to the rendez-vous clause that will make it possible to consider other changes very quickly depending on the course of events .
It is clear , however - and this debate has convinced me of this - that all criteria have been deeply thought through from all relevant points of view .
As regards individual amendments , I can say clearly that the Commission can accept all amendments on which there is agreement at first reading .
I sincerely hope that tomorrow 's vote goes successfully and that the regulation can be up and running as of 1 January .
I should like to quote a phrase used by Mr Remek : ' He who gives quickly gives twice ' , a phrase often used in Czech , and understood everywhere .
It would be far better if we could establish the fund by 1 January , rather than if it were to happen weeks or months later .
With tomorrow 's vote the European Parliament can send out a positive signal to the citizens of Europe .
I believe that this has been explained in the debate from different perspectives .
I thank all speakers in the debate and , in particular , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for its serious work in a difficult and challenging global environment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be tomorrow .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( FR ) One can only welcome the adoption of the report on the European Globalisation Fund ( EGF ) , which marks a new position on the part of the EU when it comes to dealing with the social consequences of globalisation .
Its implementation , as from January 2007 , testifies to the desire of the European institutions to find an effective solution to relocations and to put the social rights of the individual back at the centre of the system .
This fund will enable selective , individual aid to be offered to workers who have been made redundant on account of globalisation , so as to help them retrain for new jobs .
While it is recognised that , by and large , the opening up of economies to competition is positive for growth and competitiveness , it can also lead to painful relocations and brutal job losses .
The case of Volkswagen in Belgium is a perfect example of this .
Admittedly , instruments for supporting employees affected by globalisation-related relocations already exist at Member State level .
Nevertheless , the adoption of this report means that an instrument can be created at Community level that reflects the solidarity of the EU .
This fund corresponds to a strong expectation on the part of Europeans and demonstrates the EU 's ability to react swiftly when the solidarity of the people is at stake .
European Institute for Gender Equality ( debate )
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I start with many thanks to my co-rapporteur and to the Commission .
We have worked together very well in attempting to get the Institute up and running as soon as possible , and we have been very successful in this .
I would , however , ask , Mr President , that all services be again reminded to check that versions of the report in all languages use gender-sensitive language , which is not universally guaranteed in my own language - German - despite repeated calls for this .
For as long as the European Parliament has been in existence , we have presented ourselves as an engine of equality .
For ten years now , we have been discussing how best to facilitate the establishment of an institution that would pursue gender mainstreaming and draw on the best outcomes from all countries in performing its horizontal task .
Following a feasibility study , demands were made for the Gender Institute , to which the Council acceded nearly two years ago now , when it resolved that the Institute would be set up , and on a budget-neutral basis .
What does that mean ?
In practice , it means that the Gender Institute will be funded from what was the gender equality programme .
The Budget was halved , and what was left of the programme then became part of the social action programme ' Progress ' .
Such is the price that women have had to pay .
If certain parties are going to claim that the Institute costs too much , the response will have to be that , on the contrary , women have paid a lot for it .
Here in this House , though , with a great deal of support from women 's groups , we have managed to advance the Institute 's cause .
We want it to work independently in facilitating the centralisation of information on tried and tested model procedures for the best possible equalisation of opportunities .
We would like to see these examples collected from all countries and the abolition of the gulf between the legal position with regard to equality of opportunity - as found , for example , in the European treaties , as Article 3 once more confirms - and the discrimination that actually goes on from day to day .
We want women no longer to earn something like 30 % less than their male counterparts .
In the case of those who preside over this House , that may well not be so , and may even be cause for amusement , but when a woman working on a production line earns 30 % less than her male colleagues , it is not funny any more .
We want all the Member States to have access to information on how to successfully combat violence , forced prostitution and sexual exploitation , along with a Europe-wide exchange of information on how discrimination based on gender may be brought to an end in the twenty-first century .
I have already stressed that the agreement we reached in committee came about rapidly .
The Commission was highly supportive in accepting at once 35 of the 50 amendments that we adopted at first reading , although there were others for which we had to fight .
We had to fight hard to get a hearing for the head of the Institute - and I want to emphasise that I am not gender-neutral about this , in that I expect the Director appointed to be a woman - but we did manage to get it , together with a smaller Management Board .
It is far from clear why each and every Member State should be represented on the Management Board , for the end result of that would be that only 13 people would be doing the work , with 33 monitoring them , and that makes sense to nobody .
We want the European Gender Equality Institute to do groundwork of the European institutions , and the assistance of experts to enable us to do our work in this House more efficiently .
How , though , can it be - and this I see as the big drawback - that the Council should decide , as it did last week , that the Institute should end up in Vilnius ?
That is a long way away from the places where decisions are taken .
A working institute such as the Gender Equality Institute does not have any representative function and should not go where it can boost a country 's image , but should , on the contrary , be close to our spheres of government ; the effect of this is to weaken it .
We wanted to see the institutions supported in their work and that work being efficient and helping to make equality a political reality .
That is why I think the proposal we produced is a good one , and am asking this House to agree to the compromise we have worked out with the Council , and for broad-based support for the European Institute for Gender Equality .
We have opened up the way to an early agreement , and I again thank all those who had a hand in this , particularly the Commission , which made repeated attempts to bridge the gulf that divided Parliament and the Council on this .
I reiterate my thanks to all those who worked with us , in particular the shadow rapporteurs from all the groups .
One can expect the Gender Institute to achieve lift off some time soon , and that will represent the passing of a milestone , but there will still be much work to be completed if the great tasks are to get done .
Grateful though I am for the willingness to work together with us on this front , I do want to ask who would actually be able to head up this Institute ; it would have to be someone capable of offering not only expertise , but also the necessary insider knowledge of the European institutions , and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality will take great care to ensure that the Institute does not end up with someone from the Council or the Commission who is incapable of performing this function .
If we manage to get to grips with the maintenance of a large-scale network of women 's organisations - which is what we envisage doing - that will make the establishment of this Institute an enormous leap ahead for the women 's movement in Europe .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I would like to thank my colleague , Lissy Gröner , for the work that we have achieved together .
It was our strong wish that this institute should be created with the backing of the representatives of the two largest parties within the European Parliament , precisely in order to benefit from this strength and support .
I have to acknowledge that throughout our work , even though there were at times strongly differing views , in the end we always achieved a nearly unanimous vote within the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
I believe that this point is worth noting .
Even in the Chamber , there are often reservations when we deal with the issue - which is unresolved at the European level too - of women , above and beyond the laws which provide guarantees , still not able to benefit in earnest from equal opportunities and the chance to take part at all decision-making levels . Despite this , we recently achieved - at first reading , what is more - a vote in favour which , I am convinced , will be repeated in this Chamber tomorrow .
I would just like to add a few points to my colleague 's words : first of all I believe that it is not often the case that a decision succeeds in reflecting the positions of the preparatory studies as well as this one has done .
Following the Social Policy Agenda in early 2000 , a decision was taken to begin carrying out preparations for the creation of this institute , and both Parliament and the Commission commissioned in-depth studies from management consultancies working in the field .
I can go so far as to say that the result of our work , which the Chamber will vote on tomorrow , fully represents the positions contained in these two studies , namely the creation of a small , flexible , independent institute , structured around networks , capable of analysing the data and the reasons for the discrimination that still exists , examining good practice and finding and publicising innovative standards-based and legislative solutions in the field of women 's rights and equal opportunities .
Above and beyond the debate regarding the location of the institute - in which we basically did not participate as a committee , and which has now been settled with the choice of Vilnius in Lithuania , which , I hope , regardless of its remoteness , will be able to provide us with a satisfactory outcome thanks to the wonders of science and technology - I would like to express my satisfaction concerning the fact that this institute will be launched immediately and that it will begin its work as early as 2007 .
The work of this institute will make it possible to achieve further progress , which will benefit both the community of Europe as a whole and those outside Europe who look to us for guidance and a model in this particular sector .
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that the debate between the Council and Parliament has made rapid progress and that we are now close to agreement .
The establishment of the European Institute for Gender Equality addresses a genuine need to give European policy on gender equality new instruments enabling us to make further progress .
This need was identified as long ago as 1999 .
Parliament and in particular the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality supported the idea of establishing this institute .
This institute will help us - that is to say , the bodies of the Community and the Member States - to formulate and pursue policies by developing knowledge on equal opportunities for men and women .
To this end , the institute will arrange the gathering , analysis and dissemination of objective , reliable and comparable data at Community level .
It will also develop appropriate methodological resources for improving gender mainstreaming in Community policy .
The first reading enabled Parliament to refine and clarify a number of points contained in the Commission proposal .
The common position also incorporates most of the amendments tabled by Parliament .
At second reading we had to find answers to questions relating to the establishment of a management board , an issue on which the Council and Parliament had very different opinions .
I am happy that both bodies endeavoured to find a well considered compromise , and eventually found one .
The compromise that is on the table provides for an improvement to the common position .
On the one hand , the system of rotating the members of the management board , and of issuing joint statements , has enabled Member States that had been in doubt to accept a medium-sized management board .
This will enable the institute to work effectively from the point of view of its size and the performance of its tasks .
On the other hand , amendments relating to the appointment of the director , the reinstatement of the experts ' forum and the appointment of two experts from that forum by Parliament will strengthen Parliament 's role .
The Commission will therefore accept this compromise .
I firmly believe that Parliament , which shares our wish to see this regulation adopted by the end of the year , will be able to accept them too and for this I am grateful to you .
Honourable Members , I should also like to thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Gröner and Mrs Sartori .
I was able to meet with them very regularly and all of you can testify to their unstinting efforts .
It is thanks to them that we are at the stage where tomorrow we can , I hope , bring this matter to a final conclusion .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . ( SK ) The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality did well to appoint two rapporteurs from the PPE-DE and PSE to draw up a report on the Commission 's proposal to establish the European Gender Institute .
The resulting report is well balanced , and I would like to give my sincere thanks to you , Mrs Sartori and Mrs Gröner .
It would be wonderful if we could announce today that there was no need to establish a Gender Institute , since all forms of discrimination against women had been eliminated .
It would be good if we could say that there is no longer any discrimination in regards to women 's pay , that the value of men 's and women 's work is fully recognised with regard also to responsibilities at home , and that mothers and fathers have freedom of choice as a result of the progress made in balancing life and work .
Alas , this is not the case , despite the fact that the European Union has a whole arsenal of legal instruments for protecting people 's rights .
Under these circumstances , the European Gender Institute may prove to be a useful instrument .
Whether it will live up to our expectations will be seen during the evaluation exercise in five years ' time .
Will we have enough courage to dissolve the Institute if the evaluation proves negative ?
Will we have the courage to find more useful applications for the money that has been already allocated ?
I would like to caution against relying solely upon the Gender Institute to resolve all the problems associated with the lack of equal opportunities for men and women .
In the same way that a broad range of worldwide and European legislation has failed to resolve these problems for more than 50 years , the Gender Institute will also not be able to do this .
Only the personal involvement of every man , woman , politician and non-governmental organisation will ensure that women are not discriminated against , and that all women , including the poorest , have access to justice , and that their value , honour and dignity are fully respected .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Equality between women and men is one of the basic pillars on which modern Europe has been constructed .
After a long battle , we are now on the verge of seeing the establishment of a public institute for gender equality in Europe . I would like to thank Mrs Gröner and Mrs Sartori for their work , and to congratulate them on the draft proposal , which represents the best outcome that can be achieved at the moment and has , not least , the support of the Commission and Council as well .
We have managed to ensure that the institute is independent , which is essential for it to carry out its work in a suitably professional manner and fulfil its role as an expert forum which will help the director in his or her work .
The operation 's budgetary framework is also guaranteed , along with transparency in how it will be managed .
It will remain the task of the Commission and Governing Board to appoint the director , but I would point out that the director must appear before the European Parliament 's commission .
This will reinforce Parliament 's role .
It is a source of great satisfaction that there will finally be a European institute which will continually analyse the issue of gender equality in society and collect data in a systematic way .
I am sure that it will devise valuable methodologies of benefit to the equal opportunities policy and offer advice to the Community 's other institutions and Member States , as well as help enforce Community policy .
I welcome the fact that a new Member State has been chosen as the venue for the institute 's headquarters .
It was really important to me during the process of selecting the headquarters to choose a venue that would offer a suitable environment .
We can be sure that this will be the case in Lithuania , as the Lithuanian government proved its commitment when it provided the additional EUR 50 million , which will be available from Community funds for seven years .
The opening of the institute has marked an important step for us in the area of gender equality .
Only time will tell how significant its role is , but its timeliness is highlighted by the fact that 2007 will be the year of equal opportunities in Europe .
We have taken the necessary step and the institute is now ready to get down to work .
But it is our job too to ensure that it operates effectively .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my pleasure at the decision of the European Union Common Affairs and External Relations Council of 1 December this year to establish the European Gender Equality Institute in Vilnius , Lithuania .
This decision will be officially confirmed in the conclusions of the Council of European Leaders on 14 / 15 December .
This institute will be the first EU institution in a new Member State - Lithuania .
Although there is a long history of women 's struggle for equal rights with men , there remains a large difference between men 's and women 's wages to the disadvantage of women .
The real implementation of gender equality would mark the realisation not only of this EU democratic value , freedom of self-expression and interpersonal relations , but it would also help to solve demographic problems and to reduce poverty .
The most important tasks of the new Institute will be to gather information about gender equality , to analyse it and to offer recommendations on gender equality issues , and also to disseminate information about the state of gender equality in the European Union and third countries .
I am convinced that the European Gender Equality Institute , established in Lithuania , will operate successfully , since Lithuania has experience in cooperating with other EU countries and is well placed to share its experience with third countries , particularly Eastern neighbours .
The Commission accepted forty of Parliament 's recommendations for extending the geographical scope of information gathering and analysis , and information supply , including both the newly joining countries and candidate countries .
However , the scale of discrimination against women in some EU countries is so great that no one should be happy about the reduction of the Institute 's expenditure .
I believe that the opposite should be done - an increase in the number of Institute employees and the size of its budget , in line with the expanded scope of its activities .
I would also like to stress that in the first instance Member States must themselves take steps to actively and vigorously implement gender equality policy within their countries .
The European Gender Equality Institute would help them fulfil this task .
Furthermore , if the President permits , I would like to tell Mrs Sartori that not far from Vilnius is the geographical centre of Europe , and it is a city that is not too distant from Brussels .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I too would like to give many thanks to the rapporteurs .
When this Institute for Gender Equality becomes a reality , as it soon will , it will be a gigantic step forward .
Europe needs an independent , autonomous Gender Institute in order to ensure that the objective of equal opportunities for men and women does not get ranked lower than other anti-discrimination measures .
It is therefore very important that we have made it clear that we want a strong woman at the head of this Institute .
An independent Gender Institute is necessary , since discrimination against women is unfortunately still a reality in Europe .
There are many areas in which we do not just need more statistics , but also innovative suggestions for problem-solving .
I hope that this Institute will be more than just a place where data is collected , but will also be able to make an innovative contribution to solving the problem of gender discrimination .
Finally , however , I would like to raise another point which is very important to me .
The European Gender Institute cannot be a substitute for practical policies and real laws , and it must not become an excuse for the failure to implement legislative initiatives .
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I should like to say a big thank you to everyone concerned for their hard work and commitment and a special thank you to Mrs Gröner and Mrs Sartori for the fact that this Institute is now finally to be set up and to begin its important work .
Today is an important milestone for all of us who are working to bring about a society in which women and men are equal .
It is also a milestone in strengthening children 's rights because the situation of children is , to a large extent , influenced by their mothers ' - that is to say , women 's - rights .
Pleased as I am about this step towards setting up an Institute for Gender Equality , I am also , in equal measure , disappointed about the fact that , in 2006 , there is a need for a special institute to champion rights that women self-evidently should possess and that we have not progressed further when it comes to recognising the right of half of humanity to lead their lives on the same conditions as the other half of humanity .
We talk a lot in the EU about democracy and human rights , but women too need to have human and democratic rights .
The fact that large parts of the population believe that women can be treated as commodities in a market and believe that society cannot be responsible for women 's right to their own bodies cannot be viewed as democratic .
We are concerned here with women 's right not to be beaten and otherwise abused and , for example , with the fact that political power is , in large part , still male power and that women earn less than men for doing the same work .
I really do hope that , in the vote in plenary , we shall support setting up an Institute for Gender Equality , which will be a major and important step towards our really being able in the future to talk about democracy and human rights that are the same for everyone , irrespective of gender .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the idea of creating an Institute for Gender Equality , described as one of the most important aims of the Community , was conceived in 2000 , when it became clear that there was significant gender inequality in the majority of policy fields .
This is presented as a multifaceted phenomenon , which I am sure is true to a certain extent , although it does raise the fundamental question of whether this really is a matter of equality and human dignity or rather the creation of a new left-wing ideology .
One of the roles of the institute will be to eliminate gender stereotypes by disseminating information on non-stereotypical male and female roles , together with providing liberal examples to follow .
This has been done for a long time and is something that those with a Christian world view cannot support .
Contemporary programmes that are far removed from moral standards and which exploit human weakness only serve to make people weak , defenceless slaves , especially to their sexual impulses and need for gratification .
Mankind , reduced to his basic appetites , deprived of any spiritual dimension in his life , his personal development prevented and obstructed by the lack of any spiritual life , will not be able to find complete fulfilment , even with active assistance and supported by the lofty aims of various institutions .
Moreover , the legal regulations of the directive raise a number of doubts , as the institution is supposed to have maximum independence in the implementation of its activities , and is even able to commission an external evaluation of its achievements .
This lack of control of the European Parliament 's committee and its ability to select its own evaluator does not just raise doubts , but is actually quite ridiculous .
The revenue of the institute is also surprising , as it includes not only subsidies paid for from our taxes , but also contributions from various wealthy organisations , together with the revenue from services it provides .
The next privilege is immunity .
This means that the institute 's staff will also be unrestricted in the performance of their duties and will be free to spread false feminist ideas , which will lead to a situation where , instead of women cooperating with men , there will be a destructive battle of the sexes which will become the new dogma , while gender becomes the new proletariat .
We will vote against the adoption of this directive .
( EL ) Mr President , it is undeniable that equal treatment for men and women and respecting the principle of equality in all aspects of public and private activities will allow for better management of human resources in the European Union which shall contribute without obstacles to the development and competitiveness of the economy and the raising of citizens ' living and cultural standards .
In particular , in order for female participation in the labour market to be effective while at the same time allowing for the continuation of human kind through procreation and the raising of children , it is necessary to respect the rights of women as fundamental human rights .
In this perspective , as you very well noted Commissioner , both the Council and the European Parliament in their previous parliamentary term set the foundation for the establishment of a European Gender Institute .
However , since then the scepticism on equality on a European level has evolved to become a point of view with integrated horizontal applications in all policies and actions .
The roadmap on equality and the directive on the equal treatment of men and women in the labour market are clear proof of this .
I honestly have to congratulate rapporteurs Mrs Sartori and Mrs Gröner , for their amendments in the proposal for a regulation on the establishment of the Institute .
Apart from promoting equality through research , libraries , data analysis and promotion of fair practices , we await a breakthrough in the approval of the multidimensional monitoring of the establishment of equal opportunities .
These proposed aimed actions should show respect to ethnic diversification and the principle of subsidiarity .
The Institute 's administration should guarantee representativity of Member States in all its actions .
We hope that the quality of the expert opinion will guarantee useful proposals and avoid the overlapping of responsibilities among organisations that deal with particular fundamental rights , such as health , safety at work and others .
Thus , I would like to point out that despite the progress in the formation of the consulting body , the European Parliament only during its subsequent hearing with the Director ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Thank you very much for your contribution .
Mrs Thomsen , before you start , I should just like to say that I notice a TV crew is following you and interviewing you in the Chamber .
I doubt whether this would happen in the Folketing .
This is a Parliament not a studio .
I shall allow it on this occasion , but please do not let it happen again .

( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteurs for the great deal of work that they have put into this report .
I am very glad that this institute is finally to become a reality .
Despite all the legislation and good intentions , we still do not have equality in Europe today .
This can be seen , for instance , in the continued differences in the pay men and women receive and in the marked underrepresentation of women in all forms of decision-making bodies , be they political , public or private .
There is a desperate need for this institute in Europe , and for precise information , analyses and recommendations in the field of equality .
I believe that the institute will play an important role in Europe both as an inspiration and a disseminator of information in the field of equality .
The collection of data and the development of best practice will enable the institute to take the lead in producing proposals and strategies for breaking down the barriers to equality .
Many Member States are in need of a push .
Amongst other things , the need to identify and tear down barriers to equal pay could be highlighted .
Today , we not only suffer from a lack of knowledge in this area , but we also lack the tools needed for getting to work on combating these disparities .
This means that the inequalities continue to exist despite the legislation and fine words stating that we want things to change .
I am very glad that the EU is able to blaze a trail in this area and demonstrate that the work on equality is to be given high priority on the political agenda , and I hope that this work will give impetus to the efforts of the Member States .
( The speaker spoke Irish )
I am delighted to support this report and to call for speedy progress so that the European Institute for Gender Equality will be able to start work next year .
I wish to thank the rapporteurs for their work .
Fostering the exchange of experience across the EU will help us to make use of the analysis already carried out at national and regional level and to carry out important new analysis .
The institute should become a major arm of EU policy development so that action on gender mainstreaming can be actively promoted .
The institute should be operational as soon as possible , with a clear focus on both collection and analysis of data ; and it is then up to us here in Parliament to ensure that the analysis it comes forward with is pushed through all policy development in the future .
( NL ) Mr President , gender equality is a regularly recurring theme in this House .
Quite apart from the fact that what is probably meant is the equal treatment of men and women , as opposed to their equality , it is , as I see it , too easy to hope that this issue can be resolved by making one or two sweeping changes .
In recent decades , much interest , both healthy and less healthy , has been generated in women 's rights .
This does not mean that in some cases and in some regions , there is certainly cause for special attention .
This can be attributed to the different views about role patterns across the centuries in different cultures .
We can still find traces of this in the cultures of countries , not least within the European Union .
As I see it , these differences must be handled wisely if gender equality is to be achieved across all countries and Member States .
I can see the individual Member States playing an important role in this , as they are best placed to assess the local situation and take measures accordingly .
Should a Member State lack initiative , there are enough national and international organisations that can encourage , or even force , concrete steps in this area .
I am , in short , all for the equal treatment of men and women , and of equal opportunities for them , but , at the moment , we do not particularly need a new European institute to take care of this .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Gröner and also Mrs Sartori , the Council and the Commission , on the agreement reached .
We are pleased that Parliament 's view of the issues that were important to more efficient operation of the Institute have been respected .
A medium-sized management board , elected by a system of rotation amongst the Members States , will undoubtedly speed up decision making .
A director appointed by means of an open , transparent procedure who has to appear before the competent committee of this Parliament in order to answer Members ' questions is satisfactory to us .
Furthermore , the reinstatement of a forum of experts made up of representatives of the Member States , of Parliament and of social actors , to assist the board in planning the Institute 's activities is undoubtedly a good thing .
This is an historic day for this Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , because today we are creating something that both this Parliament and the other institutions and civil society believed to be absolutely essential : to have an independent body specifically dedicated to gender equality policies .
Ladies and gentlemen , equality between men and women is one of the European Union 's fundamental principles .
This Institute will be a powerful tool for guaranteeing the integration of gender equality into all Community policies .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow we will vote for the Gender Institute and we are obviously happy to be finally reaching this goal .
I say ' finally ' reaching the goal of this process because , as I recall , the feasibility study dates back to 2002 .
I hope , at any rate , that the institute will soon start to be operational .
We would certainly have preferred to have more resources available , but I prefer to look on the positive side , namely the creation of the institute , and to hope that in future the resources , of all kinds , will increase .
Thinking about the future activities of the institute , I would like to make two recommendations : the first refers to where it would be particularly useful for the institute to carry out its work , and the second to a specific issue on which to take action .
It has always been the case that in the very places where conditions for women are most backward there has been a serious lack of statistical data broken down by gender .
My first recommendation is , therefore , that the institute should be particularly active on this front .
My second recommendation refers to a specific subject for investigation : the pay gap .
The disparity between women and men in terms of pay remains unacceptably high and , above all , shows no significant signs of decreasing .
The fact that the Treaty of Rome contained an article expressly mentioning equal remuneration for men and women , and that the passage of 50 years has left us at almost the same point , should bring home to us the fact that on this issue a lot of work still remains to be done .
( PL ) Mr President , the idea of creating an Institute for Gender Equality was conceived in 1995 .
Four years later , the Swedish Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality put forward its initial plan .
Then , the European Commission and the European Parliament , after a number of years of research into the aims and organisation of the institute , recommended that it should be set up .
After the first reading in March of this year , the European Parliament supported the creation of this new agency , having tabled a number of amendments relating to the scope of its activities and ways of ensuring greater effectiveness .
It is good that the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament have expressed their intention to set up the institute and enable it to begin its operations in 2007 .
At this stage , in the second reading , only questions relating to the institute 's management structure , the election of its director and the still controversial issue of the forum of experts still remain to be resolved .
It is a shame that the Council 's position in this matter is different from the positions of both the Commission and Parliament .
However , the final outcome is satisfactory .
Taking into account the important role of this agency in the European Union , where in some countries there is still clearly noticeable gender discrimination in many areas of life , the task of the institute will be to apply a unified system for collecting and analysing information on the equal treatment of men and women in Europe .
It is good that the institute will have its headquarters in a new Member State .
It will be based in Vilnius , the capital of Lithuania .
I hope that it will begin its work as soon as possible , as this is something that we have been waiting for since 1995 .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on a very well-prepared document .
( SV ) Mr President and all ladies and gentlemen who are still awake , equality between women and men is one of the EU 's basic principles , and bringing it about is one of the EU 's central tasks .
The EU should try to bring about equality in all its activities .
In spite of the fact that a lot of progress has been made in the area of equality , many surveys show , however , that such progress is very slow .
The EU does not , for example , have the ability to put together analyses and to come up with constructive solutions when it comes to the integration of equality and the promotion of equality between the sexes .
By now creating a European Institute for Gender Equality , the EU and the Member States are signalling the high priority they are giving to this issue , as well as the political will to do more to overcome the prevailing lack of equality .
Today , I feel very proud , as an MEP from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , that EU cooperation is being used to advance the fight against gender discrimination .
It is now important for all the Member States to make use of the Institute and to submit statistics and information to it .
It is a huge responsibility for the Member States .
In conclusion , I want to say how pleased I am that it is a new Member State , Lithuania , and the city of Vilnius , in which this Institute is to be located .
I do not believe that the proximity principle has any role to play in this case , because all the EU Member States are central .
I want to wish them the best of luck and to thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Gröner and Mrs Sartori , together with the Commission .
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that Parliament is able to accept the Presidency 's compromise in full .
With this agreement the institute can be up and running more quickly .
The recent decision by the Member States to locate the seat of the institute in Vilnius is indicative of a common desire for the institute to be up and running at the earliest opportunity .
Honourable Members , Parliament will tomorrow take a further step on the road to equal opportunities .
As a number of speakers have pointed out , there is still a long way to go on that road .
I wish to thank the Commissioner , all the speakers and Mrs Záborská and her committee for their important work .
I wish the institute every success .
It is much needed .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Type approval of motor vehicles with respect to emissions and access to vehicle repair information ( debate )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my gratitude to the rapporteur , Mr Groote , for his tireless efforts .
He has made it possible for us to reach an agreement with the Council at the very first reading .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and of course the Finnish Council Presidency for the efforts which have enabled us to bring this difficult matter to a conclusion so soon .
The three Institutions have worked together constructively .
We now have a proposal on the table which lays down strict emissions values for the next ten years and which simultaneously creates clarity and incentives for technological innovations .
As well as being the result of communal efforts , these proposals are also based upon a thorough impact assessment which has confirmed the technical and financial feasibility of the proposals .
This proposed Regulation represents a significant step towards improving the environmental compatibility of motor vehicles .
Poor air quality is a cause for great concern throughout the European Union and it has serious effects on public health .
This Regulation therefore deals primarily with emissions of particulate matter and with the emission of nitrogen oxides .
The point is thus to improve air quality .
The Commission supports agreement at first reading for four reasons .
Firstly , the compromise we have reached takes into account both the costs and the benefits of laying down limit values for emissions .
More demanding limit values have been set for vehicles with petrol engines than for diesel vehicles , since it is easier and costs less to achieve lower emissions with petrol engines than is the case with diesel engines .
This fact is important if we want to persuade consumers to exchange their old cars , which do more damage to the environment , for cars which are more environmentally friendly , but also more expensive .
Secondly , the Commission welcomes the timetable for the introduction of Euro 5 and Euro 6 .
The five year interval between the introduction of the two standards is important , so that motors may be further developed that comply with the second , stricter level of emissions .
Thirdly , I am pleased that it was possible to reach an agreement on access to vehicle repair and servicing information .
The OASIS standard will be retained for now and later it can be adapted speedily to keep up with technological advances .
Motor vehicles must be environmentally friendly not only when they are brand new , but throughout the entire life of the vehicle too .
Without access to repair and servicing information , however , this cannot be guaranteed .
Fourthly , I believe that it is important that a consensus should be reached on the question of financial incentives , a package solution of two emissions stages , as with Euro 3 and 4 and now again with Euro 5 and 6 .
It is advantageous for the environment and for technology if both levels enter into force as actual levels .
The same must also apply to tax incentives .
For these reasons , the Commission can endorse all of the amendments proposed by your rapporteur , Mr Groote .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their fruitful and constructive cooperation .
The vote on this report was postponed several times , but in my view the wait has been worth it , and the negotiations have shown that we have managed to work out a compromise with the Council at first reading .
It is important that the regulation should be adopted at first reading , because the Member States need instruments in order to achieve the air quality targets we have set .
It is deplorable that every year in Europe there are 370 000 premature deaths because of poor air quality .
This shocking figure must be minimised .
The compromise on which we are to vote tomorrow is substantially different from the Commission 's proposal , because a second step was added by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
The so-called Euro 6 step brings limit values that are ambitious and realistic .
With this compromise we are at last effectively tackling the problem of fine particulates .
This is being achieved through the introduction of particle filters .
The limit value for the mass of particulate emissions is being reduced from the Euro 4 value of 25 mg / km to 5 mg / km .
Compared to the Euro 4 emissions standard in force today , this corresponds to a reduction of 80 % .
Furthermore , the particle count will be measured at the very latest when the Euro 6 step enters into force on 1 September 2014 .
By measuring the particle count , particles of the magnitude of PM2.5 , which are especially harmful , will be reduced . This too will bring about progress in improving air quality and public health in Europe .
The greatest step forward in combating motor vehicle emissions , however , is in the area of nitrogen oxides .
Here , the first step involves reducing the limit to 180 mg / km for diesel passenger cars and to 60 mg / km for petrol passenger cars .
Compared to today 's Euro 4 emissions standard , this corresponds to a reduction of 28 % for diesel passenger cars and a reduction of 25 % for petrol passenger cars .
The greatest step forward , however , will be taken in the planned Euro 6 step and affects diesel passenger cars .
In this stage , the emission of nitrogen oxides will be lowered by 56 % , from 180 mg / km to 80 mg / km .
As far as the time frame is concerned , I would like to point out that the Euro 5 step comes into force on 1 September 2009 for new types of vehicle and that the Euro 6 step applies from 1 September 2014 .
In fact , however , Euro 5 and Euro 6 motor vehicles will be introduced more quickly , because thanks to this Regulation the Member States have the opportunity to promote vehicles with Euro 5 and Euro 6 emissions standards before the 1 September 2009 through tax incentives .
A look into the history books tells us that in 2001 for example , motor vehicles with the Euro 4 emissions standard were already available on the market , even though the Euro 4 emissions standard only entered into force on 1 January 2005 .
Not only does Euro 5 ensure better air quality in Europe , but this Regulation and the compromise we have arrived at also improve the rights of manufacturers in Europe .
Thus consumers must now demonstrate the durability of pollution control devices over 160 000 km instead of 80 000 km .
Furthermore , in Chapter 3 of the Regulation the rights of consumers are protected , in so far as it is laid down that consumers may continue to seek out repair shops themselves .
This was achieved by securing access to vehicle repair information and by laying down a new format in this Regulation , the so-called OASIS format , for the provision of repair information .
Moreover I do not want to neglect to point out that this Euro 5 Regulation is a good example of the reduction of bureaucracy in Europe .
The Euro 5 Regulation cancels out 25 directives , and I very much welcome this as an example of ' better lawmaking ' .
In conclusion I would like to ask you to support this compromise we have arrived at , so that consumer rights are reinforced and so that air quality is improved .
The compromise was negotiated as an entire package , and any deviation from the complete package would inevitably lead to a second reading , the consequence of which would be that we would have to wait for this instrument , Euro 5 , for improving air quality in Europe , and , therefore , that an improvement in air quality would be shelved .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( NL ) Mr President , with this directive - and I should also like to thank the rapporteur - we are obviously making considerable headway in the area of public health .
Thanks to the compulsory installation of soot filters on diesel cars , the emission of fine dust is de facto reduced by 80 % .
These are figures everyone should be delighted about .
At the moment , life expectancy in the European Union is on average eight months lower as a result of the presence of ultra-harmful fine dust particles , soot particles in the air , and every measure to address this situation is obviously welcome .
It is now up to the Member States to take measures , fiscal and other incentives , to remove older , polluting diesels from the roads as quickly as possible .
Whilst this constitutes an important step forward , there is also a downside , unfortunately .
It is really regretful that the 4x4s have been exempted via the backdoor and that the manufacturers of what people refer to as SUVs ( sport utility vehicles ) have been given more time to conform .
Commissioner , I assume that you do not drive one of those SUVs , for the simple reason that they , as you know , are the biggest spreaders of fine dust ; they emit one third more fine dust than normal diesel cars and it is , as you know , fine dust that causes cancer .
I would therefore call on the manufacturers to take their responsibility seriously .
The car manufacturer that is the first to produce an all-terrain vehicle that is environmentally friendly will , in my view , have a huge head start on the competition .
Finally , public opinion can , and indeed should , play its role .
Every buyer has to realise that it is not in the interest of their health to drive a car that emits carcinogenic substances to irresponsible levels .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for their solid cooperation .
The Euro 5 Regulation will ensure two things in the future : firstly , that independent repair shops have unimpeded access to the repair information they need , and , secondly , ambitious emission limit values for modern passenger cars which will lead to better air quality .
Effective health protection and promoting small and medium-sized enterprises - these are goals which I wholeheartedly support .
For this reason I will be voting for the compromise which we have negotiated with the Council .
On the first point , access to repair information , the following should be noted : modern passenger cars are equipped with a plethora of electronically steered car components .
These cannot be repaired without particular information from the car manufacturer .
Independent repair shops therefore require access to this information .
This is also important for consumers .
In future they can decide which repair shop to take a car to for repairs or for servicing .
This promotes competition and so it also leads to lower prices .
In my view , however , our ultimate goal should be to integrate the regulation of access to repair information into the new type verifying framework directive .
Legally and thematically , that would be a better place for the rules than a Regulation on emission limit values .
In this respect I am pleased to say that the Council has adopted our idea that we have developed in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Just a brief remark about the second point , the new emission limit values .
The new limit values make soot particle filters almost mandatory .
This is an important step towards better air quality .
It is also right that the new Euro 6 limit values should be laid down even now , for that gives car manufacturers the security to plan ahead and to invest , thereby promoting innovation .
Tomorrow we will adopt a Euro 5 Regulation which stands for improved health protection and which at the same time strengthens small and medium-sized enterprises .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Committee on Transport and Tourism produced a positive evaluation of the European Commission initiative concerning the proposed directive .
It also tabled proposals for amendments .
I am pleased to see that Mr Groote 's report takes account of these proposals .
We looked at the following issues .
First of all , the positive effects of the draft directive on the environment are clear .
The second issue is the cost of implementing new standards .
It seems that these standards are sensible and will not have too much of an effect on the price of new cars .
Therefore , these changes should not prevent the purchase of new automobiles or extend the lifespan of older cars .
Finally , European Union manufacturers will be able to meet the new requirements and , in the case of imported vehicles , we will be able to force foreign manufacturers to meet our requirements .
Thus , there are a number of positive aspects , which I would like to highlight .
The liberalisation of the production and turnover of spare parts was also analysed , taking into account three interested parties .
The first group are the major car manufacturers , who have their reservations .
The other partners , namely spare parts manufacturers and repair workshops , are pleased with the draft directive .
The expected results include a possible fall in the price of repairs and spare parts for vehicles , thereby creating certain benefits for users .
This may more than compensate for a possible increase in the cost of new cars , and thus prove to be an advantage .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Groote , Mr Krahmer and particularly Mrs Harms , for their excellent cooperation on this report .

We have all sat through long and involved negotiations with the Council and the Commission , and I am pleased that we have come to a satisfactory conclusion - at least in most respects .
My group welcomes the outcome of these negotiations .
The report is balanced because it not only tackles air pollution at source but also takes into account the very legitimate concerns of a very successful European industry .
As previous speakers have outlined , the timetable that has been agreed is based on the package adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , Euro 5 and Euro 6 coming into force in 2009 and 2014 respectively .
I welcome the work done by my colleague Mrs Weisgerber on the access to repair information .
That is a controversial paragraph but we have also reached a very successful conclusion in that .
The limit values agreed for Euro 5 and Euro 6 steps are challenging but achievable standards .
Although reduction of NOx is very desirable , it must be remembered that will be achieved at the expense of increased CO2 emissions .
The particulate limits are as tight as is feasible and will require the fitting of diesel particulate filters across the range of Euro 5 diesel passenger cars , and that will deliver major air quality benefits .
With regard to the so-called heavy M1 provision , I am very happy with the compromise reached .
We must not forget that these vehicles are essential for many users and that there are very legitimate reasons for them to be covered by these specific provisions , which have slightly higher limits to reflect the fact that emissions increase with vehicle mass .
In this regulation we must avoid giving manufacturers a perverse incentive to simply replace diesel engines with petrol engines in these vehicles , with the resultant increase in C02 emissions that we all want to see avoided .
I drive a diesel Audi , so I have an interest in this debate .
Thank you for your kind remarks .
I have been here in the Chair since 9 p.m.
I am being fortified by coffee and some nameless Portuguese firewater provided by the usher , because it is Christmas .
So if I go blind before the end of the debate , just accept the situation !

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , it is the simply appalling air quality in many European cities that means that cars must become much cleaner , and this can be done , for we do have the technology .
Tomorrow , we will be voting on the Euro 5 standards that ensure that diesel cars in particular become much cleaner .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Groote , for his efforts .
Although major improvements have been reached in the compromise , I do have a number of comments .
First of all , I am not very happy about the procedure .
The decision has been taken that there should be an agreement at first reading , which , as a procedure where backroom decisions are taken , is not very transparent .
This could be justified if we were in a great hurry , but we are not in the case of Euro 5 , since the standards do not enter into effect until September 2009 .
It would have been preferable if a second reading had been added , for this would have given us the opportunity to arrive at a position in the plenary before discussing it with the Council .
Secondly , I also have mixed feelings about the content .
As I said , I am delighted with the stricter standards that have been agreed upon compared to the Commission proposal .
I am not happy , though , with the special treatment sport utility vehicles are receiving , in that they will , according to compromise amendment 91 , be exempt from the emission requirements that apply to cars until 2012 .
It is precisely these cars - and I am completely at one with Mr Belet on this - that cause most pollution that should be subject to stricter environmental requirements .
In addition , I regret the fact that Amendment 59 , which allows Member States to take more sweeping measures , has not been included in the compromise package .
This amendment received broad majority support in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
In previous legislation , we allowed for more flexibility , and we do so again in the case of Euro 5 .
California , in the USA , has been given more scope to impose stricter environmental requirements for new cars than has the Netherlands within the EU 's internal market , which has become a straitjacket , something that an increasing number of Europeans find unacceptable .
In fact , stricter requirements in one or several Member States could be a great incentive for innovation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , in the first place thanks are due to the rapporteur for having produced this excellent piece of work .
That is a big compliment , Matthias , for it is not every day that I praise Social Democrats .
The close cooperation between the rapporteurs has decisively contributed to the fact that we have been able to achieve a good compromise and a consensus at first reading .
With Euro 5 , the soot particle problem of diesel vehicles is practically solved , particulate matter emissions are reduced by 80 % , and , thanks to modern engine filters and particle filters , many a new diesel passenger car will have an exhaust that lets out cleaner air behind than it sucks in at the front .
We also achieve a drastic reduction in the nitrogen oxides emitted by diesel vehicles .
As rapporteur for the air quality directive I can tell you I wish that all technical systems were as clean and energy-efficient as our modern passenger cars .
I am pleased that we could agree on a realistic timetable for the introduction of the new limit values , one which takes into account the production cycles of the modern automobile industry .
The ' green side ' of this House would like to see Euro 5 and Euro 6 introduced earlier , and also stricter limit values for nitrogen oxides , as , indeed , do we all , and the ' green side ' is even right in saying that the technology to do this already exists , of course it does , but we cannot pursue illusory policies here .
Not only do businesses bear responsibility , but they also incur risks .
Technologies must not only be available , but must also be marketable and affordable for the consumer .
It does little for the environment if new , clean cars are not affordable and we therefore cannot get the old ones off the roads .
Even today , it is not the new cars which are the problem .
More than half of all the passenger cars in Europe only comply with the Euro 3 standard or less , and our goal must therefore be to completely renew all vehicles on the road .
We were generous with the exceptions for M1 vehicles , but I think that this is justified , since the effects on the environment are comparatively small .
The fact is that SUVs are popular with consumers and there is a trend towards larger cars .
However , it is not the job of the legislator to criticise this .
In a market economy - and when it comes to environmental decisions I keep wanting to remind people about this - the decision to buy is , in the end , made by the consumer .
I come from the system of the former GDR , where the state and party leadership decided for us what the best car for each individual was , and that is something I have no desire to go back to .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must say that we shadow rapporteurs also had a great deal of fun with our rapporteur Mr Groote .
Sometimes we agreed , sometimes we did not agree , however , at the end of the compromise I ask myself if the central responsibility for the negotiations really was in the hands of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
When I now look at the entire package , I get the impression that such a proposal normally tends to be put together by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
I would like to briefly explain my position , which is different from Mr Krahmer 's portrayal of ' the green side of this House ' .
I can see that this Parliament obviously does not seem to be capable of consistently championing incentives for technological innovations which could have positive effects on the environment .
The type of particle filters which we now require for Euro 5 - some time from the autumn of 2009 onwards - are already available today .
I do not understand why we have now included an artificial political delay in the process .
Technologies to reduce nitrogen oxides are also already available today .
It is completely incomprehensible to me that these will be made mandatory only from 2014 and 2015 onwards .
In my view , this politically motivated hesitation about technological innovation cannot be justified .
Another important question for me is this : why is it not possible to lay down today tax incentives for ambitious nitrogen oxide reducing technologies ?
The lack of ambition in this Euro 5 and Euro 6 Regulation culminates symbolically in this remarkably generous derogation for heavy SUVs .
I do not see why we should make a long term exception - lasting well into the next decade - precisely for such dirty , environmentally hazardous vehicles .
My view is that in doing so , we are only sending out an indefensible , irrational political signal .
Actually , I drive an Audi Quattro .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , I ride a bicycle - that is enough for me !
( SV ) Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Groote , for his constructive work .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance wish , however , to make some basic improvements in three areas .
We want this legislation to enter into force earlier than the compromise made with the Council .
Both the environment and European consumers would benefit from this .
We also want to see tougher emissions requirements for diesel cars and fuel neutrality for diesel and petrol .
A third important amendment relates to four-by-fours .
We do not want to see any exemptions for these .
In conclusion , I also want to put in a good word for Mr Blokland 's amendment about the Member States being able to have tougher legislation in this area .
Their being able to do so should go without saying when we take decisions , but unfortunately it does not go without saying .
All credit to the Independence and Democracy Group , too , in this case .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , where the improvement of air quality is concerned , I should like to see a few swift steps made in the right direction ; that is why an agreement at first reading on new emission standards for cars is to be welcomed .
Considering , however , that these standards will not take effect for a number of years , I wonder why we are in such a hurry now .
The Euro 5 standards will not become effective until 2009 and even then , they will not apply to all types until 2011 .
The Euro 6 standards will not be introduced as a whole until 2015 .
As I see it , we should have taken a little longer to arrive at a better result .
This is why I shall be supporting the three amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Different Member States are working hard to improve air quality .
In order to meet the European air quality standards , they are prepared to take more extensive measures .
In the Netherlands , people wanted to introduce the Euro 5 standards early , but the Commission would not allow this , stating that this could distort the internal market .
This is , in my view , an unacceptable state of affairs , certainly if we consider that the measures are necessary in order to have good air quality levels and that , moreover , according to the Treaty , Member States may take more far-reaching measures to protect the environment .
This is why I have re-tabled Amendment 59 of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in order to spell out the fact that Member States may take more far-reaching measures in order to achieve the air quality standards .
This amendment has been approved by a broad majority in the Committee on the Environment and as such , it deserves the support of a broad majority of this House , support which , I am pleased to note , has already been pledged by a number of speakers .

( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Groote , Mrs Weisgerber and Mr Callanan , as well as the Finnish Presidency .
They have done a remarkable piece of work on this issue with the aim of reaching a satisfactory compromise position , both within the Council and with all of the MEPs .
The Euro 5 standard will do a great deal to help further improve air quality .
In laying down harmonised rules for the manufacturing of motor vehicles with regard to their air emissions , the Euro 5 standard is part of a more general strategy aimed at dealing with the harmful effects of air pollution on people 's health and the environment .
This is an important step .
The timetable for applying the Euro 5 and Euro 6 standards , with 2009 and 2014 respectively as the dates on which they will enter into force , is certainly demanding , but it is also manageable for the economic sector , and the introduction of a one-year extension for adopting the implementing measures will mean more flexibility for industry , which I welcome .
As for access to vehicle repair information , which is an issue for manufacturers and SMEs , I am pleased at last with the compromise reached on this subject as well as on the subject of recourse , in the first instance , to the OASIS standard .
I note , in particular , the opportunity provided to review the provisions on access to technical information and to consolidate them as part of the review of the directive on the approval procedure : we owe this to Mrs Weisgerber .
Finally , I believe that we should remain vigilant regarding the issue of renewing the cars on the road in the Union .
I would like Europe to act as the driving force and to encourage emerging countries , where the number of vehicles on the road is constantly increasing , to gradually catch up with regard to the Euro emissions standards .
We now want an agreement at first reading on the basis of this compromise .
( HU ) The report presented before us is excellent , and I would like to congratulate its authors .
I would like to congratulate , in particular , Matthias Groote , Anja Weisgerber and Martin Callanan on behalf of the PPE-DE .
This proposal establishes a delicate compromise that has been difficult to implement between our traffic requirements , technical and economic potential and our growing environmental problems .
The Union is at the forefront in terms of regulating motor vehicle engines with low pollutant emissions , but it seems that in everyday life the efforts to deal with pollution are at an early stage , lagging far behind .
Manufacturers have been taking it in turn for years , presenting their concept cars to us , which can run on electricity , hydrogen or biofuels , but these plans then end up on the floor of the exhibition hall .
The question is : why does this happen ?
For the same reason that we are now talking about Euro 5 and Euro 6 cars , while not just Euro 4 , but mainly Euro 2 and Euro 3 cars are also still on our roads .
The reason for all this is because Member States do not give enough encouragement to new technology , the spread of alternative fuels or to people trading in their old , outdated vehicles for modern ones .
They say that they do not have the means ?
But they could !
We could use lower taxes to encourage people to buy more advanced technology , giving more money to research and development and pilot projects .
We could then greatly reduce the cost of buying new technology .
We can also encourage people to change technology , to a large extent , through awareness and educational campaigns , and by offering parking and transport benefits .
I feel this is the path which will lead us to achieve the Lisbon goals .
It is the only solution capable of resolving the ever more serious problem of managing air quality in our cities .
( SK ) In the Clean Air for Europe programme , the European Commission has identified several sectors as the biggest polluters of the environment .
It would seem , however , that the measures envisaged are confined to the automobile sector .
Today we are establishing the Euro 5 and Euro 6 standards that will set emission caps extremely low .
I appreciate the argument that the adoption of Euro 6 in this proposal will give manufacturers greater certainty , as they will know when and by how much motor vehicle emissions must be cut .
On the other hand , we must look at the situation from a long-term perspective and see that motor vehicle emissions have been reduced enormously over the past three decades , for example , by as much as 95 % in the case of solid dust particles .
One cannot help wondering whether we may end up having completely clean cars that most of the public would not be able to afford .
For this reason , impact studies should also take into account the economic implications of future reductions in motor vehicle emission caps .
In Slovakia the average age of motor vehicles on the road is far greater than in the rest of Europe .
This is due to the fact that many citizens are not yet in a position to afford a new car .
With regard to the accessibility of vehicle repair information , I understand the importance of supporting small and medium sized businesses .
On the other hand , it remains questionable whether we would be able to ensure adequate intellectual property protection for car manufacturers .
I am pleased that in her report , Mrs Weisgerber , has embraced the idea of having a separate framework directive to deal with access to vehicle repair information .
I was one of the many MEPs who submitted amendments aimed at removing this section of the proposal , as the issue of access to information should be addressed by a separate peice of legislation rather than forming part of a proposal dealing with the reduction of emissions .
I hope that the European Commission will , in the near future , submit a draft framework directive which will establish a balance between access to information and intellectual property protection .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Groote on the package that he has worked out with the other shadow rapporteurs .
In my view it certainly could have been more ambitious .
I come from the Tyrol , a region which is very heavily affected by car emissions .
We are faced here with a field of related issues .
We talk about micro-costs which we want the manufacturers to bear , who then try to pass them on to the car buyers .
On the other hand , it is a question of macro-benefits , namely : health .
It is difficult to find the right balance here .
All in all the compromise is sustainable , and , to be honest , what Mrs Pleštinská said is right : in the end it is not just about whether we have strict and high standards ; many other factors too have significant effects on actual traffic emissions , as for example the age of vehicles on the road or the way people drive .
Perhaps the Strasbourg colleagues I see driving at 160 km per hour on the motorway might like to take note that the particulate emissions from a Euro 5 vehicle will be considerably higher than if one were to drive at 90 km per hour through the region with a Euro 0 vehicle .
Here we should be quite honest and say , for once , that European industry has done a great deal to ameliorate the problem .
When colleagues claim that the Americans or the Californians are a shining example , then I can only suggest that they should travel over there .
There the standard motor is an old V8 petrol motor , which consumes around 20 litres per 100 km .
If I am supposed to regard California as an example , then , despite the fact that my fellow countryman Mr Schwarzenegger is the governor there , then I must say that that is completely unrealistic .
What we have here is thus a sustainable compromise , and I am saying this as a Tyrolean , as someone who finds it particularly hard to express it in these terms .
I also say this for the benefit of the Commission , since it is important that we try together to push the whole package through and also that we try to have stricter standards in future .
Overall , though , it is important to take a sweeping approach to the problem , and not just to focus on one aspect of it .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Groote , who comes from the car-making country of Lower Saxony , a German province where many cars are manufactured , which is why he has taken the trouble to consider the industry 's point of view as well .
We have heard - and I will not go into detail - that there is a pressing need to act .
This we have done .
By further developing the Euro standards , we have doubtless taken a decisive step in the context of European environmental policy , a step which is also tolerable to the automobile industry .
As has already been mentioned several times , the effects of the Euro standards are extraordinarily positive , so that non-European countries are already orienting themselves to our standards .
I would like to take the example of China as an illustration of this , since I was able to follow that country 's development in my role as a member of the China delegation .
Only six weeks ago I gave a lecture at the China Automotive Industry Forum in Shanghai , in which I spoke about European environmental policy activities , which involve dialogue with the automobile industry .
There I learned that , in 2007 , China will introduce emissions values which correspond to the Euro 3 standard , thereby reducing emissions of pollutants by 30 % .
As soon as 2010 they will reach the next stage , which corresponds to the Euro 4 standard .
One reason for them to use our European environmental standards is certainly the expanding Chinese automobile industry , which wants to compete with our market and which must therefore comply with European standards .
This could be described as a welcome side-effect of the entry hurdles to our market .
I very much welcome this extension of the influence of the Euro standards beyond Europe itself , since , from a global point of view , if Europe were to go it alone with these standards , this would have relatively little effect and it would also reduce our competitiveness .
All of those who are involved have accepted this compromise , and thanks to this being achieved , we can vote tomorrow on a balanced proposal on the Euro 5 and Euro 6 standards .
Now , however , it is up to the highly profitable fuel industry to take part more intensively in this process and to improve the environmental compatibility of motor fuels , so that the burden of costly improvements is not borne by the automobile industry alone .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are three issues I would like to address .
The first is that of large off-road vehicles .
In response to a question put earlier , I can state that I , personally , do not own a car .
I get around on foot or by train .
I was a little taken aback when Mr Belet criticised the Commission for having made an exception for large and expensive off-road vehicles .
I am sorry , but it was the Commission that proposed that no exception should be made , and Parliament that insisted on an exception for vehicles of this nature .
Let us not get carried away here .
Let us all show understanding and let us all try to follow the arguments .
However , I really cannot follow what Mr Krahmer means if he is saying , basically , that if someone has enough money to buy a particularly large and expensive car they also acquire the right , at the same time , to cause more pollution .
With the best will in the world , I cannot share this view .
The problem , put simply , is that , as Mr Groote is quite right to point out , what we are dealing with here is a compromise as part of a complete package .
I am sure that you have noticed that the Commission is very unhappy indeed with one element of this compromise .
However , this does not in any way change the fact that we are urging you all to vote in favour of this package compromise and not to table any amendments of the type described because , otherwise , the entire package will , in fact , collapse and it will no longer be at all possible to tell when we will ever reach a solution to this issue .
Sometimes , you just have to bite the bullet , or swallow the toad , as we say in German .
Allow me , by way of conclusion , just to say something in response to an argument that a number of speakers have used today . This relates to the age of the cars on Europe 's roads and what impact these regulations will actually have .
This is a very serious issue .
In reality , of course , most vehicles on our roads are not equipped to meet the most up-to-date regulations on exhaust gases .
In reality , only 8 % of the cars on Europe 's roads are replaced each year , so that it will take over 10 years for all of the cars on the roads to be replaced .
Thus , for example , it will probably be 2015 or 2016 before Euro 4 applies to all the vehicles on Europe 's roads .
These are the actual realities and it would indeed be a very welcome achievement if we were to be able to convince consumers to get hold of more environmentally friendly cars more quickly .
If that , though , is to happen , such cars must remain affordable .
We have no way of bringing such a situation about , and it is for this reason that I believe , in the final analysis , that the proposal before us , which I recommend you to adopt , is clearly the best achievable .
Commissioner , my reference was not to the language but to the geographical spread of the debate .
There were actually seven German Members speaking in the debate - which is admirable - three Dutch and single Members from other Member States .
Good for Germany - and , of course , for you !
I should like to thank the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteur , all the draftspersons of opinions and speakers in the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
In dealing with any matter related to environmental pollution it is essential that we strike a balance between the necessity for economic progress and offering a real opportunity for a reduction in emissions and thereby reducing the risks to health . I thank the rapporteur for drafting a report which generally strikes that balance .
It is clear that we need to make stronger efforts to address the problem of vehicle emissions deriving from the use of fossil fuels .
It is necessary to have sensible limit values for emissions of carbon monoxide , hydrocarbons , nitrogen oxides and particulate matter .
There may be differences of opinion over what the limit values should be but a reasonable compromise appears to have been reached .
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Agenda for next part session : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Enlargement strategy and main challenges 2006-2007 - The institutional aspects of the European Union 's capacity to integrate the new Member States ( debate )
We have a very important item on the agenda today : the joint debate on
the report by Elmar Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the Commission 's Communication on the Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2006-2007 , and
the report by Alexander Stubb , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the institutional aspects of the European Union 's capacity to integrate new Member States .
Apart from their intrinsic importance , these issues are of particular significance on the eve of the European Council and they will be amongst the most important issues to be discussed at the meeting of Heads of State or Government .
It will be my pleasure to communicate to the Council the resolutions relating to these issues that Parliament will adopt during this sitting .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it was in the spring of this year that this House asked the Commission to produce a report on the capacity to integrate the new Member States ; that report appeared on 8 November , but it is not one that we regard as adequate .
Up to now , enlargement has been one of the most successful aspects of the European Union 's policy , with the area of peace , stability and positive economic development being substantially extended and contributing to the reunification of Europe .

We also know that , in candidate countries and also in others in Europe , the prospect of EU membership is a vital element in the process of reforming the state , and both these positive considerations must always be borne in mind .
Even so , we have to be aware , now that enlargement is bringing us to a total of twenty-seven Member States - with the possibility of Croatia soon making their number twenty-eight - of the need to give thought to the future of the European project .
Do we want the European Union to be a political project in the true sense of the word , possessing the capacity to act , the ability to play a global role in dealing with issues of foreign and security policy , combating terrorism and organised crime , something for which it needs to be ready to act , or do we want it to drift along as an economic project ?
Clear answers must be found to these questions .
It must be clear to us that the present institutional constitution of the European Union will get us nowhere .
It is because the Constitutional Treaty was intended for the last enlargement that that last enlargement must be completed and consolidated before we start thinking seriously about more big schemes , if we ourselves are not to wreck our own project .
That is why the Constitutional Treaty does , to some degree , impose conditions , and Mr Stubb will have more to say about this .
There are still other questions that we have to address , questions to which unambiguous answers must be found , questions as to the direction in which we are journeying , perhaps in connection with the next review clause and the Financial Perspective scheduled for 2008 / 2009 , in order that we may know which enlargement shall have what consequences for the European project .
There are , in any case , many areas - agricultural policy , structural policy , and so on - in which things cannot carry on the way they are now .
What consequences result for certain Member States , how much less money will they get , and how much more will others have to pay ?
All these things have to be sorted out if the project is to be proceeded with in a serious way .
It is perfectly clear that the undertakings we have given - for example those given to the states of the Western Balkans at Thessaloniki - have to be acted upon .
Nobody in this House is calling for negotiations currently underway to be broken off ; we know that time is of the essence and that it is because Croatia is waiting on the threshold that the Heads of State or Government have to move the process forward , but we also have to spell out the fact that full membership is not at every stage and in every single case , whether immediately or in the long term , the only means whereby we can make countries ' European prospect tangible in a credible way .
It is for these reasons that questions arise concerning development and neighbourhood policy , or questions concerning multilateral coalitions of states for which European Union membership is a prospect , the idea being that their peoples should get something now and not just in fifteen years ' time with the conclusion of negotiations that have not even begun yet .
When I say , then , that we must develop a much more imaginative approach , I am thinking only of the example of Ukraine , where , regrettably , a great deal of time was lost , and that to our own disadvantage .

That such countries should have a European perspective is in our interests and not only in theirs , and that is a reason why we must do something , but it has to be clear to us that , if we enlarge the EU despite making no headway in its internal development , we will end up with an inner circle , with members of the European Union being divided into first and second class .
To sum it up in a slogan , we are faced with the choice between the constitution and Verhofstadt , for that , too , is a possible consequence .
It is the countries that are particularly insistent on enlargement that are the very same ones who want to slow down or stop the process whereby the European Union becomes deeper , and I myself have doubts about their credibility .
As regards Turkey , we have joined with a number of colleagues in proposing a formula in response to the new development , and I hope that it will work .
It is to be regretted that Turkey 's legal obligations have not been met and that yet another delay has occurred , although it has to be said that , on the other hand , breaking off the negotiations would have been the wrong way to go about things .
That must not mean , however , that Turkey need not discharge these obligations in the long term .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to make five points about our report on integration capacity .
I will start by thanking all those colleagues involved in the process and certainly those in the secretariat who did a wonderful job .
My first point is about the terminology we are using today .
The original term which we dealt with was ' absorption capacity ' .
When we were discussing who was going to do this report , I talked to Mr Absorption himself - my good friend Mr Brok .
We came to the conclusion that perhaps absorption is not the best term to use .
I think Mr Karl Bild put it very well when he said : who wants to be absorbed by the European Union ?
Does France want to be absorbed by the European Union ?
Of course the answer is no .
So we went for a more dynamic , more positive term and decided that ' integration capacity ' is really what we are looking at .
My second point is that this is potentially a sensitive subject because there are many interests .
My colleague and friend Mr Brok made reference to some of them .
In other words you have those types of people who are against enlargement but for the Constitution .
You have those who are against the Constitution but for enlargement .
Then you have those like me who are for the Constitution and for enlargement , and then there are the likes of Mr Farage and the rest who are against both .
What we tried to do was swim through these four types of interest and I think we have done it fairly well in this report .
The notion of integration capacity is nothing really new .
We have always had it .
There is always a debate before each and every enlargement about how much the European Union should deepen .
Before 1973 the Union became a customs union .
Before 1986 the Single European Act was put forward .
Before the Finnish-Austrian-Swedish accession you had the Maastricht Treaty .
Before the big bang in 2004 you had Amsterdam and Nice .
What we want is to have a constitution before the next enlargement .
Thirdly , how do we define integration capacity ?
I think the conclusion of this report is that you can give a vague notion of what it actually means and you could say that it is not a condition for enlargement , but it is a criterion for us , the current Member States .
We have to put our house in order before we are able to enlarge .
The difficulty is that you cannot give integration capacity a strict definition because it is linked to two things .
One : the time of accession .
Two : the number of new states coming in .
In other words , enlargement in 1973 was radically different to enlargement in 2004 .
Still on the definition , integration capacity is about three things : institutions , budget and policies .
My fourth point is about the public debate , and here I would like to point the finger at the European Council , which is saying that we need to link enlargement to public opinion .
We say yes , of course you have to do that , but do not tell me that you do not have the opportunity to do it .
Enlargement negotiations are opened through unanimity .
Each chapter is opened with unanimity .
Each chapter is closed with unanimity .
The whole package is approved by unanimity , and on top of that each Member State is supposed to ratify accession .
If within those two to ten years you are not able to explain the benefits of enlargement to the general public I think you are miserably failing in your job , so please do your job and then come and start talking about public opinion .
We need more strategic thinking on enlargement .
My final point is about the Constitution .
This report outlines a number of issues which we desperately need to clarify before the next enlargement : qualified majority voting , legal personality , the foreign minister , common security policy , etc .
These are issues that we badly need to deal with before we can enlarge .
The message from this report is : let us get that house in order before 2009 and then start enlarging .
I shall finish with this . Enlargement is probably the best policy the European Union has ever had .
It has brought with it peace , prosperity , security and stability .
When we talk about enlargement let us not give poor excuses because we know that we are never and yet always ready to enlarge .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the June European Council decided that the debate on enlargement and on the Union 's future enlargement strategy should continue and broaden during the Finnish presidential term .
The European Council that will meet this week will discuss all aspects of future enlargements , including the Union 's capacity to accept new members and ways to improve further the quality of the enlargement process on the basis of the experience gained thus far .
The European Council will have its general enlargement debate with reference to the enlargement strategy released by the Commission on 8 November .
The strategy also incorporates a special report on the Union 's capacity to integrate new members .
The aim of the Presidency is for the European Council discussions to give weight to the common view of the future of the enlargement process .
On Monday the General Affairs and External Relations Council considered the European Council 's conclusions on enlargement .
The Council engaged in a constructive and thorough debate on the matter .
Enlargement is part of Europe 's integration process .
When the Finnish Presidency presented its work programme to the Committee on Foreign Affairs last July , we pointed out that enlargement has undeniably promoted growth and affluence in Europe .
It has benefited both the Union , together with its Member States , and Europe as a whole .
The prospect of membership has prompted the candidate countries to carry out necessary reforms .
Enlargement has contributed to the fact that the Union has become a more powerful player in international politics .
Expansion of the internal market has made it possible for the EU economy to respond more effectively to the challenges of global competition .
The historic fifth round of enlargement will be completed when Bulgaria and Romania , whose intended commissioner candidates were approved here yesterday , join the European Union on 1 January .
This round has already proven to be a success .
Thanks to enlargement , an area of peace , stability , democracy , the rule of law and prosperity is extending to almost everywhere in Europe .
We must now ensure that this success story continues .
The Union needs to continue its enlargement as an open and objective process , with no new restrictions or conditions imposed .
To this end , closer attention needs to be paid to how enlargement can make headway in practice .
It is only natural to try and improve the quality of the process of enlargement , and to make the Union better prepared for it .
As we know , and as is evident from the rapporteurs ' speeches , capacity for integration , or the Union 's ability to accept new members , is not a criterion of membership .
Nor should it ever become one .
Integration capacity is nevertheless an important factor to take into account in order to guarantee the success of enlargement .
Preserving capacity for integration is in the interests of both the Union and candidate countries .
If , however , we were to impose conditions on enlargement within the Union which a candidate country could do nothing about implementing , there would be a danger that we would be harming the willingness of countries interested in membership of the Union to undertake reforms .
To preserve the Union 's capacity for integration it is necessary that acceding countries are prepared to accept and implement the obligations that come with membership of the European Union .
It is also essential that the Union can function effectively and can develop .
It is important for the Union to be able to accept new members when they are ready on the basis of the progress made in negotiations .
Both of these considerations are also important in order to obtain the support of the general public for the enlargement process .
The Union 's integration capacity should be examined during the enlargement process .
We have to ensure that the Union is able to function politically , economically and institutionally as it enlarges .
The impact of future enlargements on the Union 's institutions , policies and budget needs to be carefully assessed .
It is important that the Union keeps to the commitments which we gave to Croatia , Turkey and the Western Balkan countries in negotiations on membership .
With regard to Turkey , I would like to say here that the Presidency has done all it can to enable the negotiations process to continue .
We are pleased with the solution arrived at by the Council on Monday .
It will provide us with a basis on which to continue .
Candidate countries and potential candidate countries have a responsibility to carry out the reforms which are needed in those countries .
Progress in the membership process depends on the progress made in this respect .
Headway can only be made in the process if the conditions are met .
Recently there has been a strong sense of enlargement fatigue in the air .
Providing timely and factual information can also do much to dispel prevailing doubts .
The truth is , the Union derives benefit from new Member States and needs them .
Finally , Mr President , on behalf of the Presidency , I would like to thank the European Parliament for its robust participation in the debate on future enlargement .
The two reports before us today are a valuable contribution to this debate .
The Presidency will of course take due account of the reports on enlargement strategy and integration capacity being discussed today , as well as the views expressed by the European Parliament in general .
We trust that Parliament will support our common mission .
( Applause )
Mr President , Minister Lehtomäki , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to take this opportunity to thank the Presidency for its excellent and close cooperation during its term , and I would especially like to congratulate it for the decision it took on Monday this week to allow the membership negotiations with Turkey to continue .
This decision is a clear signal to Turkey that there are consequences for failing to fulfil its obligations , but at the same time the Council 's decision on Monday managed to prevent a clash in relations between the European Union and Turkey .
This decision shows that the European Union can take decisions on thorny issues like Turkey resolutely and with solidarity , without making a major drama out of it .
I trust that this will be appreciated in this House , and I know that it will at least be appreciated by the 26 members of the European Council who will meet on Thursday and Friday and who did not want another Turkey summit at the end of this year .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Stubb ( who is not stubborn but intellectually most flexible , however his name is pronounced ! ) .

I would also like to congratulate the Committee and all the Members for their intensive work on this important subject .
The Commission shares many of the points made in the reports .
We welcome in particular your preference for the concept of ' integration capacity ' , as explained by Mr Brok and Mr Stubb .
We welcome Parliament 's support for the Commission 's enlargement strategy and its principles , as well as the support for our efforts to enhance communication and transparency .
I agree with Parliament 's view that integration capacity is primarily about the EU 's institutions , budget and policies .
But , before I dwell on those points , let me underline the paramount importance of keeping our own strategic interest in mind when considering our integration capacity .
In the current debate in Europe in general , we often talk past one another .
Some underline only the strategic significance of enlargement for peace and democracy .
Others focus only on internal problems which reduce our capacity to integrate new Member States .
If these two discourses do not meet , we run the risk of increasing confusion among our own citizens and eroding our credibility in the candidate countries .
Therefore , we must build up a renewed consensus on enlargement by combining these two sides of the coin .
We must keep up the strategic mission of enlargement by maintaining the EU 's soft power of democratic and economic transformation and , at the same time , we must ensure our capacity to function , while gradually integrating new Member States .
For these reasons , the Commission will further improve the quality of the accession process .
We shall make impact assessments and evaluate budgetary implications on key policies , especially on agricultural and cohesion policies .
Furthermore , we need to apply rigorous conditionality .
Experience shows that the better prepared the new Member States are the smoother the EU functions after enlargement .
Difficult issues , such as judicial reform and the fight against corruption , must be addressed at an early stage of the negotiations .
However , when improving the quality of the accession process , we should not create something overly complicated .
That would only build artificial blockages into a process that is already complicated enough .
I believe we are all in favour of simplification , not complication .
Therefore , we must have clear rules , clear procedures , that are understood both by our own citizens and by the countries concerned - the candidate countries .
Some wonder whether enlargement is done at the expense of deepening .
My answer is ' no ' : the EU has managed to deepen and to widen in parallel before , and that can be done again .
Therefore , a new institutional settlement should have been reached by the time the next new Member State is likely to be ready to join our Union .
The European Council agreed a timetable for continuing the institutional reform , starting with a political declaration to be adopted in Berlin next March .
The necessary steps to achieve a new institutional settlement should have been taken by the end of 2008 .
We need a new institutional settlement to make our decision-making more effective .
We need it to strengthen the legitimacy of the Union , and we need it to strengthen Europe 's role in the world .
Last , but not least , we need it for the current EU and its citizens today or , by the latest , tomorrow - not just because of potential future enlargement .
We need to maintain the momentum of integration , and to deepen and further develop the European Union .
I trust you share these goals of a reformed and stronger Union and I look forward to working with you to achieve these objectives .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like firstly to congratulate the two rapporteurs .
Fortunately , the two rapporteurs are both from my political group , Mr President , and they have acted jointly and in a complementary fashion .
They are not aware of this , but I am going to reveal a secret this morning : in my political group , Mr Swoboda , we call Mr Brok and Mr Stubb ' the twins ' .

I hope that other twins that are better known across Europe will excuse our appropriating the name .
The truth is , however , that they have done what other twins should do .
They have acted jointly for the good of Europe .
They have not absorbed the amendments of other political groups , but rather they have integrated them .
I therefore believe that the House will vote today in favour of these two reports on the strategy for enlargement and the capacity to integrate .
Mr President , these two reports make various positive commitments .
The first commitment - as Mr Stubb has explained eloquently - is to enlargement .
We believe that enlargement is enormously advantageous for the European Union and for the States that join it .
There is no doubt about that .
Anybody who doubts it should look at the Resolution 's paragraph 19 .
It is also clear , however , that in order for enlargement to be a success , the European Union must be prepared to accept those new States .
The reality is that that is not currently the case .
Nobody invites a guest home unless the house is prepared for them .
Putting the house in order is the second commitment made in Mr Stubb 's report : the commitment to the Constitutional Treaty .
Not so long ago , two out of every three Members of this House supported the Corbett-Méndez de Vigo report .
Mr Stubb 's report stresses that fact .
We still believe that the content of the Constitutional Treaty is necessary in order to make it possible for our home to receive further guests .
I believe that it is very important to stress that now , because the German Presidency is going to make proposals with a date , that of 2009 , and I believe that paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Stubb report emphasise what must be the content of any future reform , and also reject something that we in this Parliament have also emphasised on occasions : we do not want cherry picking - the partial entry into force of certain aspects .
We want the balance represented by the text of the Constitutional Treaty .
Finally , Mr President , both reports have a clear political message .
You will be at the European Council and I would ask that you repeat it there : there will be no further enlargements without a European Constitution .
There will be none .
This Parliament must issue a favourable opinion when it comes to approving any new enlargement .
It will exercise that right , because that is what this report formally states .
Mr President , my group will support both reports , and with regard to Mr Stubb 's report , it will vote in favour of Amendments 6 , 7 and 8 .





on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , while I would like to start by thanking Mr Brok and Mr Stubb for their reports , I have to say , though , that the sight of the pair of them together with Mr Méndez de Vigo leads me to the conclusion that they may well - obviously - not be peas in a pod , but the result is very good , and that , with all due respect to you personally , Commissioner , I regard what emerges from these two reports as better than the report by the Commission , in that ours articulates the matter more clearly and with less ambiguity , and I do believe that the Commission should learn something from this .

Here , among the Members of this House , too , there are those who see a small Europe as a solution , arguing that the smaller the European Union is , the better and the more homogenous it will be , while , on the other hand , there are those who argue that ' the bigger the better ' since we will then be able to speak for everyone , yet we cannot speak for everyone if we have not found a common voice - something for which , it follows , the conditions must be created .
It is quality rather than quantity that is the making of Europe , and I am in full agreement with Mr Méndez de Vigo that this is dependent - among other things - on the European Constitution .



It does not have to be exactly the present constitution , and it probably will not be either , but that constitution 's essential elements must be made reality if Europe is to become effective .
There is no doubt about the fact that the second precondition is the proper financial basis ; let us be honest about our inability , right now , to give our peoples the things they aspire towards and imagine themselves possessing , things that they are quite entitled to expect from Europe .
How , then , is an enlarged European Union meant to work if we do not create the right financial conditions for it ?
What we have to tell our governments is that they cannot go around making fine promises about enlargement at the same time as saying , whenever the financial basis is mentioned , that we do not have the money for it ; that is not acceptable , and this House must make that perfectly clear .
Let me just say something else about the Constitution .
The most important thing , of course , is reform of the institutions , by which is meant not a merely small-scale touching-up job , but a fundamental reform .
Much the same can be said , in the financial field , about the financial models that bring about a fundamental change in the financial basis of the European Union .
So let us talk about integration capacity .
On behalf of my group , I would like to say that integration capacity functions , not as a barrier against future enlargements , but as a precondition for them ; a necessary precondition , moreover , and not merely a by-product of our thinking when we alter this or that detail in an accession treaty , something that will no longer be acceptable in future .
Alongside that , of course , the dialogues on South-Eastern Europe and the Balkans must be continued - not just about Croatia , on which subject I have the honour to be the rapporteur .
Even after Croatia , it will not be possible to draw a new border ; instead progress will have to be made step by step .
As for Turkey , about which Mr Wiersma will have more to say , while it must discharge its obligations , we too have an integration task yet to perform on Cyprus , and that is something we have to do .


Moving to my final point , we need to give the countries in our neighbourhood , particularly those around the Black Sea , a realistic vision , and that calls for the establishment of an intermediate form of a kind to which we in the Foreign Policy Committee have been giving consideration , for Mr Wiersma and I have put forward the idea of an EU / Black Sea Community , to tie the countries there closer to the European Union in what would be a kind of preparatory stage that might - albeit without imposing any obligation - lead to membership if the necessary conditions were met .
Whilst we have to give our neighbours what they desire , we can do that only if we do the same for our own fellow-citizens in Europe , and that we are at the moment not doing ; we have yet to create the conditions for doing so , and only then will it once more be possible to take the vision of a great and enlarged Europe and make it reality .

( Applause )
Mr Stubb and Mr Brok are clearly not twins in the physical sense , Mr Swoboda .
Mr Méndez de Vigo said it affectionately , making the point that they act jointly , like two other personalities who are also well-known , Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy , who were not twins either , but who acted together .
( Laughter )
That is how we should interpret the way they work together , and I say it with the greatest of affection for our rapporteurs today .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although the jokes about twins have been wearing thin of late , I should just like to add that it is fortunate that you have not yet turned into evil twins , because that would of course be extremely regrettable .
Since May / June 2005 , enlargement as a whole has come under fire .
In fact , it is said to be the main reason for the ' no ' votes in France and the Netherlands .
It was in this negative atmosphere that the concept of absorption capacity all of a sudden reared its head .
It is a hideous word which , to many , is an excuse to put the brakes on further enlargement and even to question , if not revoke , any pledges made in this respect .


My group never went along with this and is very much attached to first of all , the recognition that enlargement so far is a great success and secondly , that all pledges made in respect to Croatia and the western Balkan states , even though some of these are only now being formed , and pledges in respect of Turkey will actually be honoured .
In this connection , I should , in fact , like to congratulate Commissioner Rehn , his colleagues in the Commission , and the Council on the decisions taken with regard to Turkey , which , I think , strike the right balance .
While no doors are being shut , it is made clear what the deal is , and we support you all the way in this decision .
Finally , my group feels very strongly - and Mr Duff will expand on this in a moment - that the Union and its institutions should put its own house in order , even before the next enlargement round gets underway .

That , however , is up to the European Union , the Member States , the Commission , this House , the Council and not least the European Council , and not the candidate countries .
Both reports reflect this new , more positive attitude towards enlargement , underline very clearly the need for the institutions first to be reformed , and it is for that reason that my group will be supporting them .


on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will not repeat what a success enlargement has proven to be to date , as this has been done by many fellow-Members and also by the Commission and the Council , and although it does appear to be a bit of a platitude in this House , it is no unnecessary luxury to spell this out in a European Union where more and more people question the usefulness and necessity of enlargement .
Having said that , it is nevertheless necessary , and also possible to my mind , to learn from the way we have done things so far . As the Commissioner already mentioned , these lessons are in his report and also in Parliament 's reports .
I urge you to assess each country on its own merits and avoid making the same mistake by lumping Romania together with Bulgaria .
I would urge you not to issue a date too soon , for this will turn against us and against the process .
Do not put off awkward issues to the last minute and pay more attention to the implementation than to the pledge .
In the debate on these lessons , the term ' absorption capacity ' , which is now called ' integration capacity ' , has suddenly cropped up in the last year .
It is a reaction in some people in favour of further enlargement - among whose number I count myself - of fear to take part in this debate , because many opponents of further enlargement have used the term integration capacity as an argument against further enlargement .
I do not intend to mince my words when I say that integration capacity is not an argument in favour of enlargement , or , indeed against it , but we must all be clear what we are talking about .
Allow me to single out two elements .
With regard to institutional reforms , I repeat that whilst I am very much in favour of further enlargement including the countries of the Western Balkans and Turkey , I am also persuaded that this enlargement is impossible on the basis of the current Treaties and that we therefore need a fundamental institutional reform .
I just think that we in this House should not quibble about the question how exactly this should be done , as long as it is done !
As for the other elements from this discussion on integration capacity , public support is crucial .
This is possible only if we , and also our national counterparts , manage to make a good job of putting across the message that the past is valued for what it is worth , so that people do not shy away from underlining the EU 's long-term interests .
This also requires political leadership and political courage , which does not take into consideration each and every opinion poll on enlargement which may be slightly less upbeat at this moment in time .
All these elements - courage , political leadership , long-term interests - are combined in the debate on Turkey .
I am therefore very much in favour of this House not riding this wave of populism , which is what is happening in some debates in Europe about Turkey .
In my country too , I have noticed that those in favour of accession two years ago are suddenly against Turkey joining , because that is the way the opinion polls are tending to go .
We must not be dragged into this , not least in this report .
That is why as far as Cyprus is concerned - and I will be discussing this item with Mr Brok - Turkey must deliver on its promise , but so must the European Union .
That is why I am so pleased with the undertaking given by the Foreign Affairs Ministers that they will talk about the isolation of Northern Cyprus this coming spring .
The future of the European Union cannot be built on instability and fear , and this is certainly true of enlargement .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , in the early 90s , enlargement was declared as one of the EU 's key objectives .
Europe , which was previously shared between three economic blocs , had to make haste in being reunited within the European Union .
Subsequently , the plan for a limited initial enlargement round - in which Estonia , the Czech Republic and Cyprus were included , but Latvia , Slovakia and Malta were not - was suddenly abandoned in favour of a major enlargement round .
In this , Romania and Bulgaria , although they will be Members in three weeks ' time , brought up the rear .
Following the pledge that all Balkan states that have not yet joined are also welcome , after the slow start of negotiations with Croatia and Turkey and following short-lived enthusiasm about a possible quick accession procedure involving Ukraine , Moldova and Belarus , it has become noticeably quiet .
Negotiations with another candidate country , Macedonia , have not even actually got off the ground yet .
It now transpires that newcomers are no longer that welcome .
Those in power fear that , without a constitution , it will become ever more difficult for the European Union to function properly , and ever more funds will need to be redistributed .
The public at large are witnessing the phenomenon of labour migration , where people living far from home do the dirty and unsafe work and are badly paid and housed .
The adoption of the Services Directive has created the fear that sound social legislation and proper collective labour agreements in the old Member States will soon have to compete with inferior regulations that apply in new or future Member States .
On account of both the neoliberal policy within the European Union and a lack of progress in the democratisation process and human rights in Turkey , further enalrgement is becoming extremely unpopular among the public in the current Member States .
These two failings have forced us to shift down a gear and to adopt temporary transitional measures .
The danger of this is that states that are currently being rejected are meanwhile becoming ever more dependent on the European Union , something which can hinder them in their own choices and in their own development .
My group is in favour , not least in transitional periods too , of the equivalence of the potential acceding countries being respected and financial support being given , thus allowing them to catch up , also with a view to making their future accession easier .
We owe it to the many residents of our Member States who hail from the former Yugoslavia and Turkey to take seriously those regions ' desire for accession .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , when I read both reports I came across only one pleasant surprise .
The entirely black picture of the European Union 's enlargement prospects has been replaced by a grey one .
This brightening of the picture should be appreciated .
The picture brightened even further today in the form of the rapporteur 's speech , but the picture that is being painted is still far removed from the truth .
In spite of the impression we might get from both reports , it is not the institutional reforms that have made the Union an increasingly stronger player on the international arena .
The European Union has gained political clout because it now represents a larger number of citizens , more companies , more territory and greater military and economic influence .
Therefore , it is thanks to the enlargements that took place in the eighties , the nineties and most recently in 2004 , that the European Union has gained the strength to be a global player .
This change did not result from waving the magic wand of treaty reform .
I notice a greater willingness to talk about the resolution of March 2006 on the same issue , but making enlargement conditional on the Constitutional Treaty is simply anachronistic .
We can expect institutional changes , but evoking the treaty as it stands can only be interpreted as an excuse for halting the enlargement process for no good reason .
A philosophy based on the motto ' Constitutional Treaty or death ' is neither good nor wise .
A similar pretext can be found in academic debates on absorption capacity or integration ability .
European integration is not a chemical or physical phenomenon , and there are no objective laws of nature at play here .
Integration is a question of pure political will , which lies in our hands and the hands of our colleagues in the Member States .
If we truly agree that enlargements can be equated to success , then the question arises as to why we would want to add thirty clauses based on a philosophy not far removed from narrow-minded , gutless Euroscepticism .
Can we really be sure that the quality of integration is suffering due to enlargement ?
Perhaps the quality of integration is also deteriorating due to the bad policies of the Union itself ?
Perhaps this quality is suffering as a result of an overloaded agenda , which we force onto the shoulders of the European Union , or of excessively diverse and excessively high expectations ?
If we were to refute these criticisms of mine , we would be left with the rather banal truth that candidate countries have to fulfil membership criteria .
I doubt whether we need to draw up two whole reports only to remind ourselves of this rather self-evident and long-established principle .
For these reasons I do not want to vote in favour of these drafts , as they appear to be nothing more than a list of pretexts for suspending the integration process without good cause .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the Stubb report is disappointing for more than one reason .
First of all , it does not in any way contribute towards resolving the current institutional impasse in which the Union finds itself .
Only the confirmation of support for the European Constitution and a summary of this Constitution in paragraph 9 , on adoption of this report , appeared to be this House 's most recent position .
Just as shocking is the lack of vision where the enlargement process is concerned , which brings me to my second point of criticism .
Whilst paragraph 11 underlines the need for efforts to be made so as to enhance the public 's acceptance of enlargement , the underlying causes of the dwindling support for it remain , however , completely unaddressed .
Also , this report perpetuates the taboo of the EU 's finiteness .
It is precisely the utter lack of political leadership to define the European Union 's borders that causes discontent and uncertainty surrounding the enlargement process .
Moreover , concrete recommendations to enshrine the enlargement process in the Treaty are lacking from this report on the institutional aspects of the EU 's capacity to integrate new Member States .
I suggest enshrining the various stages of the accession process in a treaty , so that uniform criteria apply to aspiring Members every step of the way .
In that way , the enlargement process will become more transparent and Parliament will be able to actually add substance to its responsibility of parliamentary control at all the crucial junctures of the accession process .

( NL ) Mr President , while we are on the subject of enlargement strategy , now is a good time to consider the way in which negotiations with problematic candidate countries such as Turkey are conducted .
Turkey has been given a deadline to meet its customs union obligations , but the Turkish Government is refusing to play ball , and the European Union 's so-called sanction amounts to leaving the difficult chapters unaddressed for the time being and dropping the deadline with no new one in sight .

The Commission and Council have stated repeatedly that they do not want to have a train crash with Turkey , and that the Turks have now understood that they , and not we , can prescribe conditions .
In fact , the Belgian Government has come up with a new doctrine for this , which reads that with Turkey , we , and I quote : ' are involved in geopolitical enlargement and that a different tactic is needed ' .
In other words , a non-European candidate country such as Turkey is free to play fast and loose with the Copenhagen criteria .
The European Union has no answer to Turkey 's bazaar-style haggling tactics .
Commissioner Rehn spoke a moment ago about the European Union 's credibility in respect of the candidate Member States .
He overlooks a small detail , namely the EU 's credibility among the European public .
People have always been led to believe that the negotiations would be suspended if it were evident that Turkey would not come up to the mark , which is the exact opposite of what is happening now , and that is the very problem of credibility that the European Union faces .
( EL ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the two rapporteurs have presented two exceptional reports today .
I congratulate them , because they have put things in their place succinctly , comprehensively and with substance .
There is one question constantly floating round the European Union : Quo vadis Europa ?
This question can be broken down into other questions : what type of European Union do they want ?
What size European Union do they want ?
Is the European Union functioning efficiently today ?
These are tormenting questions , which must be answered and the answers are in the vision that we want to serve .
What is our vision ?
Our vision is common .
We want a European Union which is democratic , which prospers , which is humane .
We want a European Union which will play a regulatory role on the global stage .
That is why enlargement is a self-serving objective .
Enlargement is part of the vision ; consequently we cannot put the cart before the horse ; they need to move forward together .
From this point of view , Mr Rehn is right to say that enlargement and deepening are two - I would add - sides of the same coin .
However , we cannot talk about enlargement at the expense of quality and for the benefit of expansion - the objective of Europe is not expansionist - without taking account of the conditions in which we live .
It is not the European Union which has to adapt to enlargement .
It is every country that wishes to accede to the European Union that must adapt .
Talking of Croatia and Turkey , it is certainly a good thing that we want Turkey to accede to the European Union ; however , we stopped Croatia when it infringed the terms we had set it .
I do not want to say that we had to reach that point .
To close , I would say that we must proceed with the Constitution ; otherwise enlargement will have no historical meaning .
( NL ) Mr President , I too should like to add my congratulations to the two rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Stubb , for the excellent work they have done .

The European Union 's fifth enlargement round is , without a doubt , one of the most ambitious projects the EU has ever brought to pass .
It also serves as a point of reference , of course , for today 's discussion .
Moreover , this enlargement forces us to consider the EU 's internal functioning before we launch into another round ; this is why the subject of the EU 's integration capacity is once again on today 's agenda .
Nevertheless , I should like to comment on the criticism of enlargement that is often quoted in respect of the debate we are having , and from which I should like to distance myself from this to some extent , because this criticism embraces a number of ideas that I find objectionable .
First of all , that this enlargement was a mistake , secondly , that the European Union is full up and thirdly , that internal reforms are specifically needed in view of enlargement .
This is incorrect .
Enlargement represents an internal intrinsic value , tied in with the ambition to get the European Union to function more effectively .
I repeat , and will continue to do so , that the enlargement of 2004 was a success and the enlargement at the beginning of next year to include Bulgaria and Romania will be no less of one .
The EU is , and always will be , an open club .
It has made commitments to a number of countries , and these we will have to honour .
Whichever way , the European Union has to reform in order to continue to function and also because the citizens expect more from the European Union .
This , indeed , brings us back to the debate on integration capacity and the enlargement strategy in business terms .

The Brok and Stubb reports demonstrate , I believe , that this House has succeeded in setting out our expectations in a businesslike manner , and that the Commission has opted for the same businesslike approach , even if , as Mr Swoboda has indicated , the Commission has left a number of important questions unanswered , with the excuse that it will ' return to them in due course ' .
With regard to integration capacity , what matters to us most of all is that the European Union does its homework .
The present institutions and the Treaty of Nice are inadequate as a basis for the accession of new Member States .
It is up to us to carry out the institutional reforms that are needed to enable new countries to be integrated at a later date .
The fact that candidate countries are , in turn , responsible for making thorough preparations for membership is nothing new .
The conditions have been enshrined in the Copenhagen criteria since 1993 .
There are some elements of the EU 's integration capacity the importance of which is self-evident .
We need the institutions in order for the European Union to function democratically and effectively , and we need a budget that is commensurate with the EU 's ambitions ; I should , however , also like to say something about what is termed ' capacity to act ' , which is , as I see it , of crucial importance .
What also matters is that the European Union , the Commission , and the Member States , should take initiatives that meet the wishes and expectations of the European public ; these must also be central in the communication about the European Union .
The European Union must demonstrate what it is capable of and must be able to put this across , for this is the only way in which we have a chance of successfully creating , and retaining , a support structure for European cooperation , and enlargement is part of this ; we should not see enlargement as a separate area of policy that we must adopt in separation .
Enlargement must also form part of what the Commission calls its ' citizens ' agenda ' .
Only if public debate that is stirred into life on the basis of a Europe that performs better can we expect citizens to be positive about enlargement in future .
I should like to finish off with a comment about Turkey , a subject on which Mr Swoboda has already touched .
Our group supports Commissioner Rehn 's position .
He has , as we see it , tabled a sensible proposal , namely that we must respond to Turkey 's failure to implement the Ankara Protocol .
At the same time , we agree with him that we should not slam the door shut completely .
The channels of communication must remain open , and we support the partial suspension or delay in the negotiations to which you yourself referred .
We continue to hammer home the need for Turkey to meet its legal obligations in respect of the European Union , but also , at the same time , for discussions not to be broken off completely .
On a final note , we hope that next year , the Commission and the Council will take initiatives in order to address the isolation , particularly of an economic nature , of Northern Cyprus .
Mr President , I certainly welcome the suppression of the terminology of ' absorption capacity ' , which sounds like a kitchen towel , and of ' privileged partnership ' , which is a faintly patronising concept , without , frankly , much privilege to it .
But we must seek now to develop the neighbourhood policy quickly and creatively so as to create upon the eastern frontier stable circumstances for states that cannot join the Union and for those that decide that they do not want to do so .
As we approach the renegotiation of the Treaty , it would be sensible to include inside part III a chapter describing the enlargement policy , transcribing the Copenhagen criteria and describing far more clearly than at present the accession process and threshold .
Consideration should be added , as we renegotiate part III , to the creation of a fresh class of associate membership .
Such an improvement would serve to reassure public opinion about the quality of our accession process and about the pace of expansion of Europe 's post-national society .
It would also be of great use to third countries as they reflect upon their future relationship with the Union .
( DE ) Mr President , keen though I am to congratulate both rapporteurs , I have for some considerable time been trying to rid myself of the image of them as twins .
Whether or not Mr Méndez de Vigo was thinking of the pair 's mother I have no idea , but the business of giving birth to them must have lasted for several years .
We congratulate both rapporteurs despite their membership of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats rather than because of it , for , in the crisis that the EU is undergoing , they have clarified something of great importance .
What does it mean when we regard deepening and enlargement as one indivisible task ?
It is one of which the rapporteurs have given a comprehensive and critical description , one not without criticism levelled at the Commission , the Council and Parliament itself , but they were also identical in the way they most scrupulously avoided the underlying , and very weighty , taboo issues .
They have described the need for the whole of Europe to be united , but without asking what Europe as a whole actually is and where its borders lie .
When we talk in terms of uniting and deepening , what , then , is the ultimate goal of this process of union ?
It is evident that there is more to it than using a market and a currency to hold Europe together , but what is the political objective ?
In January , Mr Duff and I put before this House a report in which these questions were asked , yet they have not so far been answered .
That is one of the reasons why we cannot respond to many of the issues and fears that the public have ; there are taboos at work here , and we should break them .
I am very much obliged for the forthright criticisms to be found in the Brok report , which are aimed at the superficiality of the way in which the financial consequences of the various enlargements are depicted and the superficiality with which institutional issues are addressed .
It has to be seen as a black mark against the Commission that it has , from the very beginning of this constitutional crisis , failed to properly address the problems of the institutions , but the same criticism can be made of the superficial approach to issues such as internal security , justice , media freedom and fundamental rights .
It is important that that should be said .
Personally , I find it regrettable that the issue around Turkey should now see Cyprus put centre stage , for it is not really at the heart of the conflict , which is more about issues relating to fundamental rights and democracy - things that have actually been pushed somewhat into the background .
The Commission should , in future , apply much greater thoroughness to dealing with these issues .
How is it possible that there should be in Poland , a country that signed the Treaty , a debate on the death penalty instigated by its government ?
How is it possible that the President of the Czech Republic should , only a few months after signing a similar treaty , cast doubt on social rights and on the social market economy ?
I think future accession negotiations will have to include much more discussion with the candidates of the goal of European political unification than has previously been the case .
( CS ) I should like to take Mr Voggenhuber 's questions a step further .
How is it possible that the very unfair practices we have recently seen have now been discovered in some parts of the accession treaty , as it confronts the reality of the situation ?
One example of this is the Commission 's call for the Member States to assess what is referred to as their integration capacity , a very topical issue at the moment .
The negotiations on the enlargement of the Schengen area and on sugar quotas are scandalous , and they are just two small tips of the iceberg , revealing weaknesses of the EU .
I agree with him that here too we can see a chance to overcome these weaknesses .
Once again , of course , it is a question of having the willingness to discuss solutions that will suit all parties , rather than the abrasive , belligerent , ' take it or leave it ' approach with which we , in countries such as the Czech Republic , are familiar from our own accession negotiations .
For future rounds of enlargement , it is important not only to share common values , but also to acknowledge that the demands of countries that have traditionally been smaller players in Europe must be taken seriously .
The principle of solidarity , which has been severely undermined by cutbacks in the EU budget from 1.24 % to around 1.05 % of GDP over the current budgetary period , for example , must in future be reinforced .
Furthermore , it should be emphasised that the Constitutional Treaty cannot be the basis for the EU 's future development .
It is neither a Constitution nor a Treaty , and this needs to be said out loud .
I also wish to call for negotiations to establish a consensus on questions relating to the future of the EU with deadlines ( the Member was interrupted ) .
Mr President , I should just like to make one remark .
In the context of post-enlargement relations , which are referred to in the statement with Russia , I particularly look forward to seeing a solution to human rights and democratisation problems , for example in the Baltic States of the EU .
( PL ) Mr President , both the reports being discussed are supposed to act as signposts for the European Union .
However , in the 21st century , we need more than just signposts .
We also need traffic lights .
In this case , metaphorically speaking , we need two , rather than three colours .
We should have green and amber lights but no red light .
This means that no country should automatically be excluded from European Union membership .
Showing any country the red light along the road to the European Community is inappropriate , but European traffic would also sink into chaos if the only light on the road was green .
At this point , I would like to remind you of the debate we had two years ago regarding Turkey 's accession .
During the debate , the leaders of the Greens , the party to which Mr Voggenhuber belongs , spoke about 2014 as a potential date for Ankara 's accession to the European Union .
Today , we realise that this was a case of political surrealism .
We have to accept that , Croatia and Macedonia 's rapid accession aside , European countries such as Montenegro , Serbia , Bosnia and Herzegovina or Albania should be allowed to join the European Union ahead of Turkey .
We need to state clearly , and I say this on the day of a cyclical meeting of members from the parliament of Montenegro with representatives of the European Parliament , that the larger the Union is , the more powerful it will be .
Finally , the European Union has significantly grown in importance by expanding , without needing a constitution .
I would like to say a note of warning to Mr Brok and Mr Stubb .
Let us not treat further enlargements as a pretext for introducing institutional changes .
( EL ) Mr President , it would be good if Commissioner Rehn , the Commissioner of enlargement , could first define the borders of Europe for us .
What is Europe ?
Where does Europe end ?
In Istanbul , in Diyarbakir or in Baghdad ?
We do not know where the borders of Europe are .
Signatures are already being collected in the corridors for Israel to come in .
Why not Palestine or Morocco tomorrow ?
But will that be Europe ?
Let us clarify what we want .
A united Europe or a united Euro-Asia ?
This being so , everyone realises what is happening today .
Today Turkey is not coming into Europe . Europe is going into Turkey , which is why it is not Europe but Turkey that is setting the terms .
We also need to clarify the exclusion of the northern part of Cyprus : this exclusion is not the work of Europe or of Cyprus .
It is the work of the occupying army .
If the occupying army left , there would be no problem .
But here we turn a blind eye .
We close our eyes .
There is an occupying army in one of the 25 countries of Europe and we pretend that we know nothing about it .
This is creating additional arrogance in Turkey .
If we wanted to be fair , we would demand that the occupying army leave and that Turkey recognise all 25 countries , not just 24 .
If it had not recognised France or the United Kingdom , would Turkey be in ?
Of course not .
Why ?
Because Cyprus is a tiny country ?
This is a huge historic mistake on the part of Europe .
Mr President , it is clear to me that proponents of the rejected Constitution see enlargement as a bandwagon to secure implementation of parts of that Constitution .
Hence , in the Stubb report , the ill-argued but vehemently demanded further assault on national vetoes , the requirement for a minister of foreign affairs , the demand for more powers for the unelected Commission and the expansionist Court of Justice and more competences for the EU .
Enlargement itself requires none of this , but Europhile fanatics like our two rapporteurs , devoid of sustainable arguments to overcome popular opposition to the Constitution , have come up with this spurious spin that enlargement demands a constitution .
I say neither this EU , nor one bloated by foolishly encompassing Turkey , needs a constitution .
What a fine mess Laurel Brok and Hardy Stubb would get us into !
And all this with no thought of who would pay .
As in the past , the expectation seems to be that countries like the United Kingdom will happily continue to bankroll this runaway madness .
With the EU already costing my country GBP 4 billion net per annum , I have to say to you that we simply cannot afford any more charity .
( FR ) Mr President , the European institutions are finally getting down to the main points .
What is the European Union ?
What does it want ?
Who can be part of it ?
I hope that , thanks to the Stubb and Brok resolutions , our European Parliament will clearly help to abandon the pretence and stop forging ahead with the enlargement strategy .
Integration capacity is very well defined by the three elements that appear in paragraph 8 of the Brok report .
As far as we are concerned , priority must be given to political projects and not just to the institutions .
We are against enlargement leading to the dismantling of common policies .
It is true that integration capacity , as rightly defined by Mr Stubb , does not constitute an accession criterion , but a condition for moving on to accession .
For the time being , we believe , like Mr Stubb , that a further enlargement cannot take place without new decision-making mechanisms , without new resources and without new representation of the Union .
That is the conclusion that we currently draw from the unfortunate comparison between the accession to the Union of the 12 new Member States , which is a success , and the Treaty of Nice , which , for its part , is totally inadequate .
Let us be as clear-sighted in our reasoning regarding Turkey .
The General Affairs Council has noted the consequences of Cyprus ' situation , which is , of course , intolerable , but are we not just talking here about another diplomatic deception ?
The suspension is in danger of being ineffective and of doing nothing to change Turkey 's attitude .
Our position must be reaffirmed ; the Union is in no position to integrate Turkey , but must implement a privileged partnership with this country , which is crucial to Europe .
Let us stop pretending ; this is a question of interests and of Turkey and of the European Union .
Enlargement is not an end in itself ; it is a means of building Europe 's political project .

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Stubb on his work as shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
He has done some serious work , which meets two fundamental conditions for this kind of report .
Firstly , it provides an appropriate response to an extremely important issue , and secondly , and this is key , it unites large majorities in this House .
I believe that this report is likely to follow the pattern of other reports , such as the Corbett-Méndez de Vigo report , which achieved the practically unanimous support of the European Parliament in their time , and that gave them strength .
I believe that , in particular , because we are discussing Mr Stubb 's report and are going to approve it before the meeting of the European Council in a few days ' time and following the success of the Second Interparliamentary Forum on the Future of Europe , which took place here last week .
It is true that we must talk about integration capacity and not absorption capacity .
We must respond to the citizens ' legitimate concerns by means of a two-fold approach combining deepening and enlargement .
We say yes to enlargement , which has been a success and which must be the instrument for building what used to be referred to by the apt expression , the ' Common European Home ' .
Mr Méndez de Vigo , it is not guests that we want in this home ; it is people and countries to whom the home is going to belong , which means much more .
They have the right not just to be here , but also to feel at home here and to help decide upon our acquis and collective management .
Integration capacity cannot therefore be a further criterion to be added to the Copenhagen criteria , but rather a condition that we apply to ourselves as a Union , in order to ensure that enlargement is a success .
Integration capacity clearly includes political capacity , institutional capacity and financial capacity , before any further enlargement can take place .
The report says this and we are all repeating it .
Nice is no use . That is stating the obvious .
When it comes to policies , and unanimity , which means paralysis , as we can see , we are paying a heavy price for not having a Constitution .
That is why in this report we are committed to the European Constitution and its essential content , as Mr Swoboda said .
The container itself hardly matters , but what does matter are the main advances contained in that Constitution , because that means deepening and enlargement in real time .
That is why it is essential that paragraph 9 of Mr Stubb 's report should remain in its entirety .
We believe that the European Constitution will come to fruition by means of an appropriate agreement , without nibbling away at it and without dismembering it as a whole , but naturally that agreement must be ready for 2008 at the very latest , so that the citizens know it when they vote in 2009 .
Otherwise we would be making fools of ourselves and of course of the citizens as well .
We must also , of course , strengthen the European neighbourhood policy ; enlargement must be accompanied by the European neighbourhood policy and , in particular , it must be directed towards the crucial Euro-Mediterranean region .
In that regard , the European Parliament 's role must be key before and after each process .
The Socialist Group will therefore give your report its strong and decisive support , Mr Stubb .

( DE ) Mr President , it is evident from the debate on these two reports that there is a heartening consensus within this House on the need for massive institutional reform to be carried out before we can accept new candidates .
We all know that the European Union is not in good condition , and so it is right that this House , when considering enlargement policy , should focus on the European Union 's capacity for integrating new members , which , contrary to what certain Members sometimes claim , is not a new criterion , but an important element neglected in the past .
Past enlargements were successful , but , in 2004 , the EU was enlarged without prior or simultaneous deepening , thus imperilling the idea of ever closer union .

Particularly for MEPs such as ourselves , this idea of renewal must run through all that we do , and for that we will need effective institutions , the political will , and , above all else , the support of the public , which they will give us only if we are credible , and one of the things that credibility means is that we have to be willing to try new paths and examine alternative options for cooperating with future candidate countries and drawing them closer to us .

Contrary to what Mr Brok said , the choice is not between the constitution and Mr Verhofstadt ; we should have a vision of a constitution and Verhofstadt .

I should like to add that I believe we should be conducting this debate in Brussels rather than in Strasbourg .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by saying something brief about the Commission 's report on the enlargement strategy , which - for good reasons - is divided into three parts , and to which the communications strategy for which the Commission calls is crucial .
This debate is one in which politicians such as ourselves get involved , and we have every right to do so , but we should put this communications strategy into practice ourselves rather than talking about things being hidden in the depths of reports when they are not actually there at all .
Let me also make it abundantly clear - and I am speaking here with reference to Mr Brok 's report - that it is also unfair to exploit such things as national sensitivities and partisan sentiment in expressing opposition to the enlargement strategy or the Constitution .
Yes , of course , some parts of the report are highly ambivalent , but if you have made the effort to read through it in draft , you will know that it achieved the form in which we are debating it today only as a result of massive amendments brought in by the Liberals , the Greens and the Social Democrats .
I think the attempts being made now by some elements , not only among the conservatives but also among the socialists , to have the candidates bear the cost are irresponsible , and , since enlargement policy to date has been a policy for peace , and since we want to hold fast to it , I ask the House to endorse our Amendments 12 and 14 .
Mr President , I welcome this debate and would like to make a few brief points .
Mr Stubb identified different classifications of people and politics on this issue of enlargement and the Constitution .
I am very much pro-enlargement because I believe it has been successful and will continue to be .
But I am also against the Constitution .
The concept of integration capacity is , potentially , one that will be used to sell or portray the Constitution as simply a matter of tweaking the institutions to allow for enlargement in practice .
That would not only be a misrepresentation of that text , but would represent a real failure on our part in terms of what we keep talking about : communication with the citizens of the EU .
To communicate , we must listen , and we must have that very fundamental debate on the direction of the Union .
Where citizens see public services and workers ' rights undermined , there is no good way of communicating that , so we need to be receptive .
Finally , on the issue of Turkey , I support accession , but the issue of Cyprus must be sorted out .
This is a matter of a continuing illegal occupation .
( PL ) Mr President , while we continue to talk of enlargement instead of finding a new solution , the world is changing .
I agree that enlargement is one of the Union 's more important policies and that it guarantees peace and security in the region .
It is also true that the previous enlargements have been successful .
But one day , this success could turn to failure .
In the world of physics , only the universe can expand infinitely .
Other systems all burst at some point if they continue to expand .
Instead of talking about enlargement in a rigid , outmoded and redundant manner , we should develop tools for action which we should offer our neighbours , tools such as cooperation , neighbourhood policies and association agreements .
Moreover , a further , cultural criterion should be added to the list of criteria drawn up in 1993 in Copenhagen that candidate countries have to fulfil .
Let our citizens themselves decide by referendum whether they want Turkey to become a Member State of the European Union or to simply be an associate country .
If we want to expand further , then the purpose must surely be to extend European Union membership to countries that are , and have always been , European , such as Serbia , Ukraine or Belarus .
Mr President , the European Union has a seemingly limitless need to absorb more countries .
More and more power is taken away from democratic nation states and concentrated in a centralised and undemocratic European Union .
As Mr Stubb puts it , he wants to see a single entity with a unified structure and a legal personality , in other words , a ' United States of Europe ' .
Mr Stubb will not be surprised to know that the UK Independence Party does not agree with that , but I have found something in his report that we can agree with .
When speaking of a revised Constitution , he calls for the adoption of a clause enabling Member States to withdraw from the European Union .
Eventually , Britain will leave the European Union , Constitution or not , withdrawal clause or not , but at least Mr Stubb has the decency to recognise that countries should have the right to secede from the new European empire .
Mr President , sometimes it is worth asking simple , even simplistic , questions : why enlarge the European Union at all ?
The simple answer is : in order to enlarge the zone of democracy and stability that Europe has created .
However , the matter is more complex than appears at first sight .
Democracy is not static , but demands constant improvement with the aim of empowering the people .
This is what the deepening of integration is fundamentally about .
It is in this context that enlargement raises a particular problem , and one that has to be tackled .
The European Union insists that future Member States arrive with fully functioning democratic systems - as is proper - yet this overlooks the changes that enlargement brings in its wake within the EU itself .
The problem is this : the entry of new Member States involves not just the states but the new citizens who are added through accession .
Therefore , the enlargement of the European Union simultaneously means the enlargement of the European demos , the citizens of Europe .
Their voice is seldom heard in the enlargement debate , yet leaving out the citizens threatens to exacerbate the democratic deficit .
An EU beset by a democratic deficit cannot be fully effective in extending the zone of democracy to future Member States .
On the contrary , it could even result in exporting the democratic deficit . That would be completely counterproductive .
Enlargement must take the wishes of the citizens of Europe into account when it comes to their own enlargement , and not take their voice for granted .
Failure to do so would undermine the goal of extending Europe 's zone of democracy and stability .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to point out to the gentleman from UKIP that the constitutional treaty does give every country the right to secede from the EU , but no country has as yet done so , and nor will any - not even the United Kingdom - in view of the fact that there are far more advantages to staying in the European Union than to leaving it .
This is not something I would worry about .
There is nothing new about this sort of propaganda on the part of Members who make a speech and then walk out .
It is not worth talking about .
We all agree on the need for a deeper EU , something that we have been promised ever since Maastricht , when there were twelve Member States as against the present twenty-seven , so it is now past high time that we got it .
The same will apply after all future enlargements .
One amendment gives the impression that Croatia and South-Eastern Europe could even now be exempted this requirement , but , on the contrary , the EU must be made deeper before any new countries join it .
It must also be made plain that the blame for these problems lies with the EU itself rather than with the candidates - a point that has been made already .
Our task is to tell people about the objects and benefits of enlargement , not least for our own countries , and explain to them what these are .
All the old Member States benefit to an enormous degree from the arrival of the new ones ; since the old export to the new far more than they import from them , this is a ' win-win ' strategy , although that is not - alas - communicated to the public .
That is where we have some catching up to do .
There is another problem I want to mention , and it has to do with the procedure for ratifying new accessions .
If individual countries start announcing referendums on the accession of a new Member State , that is going to make matters difficult for us .
That is another issue we will have to address .
Overall , though , my congratulations to the twins on finding the right way ahead , which this House should adopt .
( HU ) In today 's debate almost everyone concurred that enlargement is a success story .
If this is so , then we have to continue steadfastly with the obligations we have accepted , because Europe has a crucial need for success stories .
The reform of the decision-making procedure and the debate over integration capacity must not slow down the process of enlargement , and must not be a pretext for putting the brakes on enlargement .
Croatia must be judged on its own merits .
The negotiations with Turkey must go on , but Turkey also has to show good faith and must fulfil the conditions .
For Macedonia , we have to clearly define the conditions for starting negotiations .
For potential candidate countries , there must be precise conditions for accession even in the medium term , provided they are ready to fulfil those conditions .
The European Union also has to guarantee more resources , more money and clearer , more easily attainable conditions for the pre-accession funds ; otherwise our intention to continue enlargement will not be credible .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , its own enlargement is one of the most effective foreign policy instruments and means of conflict prevention in the European Union 's history , but there are both challenges and opportunities in store for us .
After the accessions of Romania and Bulgaria , we can expect to have to deal with that of Croatia , and then , in a later round , not only that of Turkey , but also that of the countries of the Western Balkans , who must not be forgotten in all this .
Difficult a task though it is , the EU must , as it is enlarged , also become deeper , and that will call for reform of the institutional framework .
The problem we have is not so much with the public or with the candidate countries as with the European elites , and that is why I urge Mr Brok to take as his model that great European Helmut Kohl , who had the courage to bring home to the public the importance of a broader and deeper EU .
The time has come for a new initiative to resolve the Cyprus conflict and to bring to an end the isolation of the island 's Turkish North .
I rejoice at the undertaking given by the Greek part of the island , but what is also needed is a new initiative under United Nations leadership , which will make possible a final settlement of the conflict and enable the EU to treat the negotiations with Turkey as a matter completely separate from it .
( DE ) Mr President , although we cannot predict which countries we will be able to welcome into the European Union , or when , the main thing is that three facts stand out .
The first is that , after Bulgaria and Romania , there will be other accessions to the European Union ; the second is that all European states that share our values and meet the Copenhagen criteria are entitled to apply to become Member States of the European Union , and the third is that the Treaty of Nice is not suitable as a basis for future enlargements .
It follows from that that extensive and in-depth reform of the 27-member EU is long overdue .

That would have been an accurate appraisal even six years ago , at the time of the adoption of the Laeken Declaration ; it is now more relevant than ever .
I believe that the deepening of the EU before any more enlargements take place is an indispensable requirement , and that the constitutional treaty is the key to the European Union 's future viability .
It is not acceptable that unilateral demands be made of the candidates for accession and that they alone be expected to work on themselves , and I therefore hope that it will prove possible , during next year , to find a way out of the constitutional crisis that represents a solution acceptable to all twenty-seven Member States , but the fact is that the complex political melée will make this extremely difficult .
What will be crucial in terms of integration capacity will be that it should not involve aiming at a merely minimalist - perhaps merely institutional - reform of the European Union .
There must be no retreat from the constitutional treaty in 2009 .
It is also absolutely vital that we should succeed in narrowing the gulf between the EU and its citizens ; the message must go out loud and clear - and not only to the people of France and the Netherlands - that we are willing to learn from the ' no ' votes in those countries , and that that means that we are willing to look at other ways of doing European politics in the future .
That , in my view , means above all that the creation of a social Europe must be put at the heart of European politics - and must stay there .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate needs to send the Commission a clear pointer that it must make its vast enlargement programme contingent on the need for an overall strategy regarding the European Union 's political role now and in the future .
That also - perhaps essentially - involves making a geopolitical decision about what the EU 's borders ought to be .
That is particularly true and imperative in relation to the highly sensitive issue of Turkey , for which privileged partnership is finally starting to look like a solution .
I agree with these reports on one point , which is that the Commission communication on the enlargement strategy has not given sufficient thought to an essential aspect : the danger that , if future EU enlargement does not involve adequate political , economic , financial and also cultural integration , then it will inevitably result in the weakening , if not the failure , of the European Union as a political project .
It is a fact that the Commission is advancing this enlargement programme with disturbing levity , without even pointing out what financial impact it might have , whereas it is absolutely essential to be fully conscious of that prior to any accession .
We are well aware of the hard work in store for us after Bulgaria and Romania join , so perhaps the time has come to make it clear to the countries waiting to join that , for now , different prospects are opening up for them , as we have pointed out in the case of Turkey .
Let us not forget that it was extremely difficult to reach a compromise on the current financial perspective , which needs to be reviewed soon , by the way .
These arguments make us realise that the position of those governments - like the Prodi Government - that insist at every turn on extending enlargement to the Balkan countries without taking these real difficulties into account at all is the result of irresponsible levity .
Furthermore , the excessive leniency shown in previous accession procedures towards serious matters such as corruption and crime can no longer be tolerated if we want the integration of Europe to continue to conform to the standards and values in which our fellow citizens and our peoples believe .

( FR ) Mr President , we , for our part , will also vote against this report , because it has sought to distance itself from the wise Europe of the early days , that is to say , a Europe of the Six , six Member States cooperating with each other in order to strike an Atlantic-wide balance .
Those who believe in supranationality have blown their project out of all proportion by enlarging here , there and everywhere , without even knowing where their borders are .
The fact is that , by demolishing internal borders and by no longer even knowing what a border is , these Euro-maniacs no longer know where to stop .
Consequently , their project is not truly political because , I repeat , there can be no politics without the concept of borders .
Today , these Euro-maniacs are discovering that there is still someone behind the wall , that they still need to enlarge further , because they cannot say ' No ' to anyone .
Here they are deprived of any constitution - let them not be under any illusions ! - permanently deprived of any constitution .
They are faced with a huge void , forced as they are either to give ground , that is to say to invent a two- or three-speed pragmatic Europe , which would be the most sensible option , or to launch themselves into a breathtaking headlong flight .
Here they are involved with Turkey , here they are faced with new candidate countries in the Caucasus , for example : after all , Georgia is well and truly part of the Council of Europe ... Why not the countries of the Maghreb , or Lebanon , the history of which is so closely associated with that of our nations ?
Well , let us get down to it !
Since this poor Europe no longer has any structure , let us keep on enlarging it and , in doing so , let us be careful not to forget States that have been strangely sidelined - Serbia , Russia - perhaps because these countries reluctantly accept the US hegemony ?
That says everything there is to say , Mr President , about the failure - yes , the failure - of the so-called European Union .

( DE ) Mr President , again and again , and over a period of years , this House , at first cautiously , then - as today - very clearly , has sent out the twofold message that there can be no new enlargement without a working constitution .
By enlarging without ifs or buts and with ever-greater haste , we are doing nobody any good ; on the contrary , by dividing Member States into two classes by means of derogations , and alienating Europe 's peoples , we imperil that which has already been achieved .
Although enlargement is one of the EU 's real successes , many people are more and more inclined to see it as a threat , and to counter that we must be opinion formers in the best sense of the word .
That is not exactly easy , for a constitution possesses little political sex appeal , nor , to a large degree , can it have any , for it essentially has to do with getting institutions to work better and with getting decisions taken by a majority in public view rather than by means of high diplomacy behind closed doors .
It has to do with a financial model that rationally balances functions against the money available for them , and , in many respects , too , with new functions for Europe , even though , even today , very many people already feel that Europe makes itself too much of a nuisance .
Even in warm weather , the energy issue has a European dimension to it , and it is an issue we must address together .
Let me conclude by saying something about Croatia , a candidate country of particular importance to the country from which I come .
Our demand for the Constitution does not mean that we want to stand in the way of Croatia 's accession ; the contrary is the case .
It is perfectly conceivable that it will join us in 2009 or 2010 , provided that the German Presidency manages to breathe new life into the procedure for ratifying the Constitution and reviving the Constitution as an issue .
We wish the incoming German Presidency every success in doing that .

Mr President , Mr Stubb said that enlargement has been the most successful EU policy , spreading stability , peace and prosperity across our continent .
That logic still applies .
Of course it means that the European Union must adapt , especially in terms of institutional reform .
However , does it mean that we should block any enlargement until all institutional reforms have been achieved ?
If that were the case , the last enlargement would never have happened , because the Treaty of Nice was clearly insufficient .
Perhaps even the 1973 enlargement might not have happened .
The fact is that enlargement is one of the factors that drive reform .
Some Member States that are reluctant to embrace institutional reform often accept its necessity as a consequence of enlargement .
Therefore supporters of reform should be supporters of enlargement .
Yet Mr Méndez de Vigo said that there should be no future enlargements without the Constitutional Treaty .
Indeed , paragraph 9 of Mr Stubb 's report states that ' any enlargement requires ... ' - and then there is a long list of items that are all contained in the Constitutional Treaty .
We have a slight difficulty with that absolute position .
Mr Brok said that those who push hardest for widening are often those who oppose deepening .
Yet if you want to force both , you need to press for both .
There is a real danger that , on the one hand , you will have people who say that they do not want enlargement until we have institutional reform and , on the other , you will have those who say that we do not need institutional reform until we have enlargement .
If you want to drive forward both agendas you need to support both , because it is both that will drive us forward to having an enlarged and a reformed European Union .
That is why our group has tabled an amendment to paragraph 9 to make it clear that we do not see as a precondition having every single part of an institutional agenda accepted before any single enlargement takes place .
We believe that the two processes - enlargement and reform - will go together ; they will drive each other forward and they may , perhaps , end up being enacted on the same day - a new treaty and an accession treaty perhaps rolled into one .
( ES ) Mr President , enlargement must not be a goal in itself .
It is a way of expanding a project and we cannot allow that project to be weakened as a result of enlargement .
At the end of the day , this debate is really undermining our ability to talk about what Europe wants to be , what it wants to do .
Paragraph 8 of the Brok report is very clear .
Sadly , we may be , and in fact we are , rushing ahead in a manner that is preventing us from talking about our own problems and difficulties on the pretext of enlargement .
There are institutional reforms that cannot wait , enlargement or no enlargement .
There are political and financial measures that can be implemented now without any reform .
There are serious legitimacy problems and shameful actions on the part of the European Commission , such as secretly approving rules in the field of airport safety to be imposed on airports , without any kind of democratic control and without informing the citizens .
There are many actions that damage the democratic legitimacy of our institutions .
All of that needs to be resolved .
We must clearly open up the debate on enlargement , and the two fronts must be opened up in parallel .
But enlargement must not be used as a pretext for failing to tackle the serious problems facing the European Union today , with or without Turkey , with or without enlargement .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Brok and Mr Stubb for their reports and highlight the problems around the possible accession of Croatia , a country that has made considerable progress in recent years and can therefore meet the political and economic challenge of the Copenhagen criteria .
Since its integration capacity would not thereby be put to the test , the EU should devise a clear and purposeful strategy for Croatia 's speedy integration .
We cannot make the country a hostage to the EU 's internal problems , and should take a flexible line on its accession .
If it happens , it will mean relatively little for the EU , but a great deal for Croatia in terms of its democratic future .
( EL ) Mr President , I wish to comment on one of the two reports we are debating today , the Stubb report .
It is a report that promotes efforts to increase the operability of the Union at the level of decision-taking procedures and to institutionalise it such that decisions are basically taken by its leading nucleus without any right of veto for the smaller and once more independent states .
The rapporteur has obviously not listened to public opinion , which has twice rejected the Constitutional Treaty .
There is no other way to explain the fact that it digs up a dead text and adopts its anti-democratic provisions .
The content of the changes deepens the lack of democracy rather than reducing it or abolishing it .
They aim to promote the Constitutional Treaty with its anti-grassroots content by 2009 .
Instead of extending the rights of citizens and information for them , they clearly understand the operability and the decision-taking procedure of the European Union as an almost exclusive right of the strong circles of the European Union .
How very sad that once again the citizen has been left out .
( PL ) Mr President , when debating the European Union 's enlargement strategy , we should consider our vision a common Europe .
Hitherto , ruthless political attempts to force the constitution through have reflected a desire to create a supranational political organisation where the largest European countries have the deciding majority .
The issue of European Union enlargement is generally discussed in this light .
Economic issues are sidelined .
The European Union wants to welcome as many countries as can be dominated by the largest European countries .
That is why , from the point of demographic potential , the prospect of Turkey or Ukraine joining the European Union next couple of years is not acceptable to the decision-makers .
I would like to stress that the European Union can only survive if economic issues prevails over political considerations and over the ambition of creating a new , twenty-first century Roman Empire ruled by just three or four countries .
. - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks to Mr Elmar Brok and Mr Alexander Stubb , colleagues from my political group , for the effort they have put into their reports .
Both texts display a thorough and competent approach to one of the most important challenges facing the European Union , namely its further enlargement .
As a citizen of a country which joined the European Community two and a half years ago , I can appreciate the benefits of membership , both for the Polish economy and for the lives of millions of Poles .
I am also convinced that the most recent enlargement benefited not only the new members .
The whole Union benefited , both in economic terms and in terms of security and stability .
The same was the case for the earlier enlargements of the European Community .
Both the new members and the existing Member States benefited .
The European Union is an example of a successful venture because it has never confined itself to an elite circle of founding members , but has been able to grow wisely , thereby becoming an increasingly influential player on an increasingly global stage .
I have no doubt that further enlargements are in store for the European Union .
The Balkan states and the Union 's eastern neighbours will one day be part of the European Union and this too will benefit our Community .
I do not doubt the need for institutional reforms before the next enlargement . However , I would like to express my fear that making this process totally dependant on adopting all the points of the Constitutional Treaty when it has been rejected in the French and Dutch referenda may create the undesirable impression that the Union does not want any new members .
This would send a very negative message to societies in countries which wish to join our Community .
We should not and I believe we do not want to restrict ourselves to the current circle of members , which already consists of twenty-seven countries .
Our willingness to accept new members should not be a pawn in our internal disputes regarding the shape of the European institutions .
( FR ) Mr President , European neighbourhood policy and the presence of Hungarian minorities make Hungary the country most affected by the future enlargement of the Union : Croatia , Serbia , other countries in the Western Balkans .
Be that as it may , the main task right now is to strengthen and implement in-depth economic and institutional reforms , without , however , shutting the door on enlargement .
It is regrettable that , from the perspective of the history of the European Community , this enlargement should not have been preceded by economic and institutional development : Europe cannot be enlarged with relatively fewer resources and without a Constitutional Treaty !
The 2004 enlargement had a positive , beneficial outcome for the old and new Member States .
This is a win-win situation .
The ten new Member States were integrated without any problems , without any economic disruption , without any social dumping and without any migratory flows .
After the enlargement , the European Union was able to adopt the Services Directive , REACH and the financial perspective , and it is going to extend the Schengen system .
What is required , however , ladies and gentlemen , is a European campaign , because the countries of the West do not know the real cost of enlargement , and the new Member States have become scapegoats for problems within those countries .
Mr President , European values and the principles of justice , democracy , freedom of speech and respect for human rights : fine words , mostly spoken in excess at inconsequential ceremonies and meaningless functions of hypocrisy , but seldom seriously meant or implemented .
The decadence of the European spirit , coupled with the championship of subordination to the US Administration , reigns supreme in a European Union that is threatened with disintegration from within by the short-sightedness of Enlargement Commissioners , and through backstabbing by Britannic leaders forever poodling to the wishes of their transatlantic masters .
This is the sorry state of affairs of a Commission and Council that are gradually sinking the EU into disillusion by allowing a military-controlled Asiatic state , instead of fulfilling its obligations , to dictate its terms for granting us the honour of joining the EU .
Dear Colleagues , make no mistake . With this kind of Turkish accession , it is not the EU that will be enlarging , but Turkey .
So , Mr Rehn , congratulations on your determined efforts to accomplish the successful accession of the EU to a revived Grand Turkish Ottoman Empire , and good luck to our citizens who are watching in dismay and helplessness !

( EL ) Mr President , congratulations to Mr Brok and to Mr Stubb on their exceptional work .
I have the following comments to make :
Continuing enlargement policy : it is important and must be extended in a coordinated manner to the remaining countries of the Western Balkans , especially in view of imminent developments on the Kosovo question .
European prospects and enlargement policy are policies for peace and cooperation which we are all striving for .
Turkey : a decision was taken the other day which moves in the right direction .
However , Commissioner , I call on you to re-examine the idea of the timetable , because this would complement and improve the decision taken and would also help you to protect the credibility of the European Union .
Neighbourhood policy : the Commission communication is inadequate . However , it is an important policy , which must be developed .
Consequently , we await a new communication , an improved and more integrated communication .
Finally , an enlarged Europe will be more democratic , more efficient , more transparent and with more social sensibilities if it finally acquires its Constitution .
The procedures are restarting , the right approach is a step by step approach to the issues and problems which constitute it , but this step by step approach also has a sell-by date .
( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Brok and Mr Stubb for this debate on the enlargement process and for their reports .
I would like to start by commenting on the views expressed by Mr Brok in recital F to the effect that enlargement should not undermine the political nature of this project .
I come from Sweden , a country that has clearly stated in every study that a continued enlargement process is one of the most important issues facing the EU .
My worry today is that we are not speaking clearly about continued enlargement and about the future membership of Turkey .
Many Members of this House are opposed to Turkey 's membership , a fact that has already been made clear by the request from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for the vote on Turkey 's membership negotiations to be by secret ballot .
Many of us , myself included , found it incomprehensible that politicians are afraid to stand up for their opinions before their voters , the citizens of Europe .
In the past year views have been put forward on numerous occasions that have made me wonder whether there is any will for continued enlargement , even if we solve the central issues that are at the top of our agenda .
We need a new Constitution , irrespective of whether more Member States join the Union , to ensure , amongst other things , a modern decision-making process .
We need to reform agricultural policy to ensure the new jobs of the future and a sustainable Europe .
We need a bigger budget for future funding .
I wonder what Mr Brok means when he says , in paragraph 11 , that the Union can only function if all of its members share common values arising from a European identity .
Am I to interpret that as closing the door on Turkey ?
My group , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , has tabled an amendment , number 29 , which we call on everyone to support .
We are in complete agreement that Turkey must meet the requirements we set out from the very beginning in respect of Cyprus , the Kurds and human rights , as well as the requirements that apply to everyone else .
Let us speak clearly , however , and keep these different agendas apart .
( FI ) Mr President , first I want to thank the duo of Mr Brok and Mr Stubb for their reports .

As we know , they are both highly competent and gifted , but the direction in which they want to take the European Union is not necessarily the one that I am in favour of .
It is true that reforms are needed , and it is true that enlargement has in many respects proven an excellent and effective way to take the European Union forward .
On some points , however , we also need to remember the limitations of enlargement .
The European Union policy cannot be one where we just expand and expand the whole time , and when there are problems we create new agencies .
We also need to be able to discuss in greater depth what the European Union will be like in the future , what sort of Union we need , and what its work really consists of .
In this respect I hope that the limitations will also be taken into account in this debate on enlargement .
We often ask questions about limits to growth in our keynote addresses , but now that we are talking about the enlargement of the European Union we forget that there are certain limits to this aspect of growth too .
( PL ) Mr President , the plan of enlarging the European Union further is today losing public favour .
The most recent enlargement was logical , as it represented the definitive overcoming of the artificial division of Europe that was a consequence of the Yalta Conference .
The question now being asked is what is the point of further enlargements .
This question brings into question the purpose of the great project that is the European Union .
What is a common Europe and what should it be ?
Is it only a political community which is meant to ensure the stability of democratic government for its members , respect for human rights and civil freedoms , acceptance of the rule of law and , ultimately , prosperity , thanks to an efficient market economy ?
Or is it a community of values , reaching back to common roots and a common cultural heritage ?
In that case , what are those roots and what is the heritage ?
Cultural historians highlight the fact that the contemporary European identity is the product of many historical traditions .
In each of us , as in each of the European nations , something remains of the Greek philosophical tradition and of Roman republicanism .
We are the heirs to the humanism of the Renaissance and rationalism of the Enlightenment and , regardless of whether we admit it or not , we also have a Christian heritage .
Let us not deceive ourselves .
Even if some of us today do not want to accept this tradition , it is still part of contemporary European identity .
If nothing else , it is present in the fundamental principle of human dignity , which is the basis for a whole package of basic laws .
As Mr Elmar Brok 's report states that the ' Union can only function properly if all of its members share common values arising from a European identity ' , he must have in mind an identity that includes our Christian heritage .
We must not forget to refer to this heritage when we draw up a constitution .
( PL ) Mr President , today , the day on which I utter these words , is the twenty-fifth anniversary of the imposition of martial law in Poland , of the attempt to destroy the Solidarity trade union and the movement of Polish society towards freedom and democracy .
Twenty-five years later I am speaking in an entirely different world , in the European Parliament , in a Europe based on the principles of democracy , peace , the rule of law and justice .
This personal reference to history clearly proves the good that the European Union represents for all Europeans .
Today , we are facing the challenge of balancing further enlargement with the European Union 's absorption capacity .
On the one hand , the European Union cannot turn its back on countries aiming to achieve membership , to shut itself away in an ivory tower of wealth and Western civilisation .
On the other hand , it cannot allow the social and legal foundations of the Community to be diluted or to disappear completely .
The European Union should fulfil its obligations towards countries aspiring to membership , and pay particular attention to how these countries perform in implementing the rule of law , an independent judiciary and respect for fundamental rights .
The institutions of the European Union have to provide a more precise definition of a stronger Neighbourhood Policy .
To this end we need to establish a European Union-Black Sea community .
Relations between the European Union and Russia remain a fundamental issue and cover both trade and energy , as well as , first and foremost , issues of human rights , the rule of law and democracy .
( SV ) Mr President , the period of reflection has clearly shown that the great challenge now is to convince the people of Europe that they can take part in decision-making and influence the future of the EU .
It is important that they dare to trust in their abilities to influence and that they also want to give their support when , in future , the EU wants to accept new Member States , and potentially many of them .
Every European must be able to feel that he or she is represented in the European Parliament .
This goes without saying for many , but not for everyone .
As a result of the national electoral systems and the regulations on the distribution of seats in the European Parliament , a large group of Europeans will be excluded from Parliament when the enlargement process continues .
I am referring to the regional and national linguistic minorities that today constitute around 50 million people .
That is fully 10 % of the population of the EU .
Even in the last election we lost four minorities .
It is deplorable if large groups are to be systematically excluded from decision-making within the EU .
If that happens we should not expect automatic support from these people for the European structure in future .
This issue must be taken seriously when the EU 's Basic Treaty is reviewed .
The EU must not create second-class citizens .
( NL ) Mr President , I too should like to extend a huge compliment to the two rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Stubb , for their excellent work .
Enlargement , as many have said before me , is one of Europe 's biggest success stories .
If people think that is obvious , all we need to do is to remind ourselves of Mr Milinkevich , yesterday 's speaker in this Chamber , who has been in jail many times himself .
His son was in prison last time he was here , as are hundreds of people , simply for fighting for freedom .
Things could have been very different for Eastern Europe , and the democratic reforms of all those countries that have joined in such a short space of time are a remarkable feat in which Europe should take a great deal of pride .
In order , however , to retain support for this effective enlargement , the right balance must be struck in a few areas .
One could compare this with a house .
If one continues to add bedrooms on the first and second floors , one will need to reinforce the foundations , and that is why it is very important that Parliament should now speak out so emphatically in favour of introducing a new treaty before the next enlargement round .
This is not so much intended for the new countries as it is for us .
Rather than being complacent , we should do now what needs to be done .
Much has been said about integration capacity .
It is indeed to be welcomed that the concept has been introduced , although it now needs to be deepened at institutional , financial and treaty level .
Since , however , integration capacity also involves public support , we need to explain to them that enlargement is a good thing , we can make certain demands of the candidate Member States , and we must , by carrying out convincing reforms , try to retain the European public 's support for this process .
Finally , with regard to Turkey , a clear penalty was needed , because conditions are there to be met .
At the same time , a clear and additional signal has been sent by the Council , moments of assessment have been built in , rules for Turkey have been stepped up to some degree ; at the same time , there is also pressure on us to put arrangements in place for the sake of the Northern Cypriots .
I should like to repeat emphatically that we are behind the reformers in Turkey .
We hope that next year , progress will be made as regards Cyprus and we hope , above all , that we will now once again be able to turn our attention to the necessary reforms in Turkey .
I urge the reformers to make headway now in the areas of the free expression of opinion and freedom of religion , so that next year this rapporteur can be more positive compared to last year .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to make four points :
Firstly , there is a myth - because it is a myth - that enlargement and deepening are conflicting states .
In fact , since the beginning of the 1980s , it is this enlargement which has imposed further deepening on us : Structural Funds , EMU and greater cooperation in order to combat organised crime , immigration and peace in the world .
That is why it must continue .
The second point naturally concerns the Western Balkans .
I am delighted that the process of their integration is not being questioned , nor should it .
Thirdly , the saga of ' absorption capacity ' or ' integration capacity ' , by which we mean the capacity for new countries to accede .
This is Europe 's obligation .
Its obligation .
Just as the Copenhagen criteria are an obligation for the other countries .
We are not like journalists or statisticians monitoring whether this capacity exists or does not exist .
We must create it , precisely in order to allow further enlargement .
The fourth point concerns Turkey .
What a pity about the haggling I have witnessed over recent days .
While the Commission talks about the need for ' strict conditionality ' , meaning clear preconditions , in the case of Turkey it is sending out a conflicting message .
It does not exert pressure on it directly to apply its obligation concerning the protocol , it does exert pressure on it to recognise one of the 25 Member States , Cyprus ; it haggles over whether one or two or three ports will open , completely ignoring the root of the problem , which is a military occupation that infringes all the European values that we maintain should be strengthened for the purpose of enlargement .
I call on the Commission , intensely , to get this effort back to basics with a timetable and demands on Turkey , for the benefit of Turkey itself and the democrats in that country .
( LT ) Expansions , both the most recent and the earlier ones , have strengthened the Union , encouraged its economic growth and increased its importance in the world .
Therefore , we must maintain our commitment to further expand the European Union , as this is an historic opportunity and responsibility to create a unified and flourishing Europe .
However , expansion must be carried out together with the deepening of the EU , with the adaptation of its institutions to continue to operate with new members on board .
From this year forward , the EU structures apply to 27 Member States .
In order for Europe to be able to expand and function effectively , we need to perform a few urgent tasks :
1 .
We need to strengthen public support for expansion , and for this we need to comprehensively explain the advantages of European expansion , its gains , economic benefits and historic responsibilities ;
2 .
We have to revise the financial plan , including the financial system , to adapt it to the new requirements of an expanded Union ;
3 .
We need to undertake the necessary institutional improvements and changes .
Therefore , it is most important that the countries , which will share the EU presidency until 2008 , take the initiative to make the Constitutional consensus a reality .
Finally , I would like to note that looking to the future it is essential to revitalise Europe 's neighbourhood policy , which would allow countries participating in it not only to develop reforms quicker and expand links with the European Union , but , if they wish , to ultimately aspire to become members .
( HU ) Speaking also on behalf of my colleague Pál Schmitt , chairman of the delegation to the EU-Croatia joint parliamentary committee , I congratulate Mr Brock and Mr Stubb for their excellent and realistic report .


We Hungarians are glad that the reports strengthen the Copenhagen principle according to which each state wishing to join must proceed towards negotiations on its own merits .
Accordingly , in the case of Croatia , presently engaged in negotiations , we can declare with confidence that we will welcome them as new members in this wave , on the basis of the Copenhagen criteria .
In fact , Croatia 's entry is essentially the completion of the fifth wave of EU enlargement , that of the Central European region .
Croatia is linked to this wave mainly through Slovenia , Austria and Hungary , by its level of development , by its legal and institutional culture and by its thousand-year-old heritage .
On another level , Croatia may serve as a good example for states wishing to begin the enlargement of the European Union in the Western Balkans .
Fortunately Croatia 's admission , given its size and development , does not present problems with regard to either the internal market or the budget .
As for the institutional conditions for accession , these can be fulfilled by amending the Treaty of Nice , a task that , in the absence of a Constitution , will have to be addressed eventually for purposes of accession .
At the same time , the principle of specific merits and further enlargement really need to be examined more seriously , henceforth in the Western Balkans as well as within the Union .
That is the case as regards Croatia 's neighbour , Serbia , which entertains great hopes and where the northern province of Voivodina may serve as a bridge precisely on account of its western roots .
It could keep playing this bridging role if Serbia were to strive to preserve the region instead of continuing its present practice of suppressing the traditional culture of indigenous EU peoples .
If the latter continues , then rather than a European Union based on our own cultural values , we will instead be looking at a Byzantine Union .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Stubb for his work on this very sensitive subject .
His report has the virtue of tackling the problem of integration capacity from different angles .
I am therefore delighted that the text is not limited to mentioning the institutional aspects of this issue , but that it also highlights other major reforms , without which the Union could not accommodate new members .
I am thinking , in particular , of the review of the Union 's financing system .
I am also grateful to the rapporteur for having succeeded in making sure that this report is neutral towards the candidate countries and in preventing the pitfall that would have consisted in expressing , on that occasion , a position on the entry of a given State .
Finally , this report rightly emphasises the enhanced role that should be granted to Parliament , not only in the context of the accession process , but also in that of future institutional reforms .
I do have one criticism to make , however : it seems to me , in fact , that , in perhaps wanting to do too much of a good job , the rapporteur has somewhat shifted the report away from its initial aim by making it more a report that concentrates on all of the reforms necessary within the European Union than on the more specific issue of integration capacity .
Rather than enumerating a long list of institutional reforms , it would have been better , in my opinion , to have concentrated solely on the reforms that constitute genuine prerequisites for any further enlargement .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , the EU enlargement process has been a great success , with the number of Member States having increased from 6 to 27 .
We have been able to see a whole new Europe take shape .
To start to have doubts now and talk of ' fatigue ' in respect of continuing enlargement would be to take a step in the wrong direction .
Obviously , the criteria relating to democracy , human rights and a well-functioning state under the rule of law must be met .
We have also seen the earthshaking transformation of the old Eastern and Central Europe .
It is true that the EU needs new forms of decision-making , but the Union must not introduce new conditions for those countries that are currently attempting to become members .
Commissioner , I personally find the forces within the European Union that are attempting to put obstacles in the path of a future Turkish membership quite disquieting .
Our vision of the future must be of a complete Europe - and that includes Turkey .

( DE ) Mr President , in contrast to one of the earlier speakers , I regard enlargement as an instrument not of external policy , but rather of European domestic policy ; that is why the process of enlarging the EU must not be allowed to burst the bounds of Europe through the accession of a large country like Turkey , which is either only partly European or not European at all .

Were that to happen , the European Union would become a Eurasian structure like the Council of Europe , with the addition of an internal market , something that cannot be an attractive prospect to anyone who seeks a really effective Europe that replaces our nation states in the exercise of essential functions , the sort of Europe that convinced federalists - myself among them - want .

On the other hand , though , we cannot block the entrance to countries that very definitely are European , and so I repudiate those attempts at interpreting the Brok report - certain points in which certainly are amenable to interpretation - in such a way as to make the adoption of the constitutional treaty appear an indispensable requirement for the accession of a central European country such as Croatia .
In their own recent resolutions , the European People 's Party , the CDU and the CSU have explicitly stated that Croatia constitutes an exception in terms of the enlargement process by reason of its size , its position in Central Europe and its preparedness , and that it should actually have been taken together with Hungary and Slovenia .
It might well be described as a leftover - de facto rather than de jure - of the enlargement process that we are currently completing , and that is why I will resist all attempts at interpretations that would make Croatia - as Mr Horáček so rightly said - a hostage to the constitutional process .
Yes , of course we have to move the constitutional process forward in this decade ; yes , of course we need the constitutional treaty in order to be able to make further strides in the next decade by welcoming into the European Union states - such as those in south-eastern Europe between Croatia and Greece - whose European nature is not in doubt , first among them Macedonia , which already has the status of a candidate state .
It is countries such as these that have an entitlement to full Member State status , and that is an entitlement we will uphold .
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to say something about communication .

I too object to the idea of enlargement as a foreign policy instrument , but my reasons for doing so differ from Mr Posselt 's ; I do indeed believe that we have problems , for you can see for yourself how whole brigades of well-meaning global strategists , laden down with foreign policy instruments , scurry through Europe and beyond , proclaiming : ' Worried about the threat of civil war ?
Join the EU ! ' and see in all its clarity the reason why so many citizens of the EU say : ' No thanks , I am not an instrument .
I do not exist to solve foreign policy problems .
That is not why I regard myself as a citizen of the EU ; if that is what the European Union is about , I would rather not have anything to do with it . '
The second thing I want to say about communication is that it raises the question of what actual relation there is between the constant claim that we have to discharge the obligations into which we have entered , and our willingness to take a rigorous line with candidate countries both in the course of negotiations and in the run-up to them , in order to get these countries to make commitments and stick to them , when , in this debate - and congratulations to Mr Posselt - every conceivable back door is opened in the hope of getting one party or other 's favourite candidate into the EU before the Constitution has been adopted .
The man and woman in the street is very well aware of the message that sends out , so there is no cause to talk about enlargement fatigue in an accusatory tone of voice .

Those who think the only problems have to do with matters of fact would do better to get stuck in to these communications problems .
( SL ) I should like to welcome both these reports as a clear expression of the political will of the European Parliament , which strengthens the credibility of the European Union .
I see them as an expression of our responsibility towards the future of the European Union , and also as an expression of our joint responsibility towards global progress .
I will not make any specific comments about the two reports , but I am , in any case , in favour of replicating their philosophy .
It seems to me somewhat paradoxical that while , on the one hand , we are talking about a crisis in the European Union , on the other , we are this Christmas literally faced with the fact that a large number of countries , in Europe and even beyond , are keen to join the European family .
Our response should not be that there are not enough chairs around the European table or that we are having problems drawing up house rules .
I am particularly pleased to note that Mr Brok 's report clearly specifies that close multilateral relations do not mean an alternative to fully-fledged membership , but an additional opportunity for countries which are currently a long way off from achieving fully-fledged membership .
In addition , I support the clear stance towards the countries of South-East Europe .
I should like to see them all included by name in the next report , as none of them deserves to be mentioned in a list of the countries left over ( I think that this is important for us ) .
Also , the following principle should be applied to Croatia and to all the countries following in Croatia 's footsteps involved in the so-called Thessalonica process : as soon as a candidate country is ready , the European Union should be ready , too .
The European ambition should be rewarded .
( PL ) Mr President , I will begin by congratulating both rapporteurs .
Now , moving on to the matter at hand , I would like to draw your attention to the following issue .
The European Union has proved to be a very attractive project and it has , for many years , attracted new countries .
That is why , in my opinion , today 's debate on whether the European Union should expand further is academic , as the Maastricht Treaty provides the answer .
Article 49 of the Treaty clearly states that any European country that meets the political and economic criteria may join the European Union .
These criteria were drawn up in Copenhagen in 1993 and we should not tighten them up now .
Today 's debate is meant to answer the fundamental question of whether we can change the criteria for further enlargements as current needs and expectations dictate .
I do not think that we can .
I believe that we are bound by the principle of keeping our word , of upholding agreements and the ancient Roman principle of ' pacta servanta sum ' .
That is why the so-called absorption capacity cannot suddenly appear as a criterion used to block access to the European Union for countries which have fulfilled the Copenhagen criteria .
All successive enlargements have strengthened the Union , and have favoured its growth .
However , these enlargements had to be well planned .
I think that only a European constitution will make it possible to ensure that further enlargements are well planned .

Mr President , I agree with Mrs Lehtomäki that enlargement has to continue as an open process because , in defiance of many warnings and fears , all previous enlargements have turned out to be a big success for the EU as a whole .
It has been , and will continue to be , a win-win process for all the players involved .
Mr Stubb was right to remind us that every new round of enlargement has forced the EU , in a most positive way , to deepen its internal preparedness through new reforms .
The message today is that the Nice basis is no longer sufficient for a new enlargement round .
There is no alternative to the adoption of the Constitutional Treaty and applying it in practice .
However , the integration capacity is not to be seen as an additional criterion for the new applicants .
It should be seen as an internal commitment to make maximum efforts to achieve the necessary new quality of our cohesion .
The EU should not send the wrong signal that we will close our doors to new applicants .
Every European nation is entitled to join the EU and is entitled to be treated not as a guest , but as a potential and welcome member of this ever-growing family .
Therefore , we need to show maximum openness to the interested nations , including Mr Milinkevich 's home country .
Finally , enlargement is not only about the budgets and institutions .
There is a huge undercurrent of popular opinions , fears and prejudices .
This is popular psychology into which the Constitutional Treaty has tumbled .
Therefore , we need openly to address these needs and fears by stimulating frank and friendly debate between old and new Member States on our different and historic cultural experiences .
My experience is that these fears and prejudices are actually very similar , and that most of them prove to be unfounded .
There is a huge reserve of popular support for the Constitutional Treaty .
Mr President , finally there has been no collision of trains !
The Government of Cyprus has agreed with its partners to the so-called ' delay ' of Turkey 's train .
Let us not fool ourselves .
We are not supposed to open most of the suspended chapters anyhow as it will take some years to gather the benchmarks and closing a chapter is a formality - it means nothing once all the other work has been completed .
As to the reviews , these take place every year anyhow .
Cyprus has often been overplayed as the reason for the collision of the trains .
Now , it is essentially out of the way .
The European Union is free to see reality face to face .
Turkey has ignored and still declares that it will ignore its obligations concerning its Customs Union agreement , an obligation that existed well before the issue of the so-called isolation of the Turkish Cypriots .
The real questions are now in front of us : freedom of expression , freedom of religious minorities , the human rights record in southern Turkey , treatment of women , the issues of corruption , the intervention of the military in government and judiciary affairs .
Only two days ago , General Buyukanit admonished the Erdogan Government for not getting his permission for what finally proved to be a conditional opening of one port to Cypriot ships .
Some say that we should not see Turkey as it is today .
Think of how Turkey will be in 15 years ' time !
Turkey has given us some idea as to its will to become a true European democracy .
It knows how to get away with it !
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I absolutely share the concerns of numerous European citizens who wish , before there is any further enlargement , for the institutional problems to be resolved .
It is senseless for us to want to function satisfactorily with 27 members with rules which applied when there were 9 , 10 or 15 members in the Union .
Unfortunately , the Constitutional Treaty , which contained numerous positive elements , was not accepted by two nations .
Since then the matter has been on ice .
I am delighted that Chancellor Merckel has expressed her intention to table proposals on the procedure and timetable for resolving the problem .
However , I believe that , at this stage , we must aim to settle a limited number of issues , which are nonetheless important to the smooth functioning of the Union , such as the creation of the position of Minister of Foreign Affairs and President of the Union , a reduction in the number of Commissioners , an increase in the responsibilities of the European Parliament , a reduction to the minimum in the need for unanimity in the method for passing decisions in the Council , the legal personality of the European Union , the abolition of the system of three pillars and strengthening the institution of reinforced cooperation between the Member States and wherever else it is considered necessary to efficient functioning .
I wonder , though , how many of the Member States , old and new , will overcome their internal pettifogging and set as the sovereign objective the smooth functioning and efficiency of the Europe of the 27 Member States .
In all events , I believe , to close , that if we do not make the Union operational , there is no point in debating further enlargement .
( PL ) Mr President , anyone who is fortunate enough to be a citizen of the European Union would be committing a mortal sin by suggesting closing this door of opportunity to others who want it .
The question of limiting enlargement is ridiculous .
It is like putting limits on freedom or to democracy .
Today 's discussion has shown that we view the capacity for and effects of enlargement largely from the perspective of the European Union 's internal situation .
We talk about the need for far-reaching reforms , and quite rightly , as we cannot afford to be weak if we want to achieve success .
The reforms are necessary , but they need to follow a diagnosis of the situation and a carefully thought-out programme of improvements .
I think it would be a good idea to internally restructure the work of the European Commission .
If today we have twenty-seven Commissioners deciding on the scope of their portfolios , then perhaps it might be sensible to appoint two or three Commissioners who would be responsible for analysing the situation in the European Union and preparing the reform programme in such a way as to ensure that we are capable of further enlargement .
However , we cannot view this capability solely through an internal perspective .
We must remember what the citizens of the countries aspiring to join us think of the European Union and of potential European Union membership .
My own personal experiences of work in delegations with countries of the Southern Caucasus , as well as Moldova and Ukraine , have shown that ordinary people there do not believe that they will get instant membership , but they do want to be sure that the door has not been slammed shut .
They are prepared to wait twenty or even thirty years for the chance to join us .
This is a door of opportunity we cannot close to them .
The EU 's information policy should clearly state what the EU is about , what its aims are and what it means to be a member of the European Union .
We must not forget this .
Mr President , the smooth successive waves of EU enlargement are a magnificent achievement of the EU .
The fifth wave , which enlarged the Union to 25 Member States two years ago , has actually been a great success , in spite of warnings that the Union would be paralysed without a constitution and that countries such as my own would suffer unsustainable immigration flows , including from the Roma population .
Regrettably , the Brok report seeks again to link further enlargement to the absolute need for an EU Constitution , whereas British Conservatives , whom I represent , would argue that this is not the case and that what we really need are Treaty adjustments , via an amended Nice Treaty , to reflect the new voting strength in the Council , the number of MEPs and Commissioners , after the expected relatively painless accession of Croatia in the next couple of years .
I am of the personal opinion that we now also need to look seriously at the top-heavy Commission .
However , I believe we should not rotate Commissioners absolutely equally amongst all Member States , but some mathematical formula must be found to preserve , at least in a semi-permanent presence , the Commissioners of the big Member States - but I know this is controversial .
The new Member States have , broadly speaking , been more Atlanticist : they believe in freer markets and competitive rates of low taxation , which is an approach I welcome .
I believe that the accession of Romania and Bulgaria on 1 January 2007 will also prove to be a great success .
As rapporteur , I believe that the European Neighbourhood Policy must be split into a southern EuroMed dimension through the Barcelona Process and a new eastern concept of an enhanced free-trade and visa-facilitated EU-Black Sea community to further strengthen our ties with European countries such as Ukraine , Moldova and the three Caucus republics .
I call on the Member States to inform Moldova and Ukraine that they are in the longer term entitled , in my view , in the same way as all the countries in the Western Balkans are entitled , to become potential candidates for EU membership .
( DE ) Mr President , the vision of a Europe united and at peace was born , as we know , in the ruins shortly after the end of the Second World War , and it has been further worked on and developed ever since .
In much the same way as a conglomerate 's headlong expansion can put its workforce under intolerable strain , the EU and its own people have parted company , and I do not believe that the acceptance that has been lost will be won back by PR campaigns when what matters more is that existing problems - such as jobs , globalisation , terrorism , crime and refugees - be resolved .
Nor , indeed , do I regard the worries about the EU 's integration capacity as anything more than another sedative intended to take people 's minds off the delusions about enlargement that we already have .
Up to now , we have insisted only on the applicants fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria , while the question as to whether the EU itself could achieve the goals of cohesion and integration was treated as unimportant .
If we are to be able to cope with the feeling of dealing with something incomprehensible and boundless , we need not only to impose geographical limits , but also to become clear in our own minds just how much in the way of social and cultural differences the EU can handle , and I do believe that the policy of unhindered immigration over recent years means that we are dealing with far more people than we stand any chance of integrating .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I wish to thank everyone for this diverse , wide-ranging and constructive debate .
Although there seem to be certain areas of disagreement , a fairly strong common attitude is discernible in Parliament .
It is very clear that , for enlargement to succeed , we have to ensure that the Union develops internally and that it remains able to function in all situations .
This is a key element in integration capacity and , as was stated in this debate , the European Union needs to do its homework .
As for the enlargement processes and negotiations under way , we should remember that the homework has not been done with regard to the latest processes either .
On Monday the Council reached political consensus on the objective of enhancing economic development in North Cyprus as quickly as possible and even earlier , especially given the decisions taken in April 2004 .
The other aspect of enlargement and the other responsible party is obviously the candidate countries and those interested in membership of the European Union , and they must fulfil the EU membership criteria .
The extent to which they do this needs to be judged very objectively and , if need be , critically too , and we naturally have confidence in the very worthy Commission , its willingness and its ability to carry out this assessment .
This is certainly a good way to proceed , in order that prospects of membership increase on the basis of progress made , and not that dates agreed beforehand define when membership is to be finalised .
Much has been said in this debate about the Constitutional Treaty and its future .
We all share the view that the Constitution contains plenty of elements that are important for improving the Union 's integration capacity .
We nevertheless have to bear in mind that the Constitutional Treaty , or reform of the Union , is not needed for the sake of enlargement : it is needed to improve the Union 's present situation and ability to function .
It is also important to remember that we cannot entrust the Union 's ability to function solely to the Constitutional Treaty .
Treaties are , after all , just a tool to implement European Union policy .
Without the political will and commitment to the common European project , not even the best treaties can yield the desired result .
In other words , above all we need commitment to , and the will to accept , a common process , and if the will is there then the reform of the treaties is certainly possible .
Neighbourhood policy is linked to enlargement of the Union in a certain way , but that is also an important policy area in itself , and so cannot be seen as a substitute for enlargement .
It is obvious that at least the countries interested in joining the EU will not accept a neighbourhood policy to compensate for or take the place of the prospect of EU membership .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we will be discussing this week 's European Council and its agenda later on this afternoon , and I am quite sure that in that debate we will also return to those topics that have already been considered this morning .
Mr President , I want to thank you for this very substantive and responsible debate which is so important for the future of Europe .
This is a very encouraging debate .
You may recall that in my introduction I said that in Europe we have two discourses that do not often meet : one emphasising the strategic significance of enlargement and the other emphasising only our integration capacity .
This debate is encouraging because if you were able to forge a common position starting from the first drafts of the twins - who are not quite identical twins in terms of enlargement strategy - then the European Council should certainly be able to forge a renewed consensus on enlargement that respects both the strategic value of enlargement and our capacity to integrate new members .
Points were made concerning the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Indeed the Commission 's report of 8 November outlines that not all European countries are engaged in the enlargement process .
In fact , the European Union has established a variety of relationships with other European countries .
We have a comprehensive structure of bilateral agreements with Switzerland ; we have the European Economic Area , which is a very far-reaching arrangement of economic integration ; and we have the European Neighbourhood Policy .
With regard to the European Neighbourhood Policy , the Commission considers that our recent communication on strengthening the European Neighbourhood Policy largely responds to the expectations of Parliament .
The ENP is distinct from and parallel to the process of EU enlargement .
At the same time the European Neighbourhood Policy does not prejudge the future development of those countries ' relationships with the European Union , in accordance with our Treaty provisions .
There were some suggestions that cultural criteria should be added to the Copenhagen criteria .
I can tell you that the Commission is not in favour of that proposal .
I should like to conclude by referring to some reflections of the sociologist and philosopher Ulrich Beck in yesterday 's Le Monde .
He interpreted the Pope 's recent visit to Turkey .
Here we have a respected sociologist interpreting the actions of a respected spiritual leader .
( FR ) Mr President , I am going to continue in French , and I quote , ' Europe 's miracle is that it has learnt from history : make neighbours of enemies ; that is the soul of Europe .
And maybe that is why the Pope , recognising the universal historical importance of compromise between Christians and Muslims , argues for Turkey 's EU membership - in short , for the ongoing Europeanisation of Turkey ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , those are wise words that deserve to be reflected on during Christmas and the new year .
( Applause )
Thank you , Commissioner , for that conclusion in French .
As for the rest , each of us will judge the content of the speech , which I , for my part , found interesting .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed for voting time at 12.05 p.m. )

Written statement ( Rule 142 )
Following the reaffirmation of the commitment to full implementation of the Thessaloniki agenda and of the intention to honour the existing commitments made to the candidate and potential candidate countries with regard to future enlargement , we still have to ensure that the Union is able to function .
By integrating new Member States , the Union has to face the consequent political , financial and institutional challenges it implies .
The Treaty of Nice does not provide an adequate basis for further enlargements , whereas the constitution offers solutions to most of the reforms needed and constitutes a tangible expression of the deepening enlargement relationship .
This is why it is necessary to settle the constitutional settlement before 2009 EP elections .
Reforms are necessary before any further enlargement takes place .
The enlargement process is a process that spreads democracy and wealth further across the European continent and beyond .
We therefore bear a responsibility towards our neighbourhood and particularly towards candidate and potential candidate countries .
Finally , while addressing the question of the Union 's " absorption capacity " , we share the point of view of the rapporteur who prefers the positive concept of " integration capacity " .
Membership of political groups : see Minutes
Agenda : see Minutes

I must also inform you that , with regard to Mr Leinen 's report on the amendment of Rules 15 and 182 ( 1 ) of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure : Election of Quaestors and the Bureau of committees , the vote on which was scheduled for tomorrow , Thursday , in the end the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has not approved it pursuant to Rule 131 , and we will therefore hold a debate on it as the final item of tonight 's sitting .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I understand the need for security , but I must complain about the discourteous attitude and , frankly , even violent behaviour with which some security agents stopped us Members and barred our way outside this Chamber .
That is utterly unacceptable .
I understand the reasons for security , but I do think that there needs to be courtesy and respect for our roles on both sides .
The Secretary-General informs me that we have problems with certain auxiliaries who are involved in an emerging dispute .
The security officers are trying to ensure that everything takes place in its normal fashion , but we are facing difficulties as a result of the attitude of certain contracted workers who are affected by industrial arrangements .
( PL ) Mr President , yesterday was a great occasion for the European Parliament .
It was a very important day for us , as the Sakharov Prize was awarded to Mr Alexander Milinkevich .
I would like to tell you that when Mr Alexander Milinkevich began his speech here at the European Parliament , the internal broadcasting system in the European Parliament buildings failed , as did the Internet transmission system .
In Belarus the Internet was the only way to hear the speech .
This meant there was no access to the speech and , as a result , the citizens of Belarus received no news of what happened here last night .
I would like to ask the President to investigate the reasons for this incident and to inform the House of his findings .
( Applause )
Mr Zwiefka , my intention was to give the floor to Mr Florenz .
You are not raising a point of order relating to today 's sitting .
( Protests )
Nevertheless , it is an important issue and I can tell you that the problem that you are referring to is also caused by alterations to the way the services are operating resulting from the industrial conflict that we are facing with certain session auxiliaries .
This problem has shown itself in the manner described by the previous speaker .
The picture was restored as soon as possible and at the press conference I was able to explain what had happened to the media , which had expressed the same concern as you .
Announcement by the President
I feel obliged to express my concern , and that of the whole of Parliament , I imagine , at the Conference on the Holocaust held in Teheran on 11 and 12 December .
( Loud applause )
On behalf of the plenary of the European Parliament , I would urge the Iranian Government to do what it must to prevent any act of anti-Semitism , racism , xenophobia , discrimination or denial of historical events and their victims .
( Applause )
1 .
European Chemicals Agency ( REACH ) ( vote )
- Before the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , with the significance of the following votes and the extent of REACH in mind - for 5 000 amendments to it were tabled over the past five years , and the document currently contains 1 000 of them - I would just like to make two brief points .
The first is that I would like to extend very warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , and to the shadow rapporteurs , for the work they have done , which was a massive job to tackle , and they did it splendidly , so my heartfelt thanks for that .


( Applause )
That , Mr President , promptly brings me to my second point , which is to ask just what has emerged from the trilogue .
We met with the Finnish Presidency of the Council on five occasions ; the meetings were not always totally straightforward , and they were once briefly interrupted .
What came out of them is before you today in the shape of Amendment 191 , which is at the heart of what today 's vote is about , and , for the sake of a compromise into which this House has put so much of itself , in a way it never will again , I urge you to vote in favour of it .
To our friends in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance I will say that the other amendments will lapse or must not be allowed to jeopardise this important and valuable compromise .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make it clear first of all that I am sitting in this seat not because there has been a ' palace coup ' within the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , but for logistical reasons , to make it easier to give voting instructions .
Mr Florenz , the committee chairman , has already mentioned the essential points about the content and the difficulty in reaching the outcome that we achieved in the agreement with the Finnish Presidency .
It is now my job to say that this outcome is like a fresco painted by a team of artists : many people have been involved - I recall that ten parliamentary committees have worked on it .
In particular , two committees have cooperated very closely with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
I therefore thank Mrs Ek and Mr Nassauer , the draftsmen for those two committees .
Then I thank all the shadow rapporteurs in the Committee on the Environment : Ria Oomen-Ruijten , Chris Davies , Carl Schlyter and Caroline Lucas , Jens Holm , Johannes Blokland and Alessandro Foglietta , as well as the secretaries of the committees and political groups .
We have encountered five presidencies ; the British Presidency at first reading and now the Finnish Presidency have played particularly decisive roles .
We have also got to know a number of Commissioners , because REACH was launched during the previous parliamentary term .
The Commissioners responsible then were Mr Likanen and Mrs Wallström , and now they are Mr Verheugen and Mr Dimas .

We have therefore seen many things , had a great many opportunities for discussion , and distilled all that work into today 's conclusion .
I have not the slightest doubt that this Parliament 's sense of responsibility will confirm our decisions and at last make it possible to send out a strong message to Europe 's citizens : REACH will be up and running on 1 June 2007 .
Some may say that the result of all this is not a brilliant product , but in the meantime it will start operating , and I am sure that it will produce highly significant results for people 's safety , for health , for the environment and , not least , for the competitiveness of European industry .
( Applause )
- Following the approval of option 1 :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this excellent result , for which I thank this House , will now be followed by a series of amendments not covered by the compromise .
I will agree with many of the amendments , but it is quite clear that voting for and adopting them would mean forcing us to go through conciliation for the sake of some marginal points , and that would really be the wrong thing to do , as it would put back the application of the regulation .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on a point of order , I should like to point out to the Chamber that , in respect of this debate , two speeches have been made in which voting instructions have been given during the vote .
Please , this is a sensitive moment , and the positions of those who are going to vote in favour of the amendments , for example , should also be respected .
( Applause )
- Before the vote on Amendments 176 and 178 :
( SV ) Mr President , the rapporteur said that there will be conciliation if these amendments are adopted .
We do not know this for a fact , however .
If we approve the amendments , the Council may well accept them , but we will not know this until COREPER has made a decision .
There is thus no automatic link between adopting the amendments and conciliation .
( Applause )
- Before the vote on the common position :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should just like to say thank you once again .
In this House today , I think that Europe ' batte un colpo ' , as we say in Italian : it has scored a victory on a very sensitive subject for the people and for the companies involved .
( Applause )
2 .
Amendment of Directive 67 / 548 / EEC on dangerous substances ( REACH ) ( vote )
3 .
Inclusion of Bulgarian and Romanian among the languages of procedure for the Court of Justice ( vote )
4 .
Inclusion of Bulgarian and Romanian among the languages of procedure for the Court of First Instance ( vote )
5 .
European Year of Intercultural Dialogue ( 2008 ) ( vote )
6 .
Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities ( vote )
7 .
Draft amending budget No 6 / 2006 ( vote )
8 .
Coordination of certain of the Member States ' provisions on television broadcasting ( vote )
- After the vote on Amendment 167 :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I shall speak very briefly , since I have only a point about the translation to make .
In order to avoid misunderstandings in the translation of the term ' production aid ' and to relate it explicitly to the German original term Produktionshilfen , I ask for a linguistic clarification to the effect that , where the words ' production aid ' are used in the text , they should , in the English version , be replaced by the term ' production props ' , and rendered in the French one by aide matérielle à la production , and in German by Produktionshilfen .
( The oral amendment was adopted )

( FR ) Mr President , allow me to table a procedural motion : as is inevitably the case , there are many small problems , many slight contradictions between language versions in this text .
I support what Mrs Hieronymi just said : that we did not want to raise these problems .
We believe that , in such an important debate as this , the vote must be as simple as possible .
I would like it , instead , if , when the Commission hands over this text to the Council , these linguistic contradictions were removed : that is why I would like them to be recorded in our Minutes and to be taken into account , because every word counts in such an important matter as this .
- Before the vote on Amendment 160 :
Mr President , I rise on a point of order under Rule 166 , on the question of admissibility of an amendment under Rule 151 ( 3 ) .

It concerns Amendment 160 , tabled by Mr Wise on behalf of the IND / DEM Group , which calls for a massive extension of budgetary powers into areas of Member State sovereignty , namely : ' Member States ' governments and institutions or the EU shall pay for those social policy information campaigns ... ' .
Could you advise on this amendment 's admissibility in the light of this massive extension of EU powers ?
( Laughter and applause )
- Before the vote on Amendment 219 :
Mr President , I may be completely wrong , but I do not think we have voted on the original text of recital 44 .
We have voted on Amendment 44 , and the original text has in fact been accepted .
9 .
Establishing the European Globalisation adjustment Fund ( vote )
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I wish to inform you and the House that , owing to the agreement with the Council on the globalisation fund , all seven amendments tabled by the PPE-DE Group have been withdrawn , which will make the vote shorter .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor .
It goes without saying that I am grateful to Mr Lewandowski for having withdrawn the amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgets : that is going to make our task much easier .
We are on the eve of an agreement at first reading , and this will be a triple victory : a victory for European workers , a victory for the proper functioning of our institutions and , I believe , a victory over ourselves , because we will have been able to overcome our political and national divisions .
10 .
Type approval of motor vehicles with respect to emissions and access to vehicle repair information ( vote )
11 .
Financial contributions to the International Fund for Ireland ( 2007-2010 ) ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I wish to thank the members of the Committee on Regional Development for the support they have given to this report .
I also wish to thank the Secretariat for its input .
Nothing I can say can adequately express the gratitude that the Irish people on both sides of the border feel for the investment that Europe has made for the economic regeneration of Northern Ireland , the border counties in the Irish Republic and the Northern Ireland Peace Process .
To date the International Fund for Ireland has contributed EUR 803 million of funding and has leveraged a further EUR 1.46 billion in supporting 5700 projects and the creation of 55 000 direct and indirect jobs .
It is has also played a crucial role in easing sectarian tensions and bridging the divisions between the two traditions on the island .
The guns are now hopefully permanently silent and the economies of Northern Ireland and the border counties of the south are beginning to realise their true economic potential .
This will be the last time that we will ask the EU for funding for this programme , as the International Fund will cease in 2010 .
We have had many false dawns in the past regarding the permanent political solution in Northern Ireland .
However , my Irish colleagues and I are confident that we are , at long last , on the brink of a lasting solution and that a devolved government will soon become a reality for the long term .
( The President cut off the speaker )
12 .
Banana sector ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 22 :
( PT ) Mr President , I should like to table an oral amendment to Amendment 22 .
In the original French , the phrase ' est subordiné ' should read ' devrait être subordiné ' .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
13 .
VAT arrangements for radio and television broadcasting and other services ( vote )
14 .
Legislative and work programme of the Commission for 2007 ( vote )
15 .
Russia-EU Summit ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 6 :
Mr President , I wish to point out that Amendment 9 , tabled by the PPE-DE Group , is not contradictory to my own Amendment 6 and therefore I should like to ask you to put both amendments to the vote separately .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
1 .
Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2006-2007 ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 29 :

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I propose that we should adopt Amendment 29 , but also incorporate an element from the original text , so that it would end up - as an addition to the Socialist amendment - reading : ' which make up the European identity ' as a combination of both drafts .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 16 :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , we have to adapt our text to take account of the latest developments in the negotiations on Turkey .
We have tried to take the Socialist Group 's Amendment 16 as a basis for this , and have put it into a form corresponding to the facts of the situation since Monday 's Council of Foreign Ministers .
Although you have the amendment in printed form , I can read it out if you wish .
The rapporteur and the author of the amendment are agreed on this .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 17 :
( EL ) Mr President , in Amendment 17 tabled by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I wish to change the term ' Northern Cyprus ' to the term ' Turkish Cypriot Community ' .
I discussed this with Mr Swoboda this morning and , as far as I understood , he accepts it .
( The oral amendment was adopted )

Mr President , this is not an objection to Mr Dimitrakopoulos ' proposal , but I would like to add some other words to the same oral amendment .
After this morning 's debate , and after the Council last Monday expressed its support for the renewed UN efforts to solve the Cyprus problem , I would like to add the following words to the oral amendment made by Mr Dimitrakopoulos : ' in close cooperation with renewed UN efforts ' .
( Applause )
( The oral amendment was adopted )
2 .
The institutional aspects of the European Union 's capacity to integrate new Member States ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 8 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , on Amendment 8 which has been tabled by the PSE Group , the version we will follow is the French original language version which refers to the ' Lisbon Strategy ' .
The English version talks about the ' social model ' , and of course the PSE Group did not mean that .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
That concludes the vote .
Implementation of Directive 85 / 611 / EEC ( undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities ) ( vote )
Explanations of vote
in writing . ( SV ) We are choosing to support the compromise that has been put forward as it represents a clear improvement on the existing legislation on chemicals .
Furthermore , it is our opinion that conciliation would have been risky , since we believe it likely that this would have resulted in a weaker REACH .
in writing . ( SV ) I abstained in today 's vote on the second reading of REACH .
I did so because I cannot support the dilutions of Parliament 's position , as adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in October , that the Council has forced .
My criticism of the agreement revolves around three main points , which are as follows :
The substitution principle does not apply to all chemicals .
Instead , many chemicals , including carcinogenic substances , will continue to be exempted from the requirement for substitution , providing that they are ' properly controlled ' .
The right to information is being watered down in that it covers fewer chemicals and will apply to concentrations higher than those deemed desirable by Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
The principle of responsibility is not being included in the actual body of the legislative text but is instead being pushed out to the preamble .
This is serious , especially for the many chemicals with little or no associated information requirement .
My abstention is not a failure but , rather , represents the laying down of a marker of my dissatisfaction with the Council 's position .
I do not , however , wish to aim any criticism at the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi .
On the contrary , I would like to congratulate him most warmly for his splendid work on a difficult issue over a long period of time .
Today 's vote paves the way for REACH to enter into force at the beginning of the second half of 2007 .
My work , and that of many others , to improve this legislation further starts now .
in writing . - ( FR ) With today 's vote , the EU has provided itself with a text , the scope of which is far from achieving the desired objectives .
The project was ambitious : to adopt legislation that will enable chemical substances to be registered and evaluated , with an obligation to substitute dangerous products with a less harmful alternative , where one exists .
This project has not withstood the pressure of certain lobbies from the chemical industry , strongly supported as it is within the European Parliament , which preferred to invoke economic constraints over environmental and public health protection in order to obtain less binding legislation , particularly on substitution .
I also regret the exclusion of endocrine disruptors from the substitution procedure and the fact that the chemical safety report should not be compulsory for substances weighing between one and ten tonnes .
The concluded agreement is inadequate , but to reject it would mean running the risk of starting the conciliation procedure and of ending up with a completely meaningless text .
As inadequate as it certainly is , this legislation does exist , and on the strength of that alone , it is well worth our getting more involved in terms of demanding financial and human resources to apply this legislation , to take it forward and to guarantee substitution on a very gradual basis .
We abstained from the vote on the compromise arising from an agreement between the two largest groups in Parliament - the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group in Parliament - because we feel that it does not meet the legitimate rights and concerns of the consumers and of small and medium-sized enterprises as regards protecting workers and the environment .
We believe that it does not strike the necessary balance between protecting workers ' health , protecting the environment and industrial development .
Indeed , the rights of consumers have not been duly safeguarded , owing to the restrictions on the right to information ; nor have the workers ' right to good health been safeguarded , given that information is not made available on the potentially harmful effects of the materials they handle .
Furthermore , the report does not take proper account of micro , small and medium-sized enterprises , and even large companies that have already expressed a wish to replace dangerous chemicals , given that the cost of registering substances will inevitably rise , without suitable support provided .
That being said , we welcome the fact that the burden of proof has shifted onto industry . This objective , which has now been achieved , underpinned the REACH objectives .
We regret , however , that some amendments tabled by our group were not accepted , including the possibility of Member States introducing more stringent measures should they wish to .
The text submitted to today 's vote puts an end to seven long years of work and heated debates between , on the one hand , supporters of the chemical industry , who have persisted in overusing arguments of competitiveness and employment in order to maintain the status quo , guaranteeing , as it does , their own financial interests , and , on the other hand , European officials , who were anxious to come up with responsible legislation aimed at protecting Europeans from the perils of the dangerous chemical substances found in staple goods .
Of course , as is often the case , the outcome does not fully meet our demands .
Proof of this is the number of goods covered by the REACH regulation - only 30 000 out of the 100 000 desired .
Significant progress has been made , however , if we consider in particular the fact that only 3 000 substances are today being studied , and that it will be up to the chemical industry from now on to assume the burden of proof concerning the toxicity of substances , that is , to demonstrate that they are not harmful to humans .
In the end , thanks to the pugnacity of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , the European Union will have the world 's most binding legislation on this matter .
That is why I emphatically endorsed the adoption of this text at second reading .
in writing . - ( FR ) I supported Mr Sacconi 's compromise on REACH because it represents a big step forward for consumers , workers from the sector and even for the industry which , by adapting itself , is going to become the world leader in safer chemical substances .
Admittedly , REACH remains slightly too bureaucratic and does not always take account of the interests of medium-sized and , above all , small enterprises , which make Europe strong .
We need to make sure that neither the Commission nor the Agency give way to a precautionary principle that prevents any risks and any decisions from being taken , and that REACH - which is , in any case , a process stretching over 11 years - is intelligently implemented , which amounts to saying that we need to limit what are , essentially , useless studies and cumbersome procedures .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List works to limit EU cooperation to truly cross-border matters .
Such mattes include the internal market and various environmental issues .
We are convinced of the fact that a strong chemicals directive would constitute a long-term competitive advantage for Swedish and European industry .
We are therefore critical of the watered-down compromise put forward by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Under the compromise , the substitution principle has been practically eliminated .
Nor is there any legally binding principle of responsibility that would make it clear that the burden of proof is to be on companies , rather than on the authorities of the Member States .
The demand for the Member States to be able to adopt more far-reaching chemicals legislation has likewise failed to win approval .
This compromise may be a victory for those in the chemicals industry that are behind the times , but it is a defeat for modern and progressive companies , for public health and for our shared environment .
We have voted against this majority compromise on the strength of the views set out above .
We have voted to support the more environmentally friendly alternative , which is to say the compromise package put forward by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
in writing . - ( FR ) REACH is an extremely important step in terms of the EU 's chemical policy .
The reversal of the duty of care principle , which shifts from the public authorities to industry and manufacturers , is a phenomenal revolution for the entire sector .
One cannot underestimate , either , the tremendous gain in knowledge that will result from the registration , evaluation and authorisation process .
This gain in knowledge will have consequences for industry as a whole and for our means of preserving humankind and the environment .
The only remaining big regret is that the principle of substitution for ' extremely worrying ' chemical substances will not be as binding as one might have wished .
Let us hope that , in the near future , this principle will be taken up and accepted by the two European co-legislators and that we will not have to wait 20 years for that , as we have done for this directive .
To have rejected the entire REACH legislation because of this regret would have been like throwing the baby out with the bathwater , and that would certainly not have led to better legislation in the short or medium term .
I call on the future agency to remain pragmatic in its attitude towards certain well-known substances - such as lime , for example - the use of which does not , in principle , present any problems .
in writing . - ( FR ) This agreement on REACH will enable us to better protect health and the environment , and our European industry will have to become more responsible while remaining competitive in the world market .
The adopted text includes a number of important improvements : a reduction in red tape , a reduction in useless tests , better protection for businesses ' confidential information and the introduction of a compulsory substitution plan .
This regulation is going to enable legislation to be made clearer : the chemicals sector is currently subject to around 40 European directives .
This regulation is going to enable the European Chemicals Agency to register more than 30 000 chemical substances over the next 11 years .
I do , however , regret that a long-lasting solution should not have been found to the problem of imports from third countries .
Indeed , European importers of chemicals must register them , under a procedure subject to REACH .
The problem really lies in the importing of finished goods , the substances contained in which will simply be notified .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is very important for the European Union to have a harmonised system for registering , authorising and controlling chemical substances .
One Member State on its own cannot establish an effective system .
This system must make it possible , on the one hand , to reduce the risks to our health and our environment , and , on the other hand , to promote innovation and support for economic activities that are non-polluting .
The compromise voted on today successfully rises to the challenge of an ambitious piece of legislation , the principal aim of which is to create an effective system for protecting individuals , without hindering economic development .
in writing . I supported the initiative by my group and other members , which was a compromise that would have preserved the best of the REACH proposal whilst answering many of the concerns of business .
As things stand the new legislation is full of loopholes and exemptions and my concern is that this will allow the use of toxic chemicals in manufacturing to continue , even when safer alternatives exist .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am not thrilled , and I would have preferred a different version of this text , which remains a real bureaucratic monster , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises .
While the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the left are strongly criticising me and are going as far as to claim that I am defending the chemical industry at the expense of public health , the chemical industry and , above all , the small and medium-sized enterprises in this sector are accusing us of imposing legislation on them that is costly and difficult to manage , which could lead to large businesses relocating outside Europe and which is liable , above all , to threaten the survival of SMEs .
Some chemical substances , like some of the 130 substances used in the manufacturing of tyres , might no longer be able to be used in Europe , with the result that they would be integrated into finished goods imported from third countries , thus escaping all checks .
An overly perfect REACH is therefore just as dangerous as an extreme REACH because it would be liable to do away with thousands of jobs in Europe without , for all that , helping to improve public health .
One advantage of REACH is that this regulation combines 40 existing directives , which is an improvement geared towards promoting the single market .
The REACH issue is one of the most talked about and lobbied issues in the history of the EU .
Both industry and environmental organisations have already taken a critical view of the result .
Nevertheless , I regard the compromise between the Council and Parliament as viable and balanced .
The agreement that has been reached strikes the right balance between economic interests and care for the environment .
Harmful substances must , where possible , be banned , and I am all for industry making funds for this purpose available , as long as the burden - particularly on small and medium-sized enterprises - is not too heavy .
The directive provides for this by encouraging the replacement of harmful substances by alternatives and by supporting the SMEs when adaptations are made in line with the updated rules and regulations .
With fewer animal tests and better information for the consumer , the directive is a step in the right direction .
Once the dust has cleared , I am convinced that many opponents will gradually come round to showing their support for the directive .
in writing .
( DE ) SMEs and those who work for them cannot be satisfied with everything in the REACH compromise , which incorporates neither Parliament 's proposal for less stringent testing where small quantities are involved , nor the concept of better-defined categories of exposure and use , the consequence of which is that the EU is imposing considerable costs on businesses and making them less competitive .
Despite these considerable defects , I have voted in favour of the compromise , since it also bears the stamp of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , the opinion of which I drafted , and on the grounds that the new directive creates Europe-wide legal certainty by replacing forty individual regulations , considerably improves information on 30 000 substances , and reduces to a minimum the safety risks for consumers and workers in the chemical industry .
The introduction of a safety report for substances produced in quantities of less than ten tonnes annually has been dispensed with , thereby freeing SMEs in particular from the substantial cost and effort involved in documentation .
There has been a marked improvement in the protection of industrial confidentiality , and it is possible for particularly hazardous substances to be permitted without a time limit , thereby avoiding bottlenecks in supply ; the extension of the registration deadline for the first stage to three and a half years is another tangible relief for the chemicals industry .



The directive is due to enter into force in 2007 , and the success of its transposition depends on good cooperation between the central chemical agency , the national authorities , and businesses .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am delighted to be able to highlight the success of the trialogue . Despite its barbarous name , it succeeded in finding an honourable solution to the issue of registering chemical substances , as regards both safeguarding consumers ' health and protecting the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises .
I hope that the compromise reached last week will be approved by this Chamber , thus concluding the work done over three years to bring the 40 existing pieces of legislation together into a single regulation .
I am grateful to my fellow Members for accepting some amendments tabled by my group to protect small and medium-sized enterprises and animal welfare .
The complexity of the regulation means , amongst other things , that safety assessments will be carried out on about 30 000 substances placed on the marked before 1981 and produced or imported in amounts exceeding one tonne per year .
That prospect is a further guarantee to safeguard human health .
Despite the considerable number of new provisions , many application-related aspects have yet to be settled in order to make it feasible for REACH to be properly implemented in certain sectors , such as cosmetics , for instance .
A great many points have been the subject of debate , as shown by the hundreds of amendments examined , but the end result is , in my view , very well balanced .
For that reason , too , I have voted in favour of the final compromise .
It has taken five years but the EU appears finally ready to pass a law on this important issue .
Given that so much time has passed , it is essential we vote for a compromise , even if we may not support it in its entirety .
This is particularly important , given that what has effectively been achieved here is a tricky , yet vital , balance between protecting the consumers ' various interests , protecting the needs of European industry ( which , in addition to employing thousands of Europeans , is crucial to the competitiveness of our economy ) and protecting the environment .
Otherwise , if in doubt , we must follow the consumers ' interests , because it is vital to them that a competitive industry can be maintained whilst protecting the environment .
We therefore voted in favour of this report .
I have one other comment , however , which is that five years is too long .
We sometimes waste time on issues that do not carry the same weight and significance as this one , and we are sometimes left without time to commit ourselves to what is most important to our economy .
We should be mindful of this , I believe , when we discuss the EU 's problems .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the compromise reached with the Council on 30 November concerning REACH , following in the footsteps of the three large political groups ( the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ) .
I did this so that our fellow citizens might quickly have legislation - the entry into force of which is scheduled for 1 April 2007 - controlling the use of chemical substances in our staple goods .
Admittedly , this compromise is less ambitious than the one to which I aspired in taking a stand , at first reading , in favour of the compulsory substitution of ' extremely worrying ' chemical substances where safer alternatives exist .
Nevertheless , as the fruit of three years of preparation and of difficult negotiations , this compromise represents a weak , but necessary , balance between the need for health and environmental protection and the competitiveness of businesses .
I hope , however , that the framework provided by REACH will make it possible , in spite of everything , for the substitution process to be genuinely recognised , even if , in practice , a high number of toxic substances are going to slip through the net .
It is the act of monitoring and controlling the implementation of this regulation that will help to consolidate a stronger version of REACH .
in writing . - ( FR ) We voted against the REACH regulation on chemical substances at first reading , in the belief that the adopted amendments would not make it possible to maintain the balance struck between the three objectives of this regulation : health and environmental protection ; competitiveness and innovation ; and the substitution of dangerous substances with less harmful or innocuous alternatives .
The compromise proposed to us today is not a great deal more balanced .
Admittedly , it includes some significant advances , as many speakers pointed out during the debate : simplified registrations ; a more practical approach ; and some , albeit insufficient , progress for SMEs , for example .
However , it also has some gaps and ambiguities , not least concerning the constraints on imports and the potential disadvantages of this for European manufacturers , and also concerning the application of the substitution principle solely to dangerous substances , which is already a step forward , but which does not guarantee its effectiveness even in cases where technically and economically viable alternatives exist .
Exchanging one imbalance for another is not resolving the problem .
None of the three initial aims of the directive will truly be achieved , any more , I might add , than the aim to simplify the legislation or to make it compatible with other Community legislation will be achieved .
I am pleased to have seen confirmed today an improved proposal to deal with the crucial issues raised under the REACH report .
In particular the use of animal testing , which is of great concern to many of my constituents , has been changed to incorporate validation of alternatives .
Also , a three-year review allows for the European Commission to consider whether legislative proposals covering this area could be useful to reduce further any need for such testing .
Similarly , the improved text which I voted for today reflects more accurately the views of thousands of individuals and interest groups in dealing with the cumulative effects of toxic chemicals found in hundreds of household products .
Mr President , after so much work over such a long period this package does not merit the backslapping and self congratulation we have seen today .
The alternative package put forward by my group would have worked , and implemented a new regime which would have protected consumers and balanced the needs of business and the economy which must of course be included in our plans .
Today 's package will not do what it says on the tin , and it is a shame that MEPs from the Labour and Conservative groups did not join us to bring in a better package .
I cannot possibly be upbeat about the REACH proposal that has been rushed through Parliament .
The Commission , the Council and Parliament have all been dazzled by economic profit and have displayed sure signs of apathy .
For the first time in many years , the EU had the opportunity to create legislation the usefulness of which would have been plain for all citizens to see : strict , complex , but at the same time concrete and always putting the health of all its residents first .
The half-hearted approach towards harmful chemical substances leaves neither industry nor the public satisfied .
It is for that very reason that some regard it as a ' sound compromise ' .
It is not one .
It would be tantamount to claiming that halving the thickness of the Berlin wall would have been a good solution .
You cannot trifle with public health .
There is no middle ground .
Even a little more healthy is still ill .
In Flanders , things have now got to such a pass that harmful substances can be found everywhere .
Whilst we know that in many cases , this is unhealthy , we do not know precisely why .
A sound REACH would have solved this and would , for example , make Flanders healthy in the medium term .
The proposal that has now been voted on does not do this .
After all , being more healthy by half is not an option .
The Regulation , Evaluation , and Authorisation of Chemicals ( REACH ) is crucial in the protection of public health .
This legislation is particularly important in relation to babies ' health through breast-feeding .
Breast milk , the best source of essential nutrients for a baby , is currently being affected by dangerous chemicals found in the environment , passing through the mother 's body .
Through REACH , such harmful chemicals would be substituted with safer alternatives where possible .
Manufacturers would have a duty of care to protect human health and the environment .
In addition to this , REACH promotes both increased transparency in the case of , and alternatives to , animal testing .
The compromise reached today is the best we could hope for .
First of all , I should like to highlight the excellent work done by the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi .
I decided to vote in favour of the compromise amendment between the Council and Parliament mainly because this amendment is going to allow certain dangerous products to be controlled better , while making the chemical industry more competitive .
While it is true that this compromise is not perfect , I believe that , if it had not been adopted , the situation would have been more complicated .
This compromise provides for the compulsory replacement of the most dangerous substances where alternatives exist , the recognition of a ' duty of care ' on the part of manufacturers and the promotion of methods other than animal testing .
This version of the text certainly does not go as far as the text submitted at first reading , but , if the text had been rejected , we would have had to go through the conciliation stage , which would have led to other , less advantageous conclusions .
That is why I thought it wiser to vote for this version of the text , which is admittedly imperfect , but which does nonetheless enable progress to be made and more extensive checks to be carried out on chemicals that we come across in our daily lives .
in writing . - ( FR ) This fund is a new tool : for the first time , the EU will no longer come to the aid just of business and local authorities , but indeed directly to that of employees who have lost their jobs because of relocations .
This is all the more so because the European Parliament wanted to extend the profits of this fund to ' small labour markets ' where redundancies have a serious impact on employment and the local economy .
This opportunity offers promising prospects to the most vulnerable areas of my region , which is something that I welcome .
Equally , I welcome the unwavering commitment of the members of the Socialist Party in the European Parliament , who have taken a strong and tenacious stand in defending the implementation of this tool and tabled many amendments aimed at extending the implementation , amount and number of beneficiaries thereof .
This is the first step towards a more social and more united Europe .
The EU cannot , however , merely ' heal the wounds ' of globalisation .
Today , Europeans expect Europe to help keep their jobs and their lifestyles secure , in the same way that it has been able to guarantee peace and stability for almost 50 years .
in writing . The adoption of this legislation is a big step forward for the protection of people and the environment from potentially dangerous chemicals .
Some argue that it should have been better , and there is indeed a case for saying that a compromise such as this is not perfect .
However , a common set of rules on this important matter is better than a patchwork of perfect ( but divergent ) rules in some countries , half measures in others and no rules at all elsewhere - in what is supposed to be a common market with common rules .
That would have given less protection at greater costs .
This new regulation on chemicals is aimed at establishing a system for registering , assessing and authorising the chemicals with which we come into contact every day .
This new proposal will plug significant gaps in our current knowledge about the chemicals available on the market and at the same time will seek to boost European industry and to offer greater protection to human health and the environment .
Although animal testing is inevitable , measures have been proposed to guarantee the lowest possible increase , for example the One Substance One Registration ( OSOR ) system , which will ensure that tests are not unnecessarily duplicated .
The approach based on quantities produced / imported will lead to less of an administrative and financial burden for SMEs .
The submission of a replacement plan should allow sufficient time for companies to adapt and to prepare for the change , when abandoning the most dangerous chemicals .
Intellectual property is now properly protected .
By maintaining the substitution principle , albeit via the submission of a plan , we can guarantee that , in the reasonably near future , we will have a world , or at least a Europe , with fewer dangerous chemicals .
The Portuguese Social Democrat MEPs thus support the Sacconi report ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( FR ) The members of Mouvement pour la France in the European Parliament have refused to support the compromise proposed for the vote at second reading on the draft directive on dangerous substances , the so-called REACH Directive .
Now that the directive has been examined by the various European institutions , there is little left of its original good intentions .
Thus , the compromise text voted on this morning is very inadequate in terms of environmental and consumer protection .
Furthermore , the new burdens that it places on European businesses are not compensated for by similar obligations imposed on imports of finished goods , creating a distortion of competition that jeopardises European industry .
I voted in favour of the Sacconi report on the amendment to Directive 67 / 548 / EEC on dangerous substances ( REACH ) , at second reading , because I feel that the common position adopted by the Council is a good agreement that will benefit the citizens of the European Union .
I feel that this is a well-balanced legislative proposal that has sought to strike a balance between safeguarding the industry 's legitimate interests , and especially those of the SMEs , with the need to protect the environment and public health .
The REACH agreement will guarantee , as of June 2007 , that substances that are extremely problematic from an environmental and public health perspective are substituted wherever possible by safe alternative substances or technologies .
I voted for the compromise amendments on this report and against all others .
I did so to avoid the REACH Directive going into conciliation where I felt it was far from certain to emerge as a piece of legislation .
Many of the amendments had much to commend them but they would have threatened the directive as a whole - as so often in politics the best would have been the enemy of the good .

( DE ) Mr President , the basic idea of ensuring that , in certain cases , materials that give a great deal of cause for concern are replaced by materials or technologies that are less hazardous , provided that economically suitable and technically feasible alternatives are available , is a good one , although , in doing this , particular attention needs to be given to this regulation 's potential effects on small and medium-sized businesses and on the jobs they provide .
Since , however , it has proved possible to arrive at a compromise that obviates these dangers , a vote in favour of this report has been made possible .
( NL ) Mr President , what I saw as important about the report was that it considered all the options and alternatives with a view to reducing the number of animal tests to a minimum .
Since the suffering involved in tests on animals - and on mammals in particular - worries many European citizens , the use of such tests should , where possible , be avoided at all costs .
The European Centre for validating alternative methods has been given an important role in this .
This institution will , with more funds , need to produce plenty of validated alternatives in order to put an end to animal tests in the long term .
We would also argue in favour of transparency and clarity in respect of the numbers of animals and types of tests carried out by research labs .

( NL ) Mr President , it is , of course , difficult to be enthusiastic about a text and a vote that are very complex and on which we will , in fact , be unable to pass a verdict until we have had the time to reread it at our leisure ; I in any event have the impression that we have succeeded in striking a balance between respecting our chemical industry 's ambition to be competitive on the one hand and the care and attention that are so necessary for our public health on the other .
We cannot , in any case , do other than note with satisfaction that it has become clear in recent years that our chemical industry is acutely aware of its responsibilities and that it has taken on the burden of proof and accepted the principle of duty of care .
I should like to make one final remark .
In the case of substances for which there is no alternative , whose use is completely controllable and where the duty to substitute would cause considerable economic damage , it would , I think , be extremely regrettable if our industry were to relocate to competing regions on account of our obsession with rules and regulations .
( SK ) Following the discussions on this extensive and challenging piece of legislation , which has taken three years to prepare , many of us in this House were of two minds as to what we should do about REACH .
Should we support the compromise package , the common position , or turn down the proposal ?
On the one hand , environmentalists view the compromise package as too weak ; on the other hand , it poses a threat to the chemical industry , particularly SMEs , by threatening competitiveness and jobs .
I have thoroughly considered all the arguments of the stakeholders and voted in favour of the compromise package , which bears the distinctive imprint of the European Parliament , since I am convinced that we need rules in order to know more about the thirty thousand chemical substances in the products that surround us in our everyday lives .
We need to replace forty obsolete norms with a single regulation for chemicals covering registration , evaluation , authorisation and , last but not least , restrictions .
We need a strong impetus for European research to ensure the gradual and natural elimination of harmful substances where this regulation does not prescribe substitution .
I am convinced that this piece of legislation marks a correct step towards improving the quality of life for European citizens .

( DE ) Mr President , I , too , would like to emphasise that this compromise would certainly have been capable of being improved , particularly as regards substitution , the rules on which we found to be lamentably unclear , but experience with their implementation will be the main way of showing whether they are usable in practice .
This is where the Member States , the Commission and the Chemicals Agency - which is now to be established - need to do something for businesses , and we , in this House , will certainly have to keep a watchful eye out to see that they do a proper job of it .

( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the draft regulation on dangerous substances , otherwise known as REACH .
However , I have a number of doubts as to whether the compromise achieved , following lengthy and difficult negotiations , will contribute to the protection of human health and the environment on the one hand , and to encouraging competition and innovation within the chemical industry in the European Union on the other .
I firmly believe that we should gradually withdraw dangerous chemicals from the market in stages , and replace them with less dangerous substances .
However , we should be aware that new , restrictive requirements will have a negative impact on European industry , especially on small and medium-sized enterprises .
They will have to pay the majority of the costs of adjusting to the legislation .
We should therefore think about how to support them .
The new regulations should also be applied to imports from third countries and so should be discussed at WTO level .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , REACH is in fact an example of how not to do it .
It is not an example of better lawmaking in the EU , and it is for that reason that I have not voted in favour of our new legislation on chemicals .
Much will now be dependent on the management of the new Chemicals Agency , but , whatever happens , things look set to get bureaucratic , with over 5 000 pages of rules and regulations putting Europe 's small and medium-sized businesses in particular at a disadvantage .
REACH is no answer to the demand - repeated paternoster fashion in the EU - for better , in other words simpler , legislation .
It is dubious whether it actually does anything to protect the consumer , but certain that it will impose additional burdens on European businesses .
This is a fundamental problem , and we would be well advised to steer clear of this sort of legislative project in future .

( DE ) Mr President , it is a good thing that REACH takes , as its primary purpose , the protection of human life , of jobs and of the environment , but the way in which the protection of people and their environment is organised will have adverse effects on Europe , resulting in a massive build-up of bureaucracy , several thousand pages worth of superfluous regulations , and , in the long term , the relocation of jobs and a consequent reduction in the active workforce .
I do not see this as something that we , in Europe , should be voting for .
Less employment and more bureaucracy make for the sort of Europe that we do not want .
The decision was made difficult by the fact that the Compromise 191 with which we were presented was preferable to the alternative that was already on the table , and , that being so , I have neither voted to adopt this poor compromise nor opted for outright rejection .
It is for that reason that I have abstained from voting .
in writing . - ( FR ) Closely linked as it is to the ambition to build a European Union that gathers together the nations , intercultural dialogue today represents an important dimension of numerous Community policies and instruments .
That is why I welcome the adoption at second reading of the decision to implement a European Year 2008 , which will be dedicated to intercultural dialogue .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs at first reading , I hope that this European Year will enable all Europeans , particularly young people , to become aware of the need for intercultural dialogue in their everyday lives .
It must highlight best practice in this field , with the specific aim of integrating immigrants , and should do so by continuing the actions undertaken in 2007 during the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All .
Thus , the promotion of intercultural dialogue should continue within the European Union far beyond 2008 , as the adopted text calls for .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that the whole idea of a European Year of this or that is unnecessary and not something that EU taxpayers should fund .
To invest EUR 10 million in a European Year of Intercultural Dialogue would be quite reprehensible , and it is difficult and perhaps even impossible to see what would be the point of doing so .
We are voting against the amendments to the report in accordance with the view we expressed previously when voting against the report at first reading .
in writing . ( HU ) I wish to highlight the amendment proposed by Parliament emphasising the cultural and educational aims of the renewed Lisbon Strategy , as well as the need to disseminate information concerning equality of opportunity and freedom from discrimination within the European Union .
In this regard I would like to call to mind a phenomenon that brings to the fore the urgent need for intercultural dialogue , namely the situation of migrants , and in particular of migrant women .
According to Eurostat , the proportion of women amongst migrants is steadily increasing .
They currently make up almost 54 per cent of all migrants .
What makes the problem even more serious is the fact that they face quite high levels of unemployment .
Their dependency is further aggravated by the fact that a considerable number of migrants live on the margins of society and their access to public , political and economic life is very limited .
Amongst migrant populations , female migrants are victims of a double discrimination , on grounds of both gender and ethnic origin .
The major problems faced by migrants , that is , unemployment , exclusion from education and a position of legal uncertainty also weigh most heavily on women and children .
It is tragic that around five thousand migrant women fall victim annually to mental or physical violence , forced marriage , genital mutilation and crimes committed in the name of honour .
In my view , it is of particular significance that the European Commission has designated 2007 as the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , and 2008 as the Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
It is my hope that these programmes will provide an opportunity to deal with all these problems and , as far as possible , to find solutions to them .
It is for this reason that I , together with the Minister of Social and Employment Affairs , announced a series of programmes in Hungary on the occasion of the 2007 Year of Equal Opportunities .
The reduced budget implementation of the Structural and Cohesion Funds is one of the reasons for submitting this amending budget for 2006 .
Due to non-implementation , it has been proposed that EUR 2.5 billion in payment appropriations be cancelled , under the following budgetary headings : EUR 1.5 billion under the European Regional Development Fund ; EUR 500 million under the European Social Fund ; and EUR 500 million under the Cohesion Fund .
Regardless of the reasons behind the Commission 's proposal to cancel funds earmarked for cohesion policy for this reduction , we have seen that this is normal practice .
What is needed , therefore , is to assess properly the reasons behind the reduction in budgetary implementation and to not allow this necessary assessment - for example , of the impact of the nominal criteria enshrined in the Stability Pact on public investment in the Member States , and of the reduction in Member State contributions to the Community budget - to be used as a pretext for reducing the amount of money set aside every year in the Community budget for the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to you , Mr President , for having given me the floor to explain the reasons for my vote on the Hieronymi report on television broadcasting activities , which I consider very important and well produced .
By voting for the report I was expressing my personal hope and that of all the pensioners in Italy and Europe that , in future , particular attention will be paid in television programming to the dignity and the involvement of the elderly in the world of culture .
It is very nice to see young people in television programmes , and it is also nice for the elderly to see so many attractive men and women , but I think it is important that the qualities of older people should also be aired on television .
in writing . ( SV ) We voted against the report on the proposal for a directive governing audiovisual media services .
Common EU regulations governing television broadcasts and other audiovisual media are necessary in an increasingly borderless Europe .
However , we believe that such a directive must guarantee a high level of protection for consumers , particularly when it comes to advertising aimed at children or for alcoholic beverages .
It should , furthermore , be possible for the receiving country to influence the content of programmes aimed specifically at that country .
The result of the vote is much too much liberalisation of the rules on advertising .
What is more , Sweden 's ban on advertising aimed at children and on advertising of alcohol is in danger of being undermined , and that is unacceptable .
British Conservative members of the EPP-ED Group support the Hieronymi report - C6-0443 / 2005 - particularly because it includes support for co- and self-regulation and the 30-minute rule for advertising slots .
The other important aspects of country of origin principle , product placement and short extracts have been substantially modified by the rapporteur since the Commission published its original text .
We should like to congratulate Ruth Hieronymi on her diligence in the many public hearings , which included the appropriate regulatory and commercial interests from the United Kingdom , and on her producing a balanced , practicable and enduring piece of work incorporating many improvements suggested by colleagues .
Unlike the other Dutch Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I am in favour of Amendments 170 , 156 and 177 , which aim to restrict advertising for unhealthy foods intended for children , and my arguments in favour of this position are as follows .

1 .
In the EU , one in four children is obese as a consequence of incorrect diet combined with a lack of sufficient exercise .
Obese children have a bad start in life in terms of both their social and physical development .
Research shows that advertising impacts greatly on consumption and buying behaviour .
2 . There is wide public support for restricting advertising for unhealthy foods .
The Food Centre , the Heart Foundation and the Consumer Association all argue in favour of a ban on television commercials for unhealthy foods intended for young children .
Opinion polls ( Food Centre ) and surveys ( in the Saturday 2 December edition of the Algemeen Dagblad ) show that nearly half of all parents are in favour of restricting or banning aggressive advertising .
3 . The question is , of course , whether this situation requires a legal ban or self-regulation .
My personal preference would be self-regulation , unless it turned out that codes of conduct were ineffective .
Moreover , it is debatable whether a restriction or ban would be best imposed nationally or at European level .
I would in any event be in favour of this being allowed at national level .
With this Television Directive , we must avoid ending up in a situation where Member States no longer have a say in these matters .
Since the Television Directive is being tabled for first reading , it is not yet a final legal document .
This is why it is better at this stage to endorse the amendments that move in the right direction and that also give the Netherlands the best chances of retaining the right to restrict advertising .
This would carry a political message to the effect that the health of children is more important than the commercial interests of the food industry .
The objective is purportedly to amend the existing directive on the pretext of the evolution of television , but the real purpose is to ensure that profits can be safeguarded for private television companies .
A number of studies have demonstrated that people are watching fewer advertisements , on the grounds that they can change channel and this is why advertisement breaks are increasingly shown at the same time across the various channels .
Profits from advertising are not as high as they were , because the channels cannot guarantee audiences to those buying advertising , and everything in television is measured in audience figures .
Consequently , advertising has to be reinvented so that profits can still be made , for example through product placement , split screen , promotions , virtual advertising and interactive advertising .
The same happens with the amount of programme time in which advertising can be shown .
There were also a number of proposals on high-calorie food and drink advertising when children 's programmes are being shown .
Accordingly , given that the positions that are least favourable to the people were adopted and that the most vulnerable sections of society have not been protected , we did not vote in favour of this report .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List rejects the Commission 's proposal .
The Council dealt with this matter in November , prior to first reading in the European Parliament now , in December .
A compromise was agreed on , but this compromise was not supported by seven countries , including Sweden .
Sweden - and the June List - question what is known as the country of origin principle , according to which a television company has to follow the regulations in place in the country from which it broadcasts , irrespective of where its programmes are viewed , because this leads to problems when , for example , TV 3 and Kanal 5 broadcast from the United Kingdom where they are covered by British , rather than Swedish , legislation .
Sweden has been fighting in the Council for the right of the receiving country to take measures against TV companies that broadcast from a different EU country in order to deliberately circumvent national rules .
The Committee on Culture and Education has tabled an amendment relating to cases where a media service provider has established itself in the Member State having jurisdiction ' in order to avoid the stricter rules in the fields ' coordinated by the directive .
We would , however , have liked to have seen the matter discussed further in order to have achieved a stronger form of words .
Sweden and the June List believe that both advertising aimed at children and that relating to alcohol should be completely prohibited .
We have attempted , as far as possible , to vote to improve the directive in accordance with the guidelines above .
I voted against in the final vote on TV broadcasting , because I believe that programmes will be overrun by advertisements as a result of this report .
I regret that Parliament rejected attempts to ban junk food advertising during children 's programmes .
Today 's vote will undoubtedly lead to a deterioration in the quality of programmes in the EU .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the version of the directive on audiovisual services as amended by the rapporteur 's compromise amendments because they make the directive viable and reasonable .
The country of origin principle firmly rooted in this directive is of the utmost importance .
It will enable television channels to have their headquarters in a Member State and to broadcast their programmes in all the EU Member States from that Member State .
Furthermore , I consider the compromise on product placement to be viable , given that it guarantees independent European producers revenue while protecting consumers from any undue excesses and keeping away from children 's programmes .
As regards commercial breaks , I voted in favour of a 30-minute interval because this is realistic given the average length of television programmes in Europe .
This interval guarantees private channels an adequate income , thanks to which they can continue funding programme production .
I support the authorisation of one-off advertising spots for the same reasons .
Stricter restrictions on advertising , as proposed by the left of this Parliament , would have harmful consequences for European television productions and would lead to a significant loss of revenue for private channels , estimated at some EUR 200 million per year .
I voted for this report and in favour of amendments that allow Member States to take action to protect minors , to restrict the timing of alcohol advertising and the advertisements for unhealthy food .
I also supported an amendment that allows a Member State to take action against a broadcaster who sets up in another Member State intentionally to get round national legislation .
On Amendment 226 , which deals with a code of conduct on advertising of foods aimed at children , I voted against as I do not think this amendment is strong enough in its wording to get Member States to address the urgent concerns about increasing obesity levels in children .
I supported Amendment 170 in order to put down a marker that there is a need to control the issue of marketing of unhealthy foodstuffs to children .
On Amendment 169 relating to alcohol , I support calls for a ban on alcohol advertising until after 9 p.m. , notwithstanding that in Ireland we do have a strong voluntary code in place .
A review of the first year of the code is due in March 2007 and this will assist us in making decisions about the effectiveness or otherwise of such codes .
By resisting the temptation to regulate everything , to impose its will on everything and to control everything , Parliament has succeeded in making a positive contribution to this proposal for a directive .
Naturally , in the search for balance and compromise , some relevant aspects have fallen by the wayside , or have been less well regulated .
In the case of non-linear services , I believe that we have gone further than was needed at this stage of knowledge and experience in the field .
Furthermore , the solutions reached are balanced despite the well known fervour on the part of some Members of this House for excessive regulation .
In the case of radio broadcasting , the consumer is becoming increasingly powerful . This is something positive that should be taken more into account .
The rule should be that the facts should be made clear to consumers and that they should then be allowed to act accordingly .
For these reasons , I feel that , broadly speaking , the consumers ' and the industry 's interests have been duly taken into account , and this fully justifies my vote in favour .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of Mrs Hieronymi 's excellent report on the revision of the European Television without Frontiers Directive with a view to integrating brilliant technological innovations into it .
I am pleased that the directive maintains the ceiling on production quotas of European works and the protection of minors in the face of certain excesses .
Promoting cultural diversity and European values of tolerance also means standing in the way of incitement to hatred , whatever the means used to spread it : satellite television or the Internet .
That is why I supported the amendments that recommend extending ' filtering ' to ' non-linear ' services : that is the best way , in future , of preventing programmes justifying terrorism from being broadcast on European soil .
Finally , I commend the resolutely modern vote cast today by the European Parliament , which recognises the significant contribution of advertising to the creation of quality independent works and of entertaining television that meets Europeans ' expectations .
I would also point out that it is commercial broadcasters that are setting an example : with more than 30 % of programmes being commissioned to independent producers , not only are they broadly meeting the quota of 10 % laid down by the directive , but , above all , they are spending twice as much as their competitors in the public sector .
Advertising on TV for alcohol and tobacco products are a part of this directive 's concerns .
Yet product placement of these products has been treated differently in this vote today .
I voted to keep tobacco off TV screens and to limit alcohol advertising .
However , although tobacco was prohibited , alcohol failed to get sufficient votes .
Given the distress caused by alcohol in many families ' lives across the EU , as well as related ill-health issues , I find this result unsatisfactory .
In particular we must keep youngsters from being exposed to enticements to drink .
Enormous changes are afoot in the audiovisual industry , and so , in that sense , the overhaul of the Television without Frontiers Directive is a good thing .
The distinction that is drawn between linear ( traditional TV , Internet , mobile telephony ) and non-linear - that is to say , on-demand - services requires us to formulate basic protection rules for young people to prevent the incitement of racial hatred or clandestine advertising .
The text as approved contains good and bad elements .
The good ones include , inter alia , a regulation on the transmission of short excerpts from football matches or other events .
The proposal to introduce a minimum time during which programmes may not be interrupted by advertising ( 45 minutes ) is also justifiable .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance regrets that the proposal to restrict commercial breaks to at most three per hour did not make it to the finishing line , and that product placement is shrouded in ambiguity .
We shall leave it up to the Member States to decide on this .
The line between ' product placement ' and ' production aid ' is very thin , and that will make doubt and controversy inevitable .
Moreover , the Greens regret that the teeth have been removed from the proposal to restrict advertising for unhealthy foods during children 's programmes .
It is also unfortunate that the reference to pluralism and prevention of media concentration has only been included in the recitals and not in the articles .
The health of children in Europe must be one of our key concerns .
Therefore the marketing of foods high in sugar , salt and fat to children undermines efforts in the fight against child obesity , a problem faced by one in five children in the European Union .
Such marketing makes it increasingly difficult for parents to encourage healthy eating : limits on such marketing are therefore imperative in tackling this problem .
Furthermore , European Ministers ( in November ) and the EP Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety ( last week ) approved the World Health Organization 's call for the introduction of strict legislation in this area .
We as legislators must do all that we can to protect children 's health and place a ban on the advertising of these types of unhealthy products to children .
Also , I fully back the amendment which would have restricted the advertising of alcohol to after 9 p.m. in the evening .
It is with grave disappointment that I note that the vote today did not go far enough in protecting children 's health .
I decided to vote in favour of the Hieronymi report because it includes many advances in the area of television broadcasting .
I welcome , among other things , the adoption of Amendment 227 prohibiting product placement in news and current affairs programmes , political broadcasts , children 's programmes , documentaries and programmes of advice , and permitting it under strict conditions in cinematographic works , films , series made for television and sports broadcasts .
I do , however , have two major criticisms to make of this report .
I regret the fact that Parliament has voted by a margin of one vote to interrupt the transmission of films made for television , cinematographic works , children 's programmes and news and current affairs programmes with commercial breaks every 30 minutes instead of every 45 minutes , as voted for in the Committee on Culture and Education .
Furthermore , I regret the vote on Amendment 221 concerning derogations from the country of origin principle , which permits the Member States to adopt more detailed or stricter rules ; this amendment is a danger to cultural diversity , a principle that the European Parliament has a duty to protect .

( DE ) Mr President , globalisation - which is what this is all about - is happening whether we want it to or not , and it goes hand in hand with the opening-up of markets , with international competition , with economic growth , with the creation of new jobs , but , unfortunately also with the loss of jobs in those sectors that are less competitive .
In the light , though , of the need to seize the opportunities presented by globalisation , and to support those workers who are adversely affected by it , the establishment of this ' European Adjustment Fund ' is a very good thing .
The delegation of the Austrian People 's Party , however , with its knowledge of the structure and size of Austrian businesses , has demanded an amendment to the effect that the Fund would become active as soon as 500 - rather than 1 000 - workers were laid off , and should give out a commensurate amount in funds .
We see all the other measures - ranging from microloans to training - in a positive light - and the report as a whole therefore enjoys our support .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for giving me the floor for the second time on this important document by Mrs Bachelot , which quite rightly seeks to protect us citizens of Europe from the problems of globalisation .
I voted for the report , hoping in this case that , because of globalisation , action will be taken for us not only in the form of financial aid , in cash , but also in the form of cultural aid .
That is to say that , in my view , it is important for us to realise that globalisation also means a single world , and so I tell the elderly that they must realise not only that they live in a national State , but also that they live in the world , and that in this world all elderly people , as well as all young people , need something .
in writing . ( SV ) The increased competition amongst companies and the increased opportunities for new , cheaper and better products for consumers that globalisation brings make new demands in relation to flexibility , new thinking and adaptability .
It is by striving to be better , more efficient and quicker that we will meet the new demands and opportunities presented by globalisation .
The effect of the Globalisation Fund already set up will be the opposite .
It will put the brakes on regeneration and delay adaptation without taking advantage of the opportunities that globalisation provides .
There is no doubt that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) will be a worthwhile financial instrument offering a European-level response to job losses caused by the opening up of the markets and by increased pressure from international competition .
Redundancies are one of the principal adverse effects brought about by the phenomenon of ( economic ) globalisation , alongside the acknowledged benefits .
I am bitterly disappointed , however , that the objective of setting up the EGF , under the terms of the Commission 's proposal , is to enable the Community to offer support with the aim of reinstating the jobs solely of workers who have lost their jobs due to significant structural changes in world trade .
This view demonstrates a misunderstanding of the phenomenon of globalisation .
It overlooks the fact that , apart from the liberalisation of world trade , the freedom of movement of capital and the deregulation of the market , which are also driving forces behind globalisation , they too could lie at the root of the job losses attributed to globalisation .
Against this backdrop , I tabled several amendments to the proposal , in the context of the opinion issued by the Committee on Regional Development , for which Mrs Madeira was responsible .
Although the report before us maintains the scope of the EGF , it also introduces a series of amendments to the Commission 's proposal which significantly improve it , add to it and clarify it .
I therefore voted in favour .
We are very disappointed by the rejection of the proposals we tabled aimed at improving the eligibility criteria and in particular at making it possible for aid to be granted in the event of relocation outside the EU .
This may arouse a sense of injustice among the workers that have been laid off following relocation or restructuring within the EU .
The rejection of our proposals made it clearer still that , by setting up this Fund , the EU is seeking to give workers the impression that it is committed to combating the adverse effects of globalisation , whereas in reality it is a symbolic measure that provides no solutions .
Its budget is limited and its eligibility criteria are tight .
The Commission estimates that between 35 000 and 50 000 workers could benefit from the Fund , but , by 2005 alone , the number of workers laid off as a result of restructuring had topped 570 000 , most of the redundancies being due to relocations within the EU and consequently ineligible .
We therefore abstained from the final vote .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am hesitating over a term with which to describe Mrs Bachelot-Narquin 's report on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Demagogic ?
Yes , because behind an attractive title suggesting that Brussels is going to come to the aid of the economic and social victims of untrammelled globalisation , one finds a more mundane reality : the criteria and methods of granting this fund give rise to the fear that it will not be going either to the employees or to the labour market areas that need it .
They may even encourage businesses to use bypass strategies or to look for spin-off benefits .
Redundant ?
Undoubtedly , as is the European Social Fund .
Cynical ? Definitely , insofar as the Commission is pretending to help mitigate the consequences of its own internationalist economic and trade policies .
It would be less costly for it to compromise these policies for the benefit of European businesses and employees .
However , the report is not useless in everyone 's view , and it is definitely very useful where Brussels ' propaganda is concerned .
Article 9 of the regulation , further enhanced by Mrs Bachelot-Narquin 's Amendment 38 , does indeed stipulate that the Member States must make it widely known that the Commission is the one paying .
As if this money were not coming out of the Member States ' budgets , that is to say , out of the pockets of the Europeans themselves !
in writing . ( SV ) We are strongly critical of the reasoning behind the establishment of a Globalisation Fund .
For a start , the proposal proceeds on the basis that globalisation per se is a problem .
In our view , globalisation is , on the contrary , an opportunity , especially for poor , developing countries , provided that significant economic actors , such as the EU and the USA , reform their protectionist trade policy positions at the World Trade Organisation .
The Member States of the EU are capable of implementing national measures to support those sectors that they deem to be in need of financial assistance .
A special EU fund would guarantee arbitrariness , inefficiency , bureaucracy and unjustified expenditure .
How is the Commission to decide , in a relevant way , whether globalisation has had a negative impact on a given sector ?
We have voted against this report on the strength of the views set out above .
in writing . - ( FR ) With a maximum sum of EUR 500 million granted to it each year , this European Fund is intended to soften the blow of globalisation for employees affected by restructuring .
This is not a new form of aid for businesses , but extra assistance aimed at helping to find new jobs for employees who have been made redundant following changes in world trade .
The fund will be introduced on three conditions : there have been at least 1 000 redundancies ; they have had a serious impact on employment and the local economy ; and they are linked to a disruption in world trade .
The fund can therefore only be used in the event of ' major changes in the structure of world trade leading to a serious economic disruption ' , such as a huge rise in imports , a gradual decline in the EU 's market share in a sector , or a company relocating to a third country .
I welcome the adoption of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , which will enable Europeans to gain a response to their worries concerning the negative effects of globalisation and will help establish more economic and social cohesion within the European Union .
in writing . - ( FR ) Unlike the rapporteur , I do not believe that globalisation is an opportunity for France and Europe .
The financial profits of multinationals are one thing ; the economic and social profits in terms of employment and the protection of Europe 's industrial fabric are quite something else .
The creation of a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , disguised as a desire to compensate for relocations , will be just another bureaucratic and demagogic tool .
If the pro-Europeans had wanted to be more effective and straight with themselves , they should have thought instead about improving and enhancing the European Social Fund .
I , for my part , believe that only the application of preference and of national and Community protection can save our jobs by redefining fair world trade rules .
This Adjustment Fund is , moreover , unacceptable , not least because it is aimed at undermining the work of the Member States , the thinking being that efforts to promote solidarity should only be made at European Union level and no longer at national or regional level .
Economic analgesics of this kind will not ease the social suffering of our people .
The day is coming when they will ask for explanations .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am among those who believe that this Globalisation Adjustment Fund is totally superfluous , if not counterproductive : it is the prototype of a bad ' good idea ' , but once such an idea has been floated , it is difficult to stop it .
We have Structural Funds , we have the European Social Fund and other funds that operate and that are perfectly equipped to respond to the challenges and the consequences of restructuring , which is linked to relocation , which itself is arguably linked to globalisation .
What is totally absurd is that some amendments propose assigning objectives to this fund that will not contribute to the structural reform-related improvement of Europe 's competitiveness and that are unachievable in the context of this fund .
I know that any opposition to this fund may be interpreted as insensitivity to the negative effects of globalisation-related relocations .
That interpretation is unjustified , so conscious are we of Europeans ' fears regarding globalisation .
We want to remedy the situation with constructive structural reforms and not with a fund that gives an excellent excuse to businesses and leaves them with a clear conscience .
The fund actually implicitly encourages them to relocate because they no longer have to worry about the negative effects on employment in the EU .
I have just voted against the Globalisation Fund .
While its approach is the right one , in that it is intended to help , by means of measures to retrain and reintegrate them , those workers who have lost their jobs as a result of international business relocations , the manner in which it is to be implemented leaves a certain amount to be desired .
The fund goes about things the wrong way , in that it addresses the symptoms rather than the causes of the lay-offs ; the approval procedures are too complex , and the extensive bureaucracy results in considerable expense .


Above all , though , the refusal to reduce the threshold from 1 000 layoffs to 500 means that it is no use to SMEs , and , moreover , when fewer than 1 000 workers are laid off , only 15 % of the funds may be paid out as against the 20 % that we seek .
Access to the Fund is meant to be permitted when a given Member State reports 1 000 layoffs from its SMEs over a period of nine months , whereas the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs had demanded a period of twelve .
The people on the receiving end are bound to be bitterly disappointed when the money - which amounts to a maximum of EUR 500 million per annum - runs out ; if the EU awakens great hopes , but fails to do as it has promised , the result will be frustration among the public .
My position is shared by my colleagues in the CDU / CSU group in this House .
While we strongly support measures to improve the situation of workers made redundant through the relocation of companies , we feel that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is not up to the task .
The funds available are totally inadequate , reaching less than 10 % of workers made redundant through restructuring operations .
SME restructuring and redundancies in smaller Member States , which has a serious impact on national , regional and local economies , will benefit very little from the EGAF .
We welcome the fact that some redundant workers from big companies will have access to this fund , and call on the companies concerned to seriously negotiate with workers ' representatives and to not use the existence of the fund to back out of their social obligations .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is a charity fund which pays out lump sums in a bid to disorientate and deceive the workers .
Its objective allegedly is to provide assistance and solidarity to workers made redundant in areas suffering from relocated businesses , in other words where capital aims to maximise its profits by moving to countries where the cost of labour is lower .
The criteria set by the regulation under which it is applied are so narrow that a minimal number of workers will be entitled to it , given that it is paid in areas in which , due to the relocation of companies , there are at least 1 000 redundancies from one company or at least 1 000 redundancies over a 6-month period ( or 12-month period as proposed in the committee report ) , representing 1 % of employment in the region .
It can only be requested in an application by the government of the Member State and not by the workers or their trades union and is only paid by the government .
Thus , the workers are at the mercy of every government , which can use it selectively and as a means of exerting pressure and coercion on the workers and as a means of guiding consciences and deflating the indignation of the workers .
in writing . - ( FR ) Europe is going to help the victims of company relocations .
As from 1 January , a globalisation adjustment fund will enable as much as EUR 500 million to be given each year to employees who have fallen victim to international restructuring .
These employees will be able to rely on the Union to make it easier , or rather , less difficult , for them to retrain .
Individual training , micro-credits , help with mobility : this is clearly about rescuing employees , not businesses .
One question is obviously on all of our minds : will the employees of VW Forest be able to rely on this European solidarity ?
The criteria for accessing the Fund are strict : the redundancies must affect at least 1 000 people , sub-contractors included , and they must have a serious impact on the local economy .
Above all , however , the Belgian authorities need to be able to prove that the restructuring is the result of ' structural changes in world trade trends ' , and that is not a given !
The Union is faced here with an obvious case of social competition within its territory , and it is for the Commission to demonstrate flexibility in examining the criteria .
Europe 's image and our notion of solidarity at EU level are at stake !
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the compromise governing the creation of a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
Globalisation is a reality that can be beneficial when it is fair and equitable .
However , when globalisation has negative effects on employees , the European Union has a duty , out of a concern for solidarity , to mitigate the consequences of changes in the structure of world trade .
This fund , which amounts to EUR 500 million , will not serve to fund company restructuring but to help employees who have been made redundant , particularly in their efforts to re-enter the job market .
The EGF is an important instrument because it helps to show that the European Union takes full account of the social impact of globalisation and that it is not losing interest in the fate of employees .
It was in 2005 , seeing the impact of liberalisation and competition on the textile and clothing sector , and more specifically on its employees , that the idea of such a fund was born .
It is in 2007 , that is , only two years later , that this fund is becoming effective and is really meeting the expectations of redundant workers .
Yes , Europe can be close to its citizens , as it is proving today !
in writing . ( SV ) I believe that the effects of globalisation on world development are good and have served us well .
We have today voted on a report on a European fund for making adjustments in the light of the effects of globalisation .
The report includes a raft of critical statements in relation to precisely these effects .
The re-shaped patterns of world trade have produced nothing like the negative effects that the report would have us believe it has done .
My view of globalisation , and of the ever greater exchange of people , products , services and capital that comes with it , is positive .
I believe that a world with open borders and where democracy and human rights are the values that govern relations between people and between countries is worth striving for .
Globalisation has created , and continues to create , great opportunities to liberate people from tyranny and extreme poverty , increase prosperity and provide better conditions for democracy .
I therefore chose to vote against this report today .
Since phenomena such as mass dismissals as a result of closures , substantial restructuring within the sectors that are sensitive to globalisation , and smaller-scale collective redundancies as a result of structural changes to the world trade patterns all greatly impact on the local labour market , a European Fund for adjustment to globalisation is a good thing .
Unlike other structural funds , the globalisation fund enables the Member States to anticipate quickly and directly acute socio-economic emergency situations , enabling the workers affected , following dismissal , to re-integrate into the labour market .
It is also good that the Member States provide 50 % of the funding and that support from this fund is only additional to , rather than a replacement for , these efforts .
I am also glad that the Council and the Commission endorse the idea of microloans as an active labour market measure .
What is also positive is that older workers are not required to work longer for lower wages , but are instead given financial incentives to remain within the labour market .
That , finally , the fund is constructed in such a way that the contributions cannot be intercepted by ' other players ' , but are of direct benefit to the workers can only serve as an example to other structural funds .
in writing . - ( FR ) Globalisation is giving rise to negative consequences for the most vulnerable and least qualified workers in certain sectors .
Relocations are producing a climate of harmful social uncertainty for social progress .
Businesses are benefiting from a new kind of freedom that flouts borders , leaving hordes of often poorly trained employees jobless , people who will have the greatest difficulty in finding work again .
Eleven thousand jobs have been relocated over the last 12 months in France .
The fear of relocations is spreading from region to region , at a rate of almost 1 000 job cuts per month , a figure that is more than enough to fuel social unrest .
I voted in favour of Mrs Bachelot-Narquin 's report because it provides an initial response to the legitimate worries of European workers .
The creation of a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGM ) will provide an annual sum of EUR 500 million in aid to workers who have fallen victim to international restructuring , with the aim of getting them back to work .
The assistance provided by the EGM should thus provide solidarity and support to workers who have been made redundant because of changes in the structure of world trade , even though this fund will probably prove to be insufficient .

( DE ) Mr President , although the approach chosen in this piece of legislation for pursuing an emissions-based policy on air quality is the right one , I do believe a more ambitious line could have been taken as regards limit values on nitrogen oxides in particular , for these pollutants cause major problems , particularly in narrow mountain valleys .

I nevertheless welcome the proposal , and have indeed voted to adopt it , in view of the number-based approach taken to particulates in particular .
What the Commission now has to do is to implement this properly in practice .
I am also glad to see the information on repairs , which should be circulated to all independent workshops .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for having given me the floor for the third time on this report by Mr Groote on protecting European citizens from harmful vehicle emissions .
I voted for this document in the hope that in the near future there will also be a directive against government pollution because , unfortunately , even governments sometimes produce pollution that damages people 's health and their environment .
I am referring in particular , but not solely , to laws that pollute the air and make it hard , if not impossible for the elderly and pensioners to breathe , since they cannot live on inadequate pensions .
in writing . ( SV ) We should like to have seen a tighter timetable for the introduction of Euro 5 and lower limits for nitrogen dioxide emissions in Euro 6 .
We did , however , vote in favour of the compromise with the Council of Ministers because we believe that it is sound and that a longer process would not lead to better regulations but merely to postponement of the timetable for introduction .
in writing . - ( FR ) Transport is responsible for a large amount of environmental pollution and has a major impact on climate change .
The new , so-called Euro 5 standard will specifically focus on particles and on nitrogen oxide ( NOx ) , which is emitted by vehicles fitted with diesel engines .
This extra tightening of the limits on vehicle emissions for particles and nitrogen oxide is a significant step forward in terms of public health .
The adoption of this report will enhance the European Union 's trade potential with regard to the design and manufacturing of clean vehicles .
The forthcoming Euro 6 standard will include restricted limits on emissions , in particular for nitrogen oxide , and , at the same time , will stimulate technological research for the automotive industry .
The adopted text also proposes a timetable for the application of these two standards that is demanding , but achievable , for the automotive sector .
I do , however , believe that we need to remain alert to the renewal of the car population and thus implement the most recent Euro standards in the hope of achieving significant results on air quality .
I supported this compromise package which will ensure the motor industry is forced to produce greener and cleaner cars which will help to reduce pollution .
This package of amendments will mean that cars produced will have to stick to set emission limits in the long run .
It will encourage the motor vehicle industry to invest in the technology to make cars greener and to help to protect our environment .
The proposal on which we voted today provides for a review of the current emissions limits of motor vehicles and the inclusion of vehicles that run on biofuels .
New technologies and scientific discoveries have enabled us to aspire to a high level of environmental protection and to invest in these new areas of the car market .
In this day and age we cannot overlook the environmental challenges facing us , nor can we ignore the fact that there is a new market developing in the area of clean fuels .
Consequently , the provision of information to the consumer on less polluting vehicles , on car repairs and on the new items that manufacturers are placing on the market are important measures for protecting and investing in the society of the future .
Once again , the functioning of the internal market , the promotion of environmentally sustainable development and the improvement in the citizens ' living conditions are coming under threat .
I therefore voted in favour of the Groote report .
Mr President , I just want to explain why I opposed Amendment 1 to the Higgins report , in other words the changing of the legal basis from Article 308 of the Treaty to Article 159 .
I can understand why many Members of Parliament would support this , as it will extend the power of Parliament because the fund has economic and social objectives .
Parliament , of course , is within its rights .
However , I am concerned that there may be unintended consequences because I believe that the Council is unlikely to agree and that this will mean a delay .
That delay , if it happens , would have the effect of delaying funding to projects that are already under way .
I think this would have very serious consequences because it is a particularly sensitive time politically in Northern Ireland at the moment .
We are about to take the final step and I really do not think we need any negative signals coming from the EU .
Also , to some extent , it is a hollow victory for Parliament as this will be the last time that Parliament will be asked to approve funding for the programme because it finishes in 2010 .
Also , I voted in error on Amendment 169 to the Hieronymi report .
I simply pressed the wrong button .
I should have pressed ' plus ' .
Your desire to express another view at this point will be mentioned in the Minutes .
in writing . ( SV ) Even though the Republic of Ireland and the United Kingdom are two of the richest countries in the world , there are good reasons to support the International Fund for Ireland .
Those Member States that wish to contribute to this fund can do so through decisions taken by their national parliaments .
Not only is such a process more democratic , but it also means that the Member States ' financial resources need not be unnecessarily diverted via the EU budget .
We have therefore voted against the report in question .

( FR ) Mr President , the banana is a subject that has given rise to a genuine soap opera since the 1990s .
In Europe , we consume bananas originating from three regions : up to around 850 000 tonnes of European bananas originating from the French West Indies , the Canaries and the Azores ; bananas from the ACP countries and , finally , ' dollar ' bananas , grown in Latin America , for the benefit of Chiquita and Dole .
Ten years ago , customs duties on the 2.5 million tonnes of US bananas fetched around EUR 850 per tonne ; today , they fetch EUR 176 .
In order words , Europe is giving the US multinationals a gift of EUR 2 billion .
Moreover , these bananas are produced in Ecuador by 10-year-old children who are paid USD 2 a day , who inhale pesticides , who have asthma , who have problems with their balance and who suffer from cerebellar ataxia .
Elsewhere , working conditions are similar for those who work in the greenhouses used to grow roses .
Under these circumstances , an 18-kilo box of bananas can be sold for USD 3 in Germany .
That is called slavery .
However , it is true that our Parliament also has recourse to a form of slavery when it employs part-session staff members .
My God , one more slave will not make any difference !
in writing . ( SV ) We voted against Amendment 10 .
We Swedish Social Democrats in the European Parliament interpret the amendment in question as a means of allowing those Member States that so wish to retain a proportion of the production support for bananas .
In the light of the fact that we consistently work towards a de-coupling of agricultural aid , we find this unacceptable .
Production support makes it impossible for banana producers from non-EU countries to compete on fair terms .
We are also critical of the proposal overall , as it will lead to higher expenditure .
A reform of the organisation of the banana market should , in our view , lead to budget savings .
I wholeheartedly support the Commission 's proposal , as amended by this report , the objectives of which , bolstered by the amendments introduced , are as follows :
to maintain Community banana production , the main agricultural activity in some producing regions , that is to say , the outermost regions , and in regions in which it plays a key socio-economic role ;
to safeguard the incomes of banana producers and to prevent the economic situation of the banana sector from deteriorating ;
to give banana-producing Member States control over the granting of aid , so that this can be done as effectively as possible , taking account of the specific priorities of these regions .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
However , I object to the idea of continuing to make it compulsory for producers to join a recognised producers ' organisation in order to receive aid - in line with the wishes of the European banana producers ( members of the European Association of Banana Producers ) , the authorities of the outermost regions and the banana-producing Member States - as I consider it contradictory and counter to the last objective . I have therefore tabled an amendment with a view to leaving the decision to the Member States as to whether this should be a compulsory requirement , as the Commission proposed .
in writing . ( SV ) We have voted against this report because it is completely skewed towards the special interests of the EU 's banana growers .
We are firmly opposed to Amendment 10 in the report , which proposes special treatment for the support for cotton , olive oil , raw tobacco , hops and bananas .
If individual Member States wish , for reasons of regional policy , to support banana growing on their territory then that is up to them , provided , of course , that they take account of international trade agreements and EU rules .
In such a case , however , it would then also be up to the individual Member States to fund this aid , without the involvement of the European Union .
We are opposed to decoupling production aid , which is the thrust of the Commission 's proposal on the reform of the banana sector . The Commission is seeking to end compensation for producers and to promote the liberalisation of the sector within the framework of the World Trade Organisation .
Although the current arrangements are inadequate , we would prefer to keep them or to bring in a reform that actually addressed the problems faced by banana producers , concentrating on the outermost regions and the least favoured regions of the EU .
We welcome the adoption of the amendments we tabled aimed , firstly , at keeping the system of annual advances for the entire period and secondly , at providing for the submission of an impact assessment report on the effect of the regulation on producers ' income .
We are very disappointed by the rejection of the amendments that we tabled , which proposed firstly , a one-year transitional period for the regulation to enter into force and secondly that reference period for the calculation of aid date further back , from 2005 to 2004 .
We believe that the report improves on some substantial aspects of the Commission 's proposal in proposing the partial decoupling of aid and the retention of aid for producers ' organisations .
Lastly , we object to the proposal to implement the system of decoupling aid to all other ' non-reformed ' sectors .
The British Socialist Delegation ( EPLP ) welcomes the adoption of the resolution on the Commission 's Legislative and work programme 2007 .
It is a comprehensive and ambitious work programme .
Whilst there are certain omissions which are regrettable , on the whole we support the Commission 's programme .
On the particular issue of security of citizens , justice and migration , the EPLP supports the general position of the EP as well as the other institutions in the development of policy in this important field .
That said , on the issue of maximising the effectiveness of the decision-making process in this field , we underline that , on this issue , it is solely for Member States in the Council to decide .
We voted against this resolution on the Commission Legislative and Work Programme for 2007 because it proposes more of the same neoliberal policies , with the disastrous consequences with which we are familiar , such as the growth in poverty and social inequality .
What is really needed , on the other hand , is a clean break from such policies and root and branch change , as proposed in many points contained in our group 's resolution .
Among the proposals that we tabled and that were unfortunately rejected , we wish to highlight the following : we call for the immediate suspension of the current process of liberalisation of public services and for a firm undertaking to achieve a reduction in working time , without cutting salaries , with a view to creating new jobs .
We also regret that the Commission 's Work and Legislative Programme overlooks the situation in the Middle East , and we find it unacceptable that financial cooperation has not been set up between the EU and the Palestinian Authority .
We also criticise the fact that the Commission has not put forward initiatives aimed at improving social policy and that it is pursuing liberalisations in a number of sectors , including the services sector and the energy market .
I and my British Conservative colleagues support the President of the Commission 's call for a renewed focus in achieving effective economic reform through the revised Lisbon Agenda which we believe must focus on stimulating growth and competitiveness in Europe leading to more employment .
The completion of the internal market is also something we can endorse and the effective implementation of the Services Directive will be an important element in this .
Liberalisation and the pursuit of free-trade policies will lead to a more competitive and dynamic economy in Europe .
We also support the emphasis placed by this Commission on deregulation and the rigorous pursuit of impact assessments , something British Conservatives have long argued for .
We also welcome any sensible measures that promote the environment and the fight against global poverty .
We can agree with the emphasis placed on the fight against fraud and mismanagement .
However , we cannot support the calls in this resolution for the implementation of the EU Constitution , the calls for a Common EU Immigration , Visa and Asylum Policy or the assertion that the EU has insufficient funds to deal with future challenges .
The Commission 's proposed legislative programme for 2007 shows in stark relief how the lack of political leadership in many Member States is complicating matters for the EU .
Whilst it is true that the Commission is the driving force of the Community institutions , it is also true that , when the Member States are enmeshed in internal problems , this takes up a great deal of energy .
Nevertheless , it should be recognised that , by placing the emphasis on economic issues - more specifically , the issue of technology and , equally importantly , that of energy - and by not attaching excessive importance to institutional issues , this Commission shows itself to have understood what its priorities should be .
The constant commitment to better regulation moreover reveals an understanding of the need to simplify the legislative environment .
We hope that 2007 will be a year in which Europe 's political web is untangled , so that the notion does not become established that we have neither a mobilising project for Europe nor the political impetus to implement such a project .
In view of its business and economic importance and given the clear historic and cultural affinities with the countries that make up the EU , Russia is worthy of our particular concern .
The fall of the Soviet dictatorship aroused genuine hope that it may follow the path of democracy and freedom .
Unfortunately , the recent tragic deaths of Anna Politkovskaya and Alexander Litvinenko are clear signs that Russia is still a long way from acceptable standards when it comes to the most basic fundamental freedoms .
In addition to armed interventions in its geopolitical sphere of influence , I must also criticise the trade and energy mechanisms employed by Russia as a means of putting pressure on its neighbours , which are tantamount to discretionary sanctions .
I feel that the EU must continue to establish close cooperation with Russia , both on the international stage and at the common neighbourhood level , but this partnership must be subject to constant vigilance and criticism on our part .
For its own balance and security , the EU clearly needs a prosperous , free and democratic Russia .
I hope the Russian people are able to chart a safe course in this direction .
( DE ) Mr President , since our debate , which , regrettably , took place in the context of a mini-plenary , the situation in Russia has continued to get dramatically worse .
All I can do is appeal to President Putin to take good care of the prisoners - the so-called Yukos managers and other political detainees - and to take care that they are not killed in mysterious ways as others have been .
The standards of the rule of law apply in Russia , on paper at any rate , and it is a matter of urgency that they should be maintained .
World public opinion will be watching President Putin vigilantly in the expectation that they will be .
I want to thank Mr Horáček for having inserted into this fine resolution the reference to the Yukos managers , which insists on their being at last set at liberty or at least treated in accordance with Russian law and imprisoned nearer to their homes .
I would like to use the opportunity presented by this statement of vote to make a personal statement .
As I do not know whether I will again have the honour to speak when you are in the chair , I would like to thank you for exercising the office of Vice-President in such an outstanding way .
Thank you , Mr Posselt , for your kind words .
As regards the resolution adopted today by the majority in Parliament , it is worthwhile pointing out that there is deliberately no reference to issues such as NATO 's advance on Eastern Europe , and the strategic installation of new military bases surrounding and threatening Russia , adding fresh impetus to the militarisation of international relations and the arms race .
Furthermore , the resolution makes no reference to the moves aimed at destabilising the Caucasus on the part of forces linked to NATO , with Georgia used as a point of support for Chechen rebels .
It also says nothing about the thousands of people of Russian origin who suffer discrimination and who are denied citizenship rights in Baltic States that are EU Member States .
What is more , it swings between the carrot and the stick . In other words , whilst this resolution is characterised by interventionism and political pressure on Russia - and on other countries of Eastern Europe and the Caucasus , not least Belarus - the forces of major capital in the EU seek to have full access to Russia 's plentiful energy supplies .
The motion for a resolution gets my vote , since I feel that the jointly drafted text is very balanced and takes account of my two principal concerns , namely the European Union 's structural deficiencies in energy policy and the quality of Europe 's relations with Russia .
We must not be in denial about our current dependence on foreign nationalised energy providers , any more than we must allow European values to take second place to business interests .
Business and political interests must not be confused , nor must our misgivings about violations of human rights and of the freedom of the press be suppressed in the hope of making talks about energy more fruitful .
What is now needed is for priority to be given to a single European energy policy , so that the European core values of our Community , among them the upholding of human rights , may not be undermined by economic dependency on others .
The failure to launch negotiations for a new framework agreement between the EU and Russia is deeply concerning .
There are many issues , including the recent murder of a former Russian spy , which require answers .
I hope that the next Presidency of the EU will also give priority to relations with Russia .
( DE ) Mr President , it will come as no surprise to you that I have voted in favour of this report , and I have done so on the grounds that it takes a very realistic view of the European project and sets clear objectives for its future development .
What matters now is that integration be moved forward , so that real use may be made of every opportunity and that the European Union may remain stable .
If that is to happen , then new rules will be needed for labour , for the interplay of the institutions and for financing .
Our hope is that this work of regulation will be complete by 2008 .
With so many states seeking to join the European Union , new strategies are needed .
Full membership cannot be the only goal ; alternative perspectives for cooperation with the countries in our neighbourhood must be developed , and this is something to which the Heads of Government should give some thought , not least with reference to Turkey , particularly considering the possibility of a privileged partnership .
The idea of Turkey acceding as a full Member State is unrealistic , since there cannot be 71 unanimous votes at EU level , any more than all the national referendums - or , indeed , the vote in this House - can produce favourable results ; that makes it all the more important that negotiations should begin right now , that they should be aimed at further developing the favourable climate and that they should have the probable eventual result of according this important partner of the European Union a privileged partnership .
( NL ) Mr President , my distinguished colleague Mr Claeys drew attention during this morning 's debate to the way in which the negotiations are being conducted with Turkey , a problematic candidate for Member State status .
It has now become clear that the European Union is not equal to Turkey 's insolent way of negotiating , which my colleague described , somewhat sarcastically but perfectly accurately , as bazaar-style haggling .
The way in which European negotiators let each and every ultimatum of their own lapse and let Turkey get away with it is outrageous and sends completely the wrong message to Turkey , giving it the idea that the European Union is prepared to do anything to get it to join , and this completely goes against what most of the European public want .
We may well end up concluding that the European Union is as undemocratic as the state - Turkey - that is seeking to join it .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of enlargement of the European Union , as proposed by Mr Brok , because both personally and as the person in charge of the Pensioners ' Party in Italy I believe that the enlargement of Europe should embrace the whole world .
Europe should be enlarged all over the world because Europe keeps the peace among the Member States that are part of it .
The more countries that succeed in becoming part of Europe , the more peace we will have , not only in Europe but throughout the world .
Therefore , Mr President : ' European Union all over the world ! '
in writing . - ( FR ) No , the adoption of a Constitution and the creation of a centralised European superstate are not , under any circumstances , prerequisites for the enlargement of the European Union .
We will therefore obviously vote against Mr Stubb 's report , which attempts to bring back through the window a Constitution that two European nations have thrown out the door .
Over and above these so-called ' institutional ' aspects , which are rather ideological in nature , we must also ask ourselves whether it is not time we took a break .
In a very short time , the European Union has gone from having 15 members to having 27 , soon to be 28 .
Aside from the prepared statements , no one , in this Chamber , is able to say today what the advantages and disadvantages of this unprecedented enlargement are either for the EU or for each of our Member States .
Enlargement for enlargement 's sake makes no sense at all , except in the case , to which we object , of the nation States being absorbed by the Brussels Leviathan , and of their finally disintegrating .
There would be none of these problems if we built a real Europe of sovereign nations , cooperating in their chosen areas , for their mutual benefit .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List is , in principle , positively disposed towards EU enlargement .
It is , however , absolutely essential that those states that want to become members fulfil the requirements made of them before they accede .
Those countries that are currently the subjects of a possible future accession have a long way to go .
It would not be in the interests of either the existing Member States or of the candidate countries to fix the date for accession to the EU now .
This , then , should be a process allowed to ripen slowly .
The report states , amongst other things , that the Treaty of Nice does not provide an adequate basis for further enlargements .
The unspoken sub-text of this is the advocacy of a new Constitution , despite the fact that the populations of France and the Netherlands rejected that idea in referendums .
The rapporteur also talks of the EU 's ' integration capacity ' and believes that it must be made clear that this must in no way be confused with public perception of the impact of further enlargements .
There is a perceptible note of contempt here for fundamental democratic principles .
If a majority of Europeans believe that the EU should not be further enlarged , those elected by the people ought to heed what they are saying .
This is a clear example of the contempt for the citizens that is endemic in this Parliament .
We have voted against this report in the light of the fact that it uses prospective enlargements as an argument for a future Constitution .
The report contains some points regarding EU enlargement to which I am firmly opposed . For example , it emphasises the fabricated ' need ' to conclude the so-called ' constitutional process ' as a ( false ) condition for any future enlargement .
There is a further point relating to the negotiations with Turkey , which is worthy of firm rejection and which needs to be highlighted .
The report ' deplores ' the fact that the Finnish Presidency 's efforts to ' find a solution to end the current stalemate to ensure full implementation of the Additional Protocol , on the one hand , and to reduce the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community living in the north of the island , on the other , were unsuccessful ' .
In other words the report seeks :
to gloss over the fact that the Turkish Cypriot community 's isolation is solely caused by the illegal Turkish military occupation of 37 % of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus ;
to link the implementation of the Additional Protocol with recognition of the reality of the ( illegal ) military occupation by Turkey and the self-proclaimed ' Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus ' ; this is what the Turkish authorities want , and they are supported in this by several countries , including EU Member States .
to manipulate the Cyprus question , in the context of the contradictions surrounding Turkey 's accession , by subordinating UN resolutions on Cyprus .
in writing . - ( FR ) The current enlargement strategy that consists in gathering together forty-odd Member States into one group will lead the Europe of Brussels to suffer the fate of Jean de la Fontaine 's frog which , in its desire to make itself as big as an ox , bursts .
This will happen for two reasons .
The first is due to the fact that , having been given no geographical boundary , this Europe , after having let in Turkey , will have no grounds to refuse the entry of other Asian or African countries .
The second reason is linked to the ideological nature of the Euro-Brussels project , which is aimed at crushing the identity and sovereignty of the European nations in order to build on their ruins a centralised superstate , the administration of which will be even more burdensome than the national administrations .
Rather than dissolving our nations into this supranational whole , which is destined , like the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia before it , to disappear , let us build a great Europe of free , sovereign nations , united by the humanist and Christian values that made our civilisation great .
If we want to pay suitable heed to the needs arising from the extraordinary 2005 enlargement process and from any future rounds of enlargement , the word ' accommodate ' needs to be part of the Community 's vocabulary .
A year and a half on , we must acknowledge that our societies , our economy , our institutions and our mentalities have not completely accommodated the enlargement .
This is understandable given that our flexibility is not unlimited .
The importance of 1 May 2005 is too great for its initial impact to have dissipated in just 18 months .
That being said , we must not confuse difficulties with impossibilities , and certainly not inevitabilities .
We can do more and better so that this process settles down and accommodates .
Equally , we must prepare for the next phase , as part of the approach whereby enlarging the EU is beneficial for both new arrivals and present incumbents .
This is how it should be interpreted .
To my mind , this is one of the most important issues .
One of the results of this is recognition of the need to match the institutional context to the reality in the EU , although it cannot be concluded that this is the main difficulty facing us in the years ahead .
Accommodation is social , political and economic , rather than primarily institutional .
British Conservatives have always been and remain strong supporters of EU enlargement as it provides a larger single market and a looser and more flexible Europe of nation states .
Nevertheless , we do not accept that for this process to progress further that it needs a fully-fledged EC Constitution with the loss of more powers from Member States to the EU .
Therefore , we have abstained on this report .
I cling to the belief that enlargement is one of the few positive aspects of the EU , provided that the movement of people can be controlled - widening of the EU means less chance of creating a tightly integrated European superstate ; it also helps extend the area of stability and prosperity across Europe .
In fact , as we have seen , the process of enlargement and the prospects of future enlargement are a major catalyst for change .
The reaction to this by the federalists is to try and tighten their grip on the EU as a political project by trying to resuscitate the Constitution and to slow down future enlargement .
This is reflected in the Brok report .
The report also takes a very one-sided and unhelpful view of the Cyprus problem .
I abstained in order to signal , on the one hand , my support for enlargement , and on the other , my firm and consistent opposition to the federalist agenda , to the Constitution , and to the bias against Northern Cyprus .

( DE ) Mr President , I am glad to see that this House will , with immediate effect , be putting integration capacity at the heart of the enlargement debate , for the success of the enlargement process , and of a more profound process of European integration , depend on it .
Integration must be accomplished before we can even think about a new enlargement ; what that means is that the institutions ' functioning must be improved to a sufficient degree to enable them to take decisions in an efficient and democratic manner , and the existing financial arrangements must be changed .
Enlargement so far has been a partial success , and , in the course of moving forward the integration process , we will use every opportunity to make the European Union more stable .
Since this will be my last speech today , I would like to use this opportunity to extend very warm thanks to the President , for whom I have particularly high regard , for the way in which he has chaired this sitting , backed up by his own unique brand of charm .
I wish him all the best for a successful future in this House .
The PES Group supported this report and congratulates the rapporteur on achieving a wide consensus .
However , the UK Labour MEPs and others abstained on this report and several of its paragraphs on the grounds that , while we support most of the measures proposed , they are not all preconditions for enlargement .
Had the report not insisted on every one of these reforms being a precondition that has to enter into force before any further enlargement , it would no doubt have gained a larger majority .
This proposal , submitted for a second reading , differs from the legislation in force in three key areas .
One purpose of the proposal is that data be submitted annually rather than monthly .
According to recent studies , monthly data forwarded up to six months after the event are of limited use in day-to-day market management , whereas the compilation of annual data can be useful for medium- to long-term market studies and can help reduce the workload for the national authorities in forwarding data .
According to the proposal , data submissions are to be required by the flag ( or nationality ) of the vessels responsible for the landings .
This requirement , as opposed to the current submissions by broad groups of EU , EFTA and other vessels will enable the data to be analysed in greater detail and yet will not significantly increase the workload of the national authorities which already collect the data to this level of detail .
Lastly , the proposal for a regulation provides for a more flexible approach , enabling sampling techniques to be used to estimate total landings .
National authorities may , to an appropriate extent , use sampling methods for data collection purposes , providing that they justify their use and analyse the quality of the resulting data in a methodological report ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr Brok 's report on enlargement strategy is very much about ' integration capacity ' , considered solely from the angle of satisfying Brussels ' interests and appetite for power .
According to this report , this ' capacity ' should not be confused , I quote , with ' public perception of the impact of further enlargements ' .
You are wrong .
Firstly , because it is the people of the Member States who are most affected by the economic and social consequences of enlargement and who therefore deserve to be heard .
Secondly , because it is they who will ultimately decide on these accessions .
In France , for example , a referendum will be compulsory for any accession taking place after that of Croatia .
This is the ' gift ' that a failing Mr Chirac has given us in a vain attempt to prevent us from rejecting the European Constitution .
I also regret that the question has never been asked about Europe 's geographical boundaries and about the definition of its common identity .
That would enable us clearly to say that Turkey is a great country , but that it is essentially , geographically , culturally , historically and demographically , an Asian country .
It would also enable us to put a stop to the humiliating farce for the country that these accession negotiations have become .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List does not share the rapporteur 's view that a more federal EU must be created in order for it to be possible for the enlargement process to continue .
We believe , on the contrary , that it is of the greatest importance that political decisions that are to apply to the whole of the EU should be soundly based in the Council of Ministers .
We therefore oppose any increase in the number of areas within which decisions may be taken on a qualified majority basis .
We also think it is of the greatest importance that every Member State be represented in the Commission in order for the latter 's work to be credible in all Member States .
We are further unable to see how the creation of the post of Minister of Foreign Affairs would be of benefit to the enlargement process .
June List MEPs have therefore voted against this report in its entirety .
As has become the norm , the majority in Parliament has adopted a report based on the idea that EU enlargement should be pursued on the condition that federalism is guaranteed and even deepened , that is to say , on the condition that the domination of the major powers in the EU 's decision-making process can be guaranteed , thus pandering to the interests of their large economic and financial groups .
The report begins by positing the populist premise that the institutions need to be reformed in order to guarantee the ' effectiveness ' and ' functioning ' of the EU institutions .
After setting out a long list of reforms , it predictably reaches its ultimate destination , namely the promotion of the inappropriately named ' European Constitution ' .
By emphasising the content of the already-rejected proposed Treaty , this report shows the true intentions of the resumption of the so-called ' constitutional process ' .
Consequently , we have the usual panoply of measures aimed at centralising power in supranational bodies dominated by the major powers : a new weighting of votes and the end of the rotation of Council presidencies , the extension of the qualified ' majority ' , the ' Minister for Foreign Affairs ' , the end of one Commissioner per country on the Commission and the end of unanimity in amending the Treaties .
This is unacceptable .
I and my British Conservative colleagues have always been and remain strong supporters of the enlargement of the European Union .
However , we fundamentally disagree with the premise of this report which , in effect , states that further enlargement can only proceed successfully if the European Constitution comes into force .
The report on the institutional aspects of the European Union 's capacity to integrate new Member States confirms the constant determination of the political spokesmen of European capital in the European Parliament to resuscitate the reactionary European Constitution , which has been condemned by the people of Europe .
Thanks to their constant desire to integrate new countries into the ΕU , they are projecting the most reactionary aspects of the European Constitution ( such as the full abolition of unanimity , the strengthening of the role of the President of the Commission , the introduction of the position of Minister of Foreign Affairs of the ΕU , the simplification of amendments to the Constitution ) , as allegedly necessary reforms for the effective functioning of the Union , meaning the unimpeded facility for monopoly capital to promote capitalist restructurings and its anti-grassroots , imperialist policy at the expense of the peoples of Europe and the whole world .
With provocative disdain for the declared will of the peoples to reject the European Constitution , they are calling for the campaign to brainwash the people to be intensified , so that they are ultimately forced to accept it ; they even set as a target its promotion by the end of 2008 .
The pressure , coercion and huge conscience-guiding operation reflect the deep concern of the political forces of the ' one-way street ' in Europe at the increasing questioning of the reactionary construct itself by the peoples .
That is why we voted against the report .
One cannot receive guests without a home in which to receive them .
If this is what is meant by ' absorption capacity ' , I am in complete agreement , as I have said on many occasions .
Each time it enlarges , the Union must be capable of absorbing those who enter and must accommodate the changes arising from it .
This is why I voted in favour of the report .
Worse than dashing the expectations of those who are seeking to join the Community would be to dash the expectations of the accession countries and of those already in the Community .
Let us look at our capacity to accept new Member States before each new round of enlargement .
Do not , however , expect us to help subvert this concept and turn it into something it is not : a euphemism for blocking entry .
Lastly , in this regard I would underline what I have said before : the EU 's capacity to enlarge will of course have its limits , but it would be good if the Union 's capacity to produce the same results were not limited , beginning with our neighbours in the Mediterranean region .
Although we are not , of course , capable of absorbing them , let us be up to the task of ' integrating ' them into our area , in a new , broader definition of the term .
Although there is much to support in this report , it focuses not on what is needed for enlargement but what the EU is missing due to the non-ratification of the Constitution Treaty .
Although I am not against the Constitutional Treaty , I do not believe that it should be a prerequisite for future enlargements .
I will therefore abstain .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 2.05 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Data protection ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on data protection .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , matters relating to data protection have had a high profile during the Finnish presidential term .
On the one hand , the Presidency has encountered challenges relating to the subject and previously known to us , such as taking forward the Framework Decision on data protection under the third pillar .
On the other hand , we have faced situations where the Presidency has had to respond quickly and as the circumstances have demanded .
Examples of this are the negotiation of the new agreement on passenger name record ( PNR ) data with the United States of America , and the matter of bank transfer data by SWIFT .
The Finnish Presidency is aware that the European Parliament has said in several contexts that it considers the Framework Decision on data protection under the third pillar and its speedy adoption to be very important .
The proposal for the Framework Decision has been one of the priorities of our Presidency in the area of justice and home affairs .
It was our ambitious goal to reach agreement on the Framework Decision during Finland 's term .
We have taken much time and trouble this autumn to take this proposal for a Framework Decision forward .
During our term the first reading was brought to a conclusion , and it went through a second and third reading .
In addition , on several occasions the Article 36 Committee and the Permanent Representatives Committee were asked to look at individual questions relating to the matter .
Despite these efforts , the timetable proved too tight .
Obviously , consensus will not be reached now during the Finnish Presidency , and the debate on the Framework Decision will be taken up in the German term .
The proposal for a Framework Decision is a broad and multilateral package , whose impact on police cooperation , as well as cooperation on crime and the protection of data of those registered , will call for careful deliberation .
The difficulty with it is that certain crucial questions remain unanswered , though much progress has been made .
For example , questions relating to the scope of the Framework Decision have not yet been resolved .
The main question that remains unanswered is whether the principles of data protection in the Framework Decision would also apply to the processing of data within the Member States , or whether its scope should be limited to cross-border information , which is what some Member States are in favour of .
It was also the task of the Presidency this autumn to negotiate a new agreement on the surrender of PNR data to the US authorities .
The agreement that emerged from the talks corresponds very much to the content of the 2004 agreement .
The airlines can still operate , and they can still hand over PNR data to the United States .
The United States , for its part , is committed to guaranteeing an adequate level of data privacy in the future .
The agreement signed in mid-October is temporary and valid until the end of July 2007 .
The intention is to have by then a new , more permanent arrangement for handing over PNR data .
We will aim to start talks on this , which are not expected to be easy , as soon as possible .
A new negotiating mandate is being drawn up at the moment .
The significance of the new PNR agreement to be negotiated in 2007 is underlined in the light of the information that has recently been made public with regard to the Automatic Targeting System ( ATS ) employed by the US authorities .
This system collates information from various different sources , including PNR data on air passengers arriving in the United States .
Its purpose is to make it easier to prepare risk assessments on passengers .
The existence of the ATS has been known to the Council and the Commission since the joint review of the first PNR agreement 's application was conducted in September 2005 .
The US Department of Homeland Security did not make the system known to the public , however , until 2 November this year , when the news was published in a US official organ .
The compatibility of the current and future PNR agreement and the ATS is being examined at present , especially with regard to how long information is to be kept , as well as the handing over of data and its relevance .
The Presidency and the Commission have sent the US authorities an official enquiry on the matter .
The European Parliament will be advised of the outcome in due course .
Mr President , as you know very well , on 19 October the European Union and the United States concluded an agreement for the processing and transfer of passenger name record data by air carriers to the United States Department of Homeland Security .
The Government of the United States confirmed a set of undertakings which guarantee the protection and security of PNR data .
Against this background , concern has been expressed recently following information published last month by the Department of Homeland Security on the so-called Automated Targeting System .
This is a security-screening system making a risk assessment of international travellers , relying among other things on PNR data .
The information published by the Homeland Security Department reveals a significant difference between the way in which PNR data are handled within the Automated Targeting System and a stricter regime for European PNR data according to undertakings given by the Department of Homeland Security .
As the President-in-Office has just said , we have today sent a letter to the United States Government to request formal confirmation that the way EU PNR data are handled in the ATS is the one described in the undertakings .
The current EU-US agreement on PNR data will expire in July 2007 .
At the beginning of 2007 the Commission will recommend the Council to mandate the Presidency , assisted by the Commission , to negotiate a new PNR agreement with the United States .
I am sure that any new agreement will provide for a high level of data protection for all PNR data transferred under the agreement , while protecting the security of citizens .
I will keep the European Parliament informed on the preparation of the draft mandate , which I expect to get before the end of March 2007 , otherwise taking the position that travellers must be informed when their PNR data may be transferred to competent authorities of third countries .
The Department of Homeland Security undertaking expressly acknowledged this .
We need an international agreement with the support of the public on both sides of the Atlantic and of the democratic representatives of the peoples .
I have often said that there is an important balance to be struck between measures to ensure security , on the one hand , and the protection of non-negotiable fundamental rights , on the other .
The Commission , assisting the Presidency in the negotiation of future PNR agreements with third countries , will ensure that security issues are properly addressed through the transfer and appropriate use of PNR data , while protecting personal data as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Charter .
Finally , a high level contact group was set up at the EU-US ministerial troika meeting on 6 November 2006 to discuss information sharing and protection of personal data for law enforcement purposes .
There is a clear need on both sides of the Atlantic to work more closely together on these issues .
I would also be in favour of close and continuous contacts between this new contact group and both the European Parliament and the Congress of the United States .
We need a broader perspective and a long-term vision to tackle , together with the United States , the terrorist threat , while protecting the fundamental rights of individuals without putting them at risk .
More generally , on a subject just mentioned by the President-in-Office , I also remain firmly committed to encouraging and continuing to encourage the Council to approve as soon as possible the proposal I made 15 months ago on data protection under the third pillar .
I count on the support of the incoming German Presidency on that .
We face a common problem and threat .
Terrorism will continue to exist in the coming months and years .
Only a very solid strategy and balanced cooperation with our main international , transatlantic partner will make it possible to reduce if not eliminate this modern form of totalitarianism against democracy .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats support Mrs in ' t Veld 's recommendation relating to the use of passenger data .
We also prefer the Canadian agreement to the US one .
We hope , moreover , for improved transatlantic cooperation and have faith in Commissioner Frattini 's commitment in this regard .
We are not , however , participating in this debate in order to comment on newspaper articles , but instead in order to force the pace on the Commission 's decision on data protection rules , including when such rules have knock-on effects for the justice ministers in the third pillar , rather than just when we place restrictions on company rights under the first pillar , as at present .
Fundamental rights must provide consumer protection , irrespective of the structure of the treaty .
The European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights covers data protection , as does the Council of Europe 's Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , which also provides for a right to protection of one 's private life .
It is also a principle supported by all three of the EU institutions and all the Member States .
All of the Member States have legislation on data protection and a data protection authority .
We need all of this at EU level too .
Parliament and the Council have been in agreement on this since as far back as September , but nothing has yet happened .
The EU has made progress in its fight against crime and terrorism .
What is needed next is data protection at the level of the case law of the Council of Europe or , best of all , at the level of the Member State with the best data protection .
Parliament always plays its part in the development of the field of rights .
The Visa Information System , the Schengen Information System and Europol are no exceptions .
Any institution standing in the way of data protection is in danger , in practical terms , of being an obstacle to effectiveness in the fight against crime .
It is not ' either ... or ' , but ' both ... and ' that applies in this case .
If the Council backs proportionality and the necessity criteria , why not say so ?
Is the Council concerned that the European Court of Justice may defend fundamental rights ?
Which legislation would then be in trouble ?
When will we get the proposal on data protection in the field of crime-fighting ?
The Council has a responsibility to answer the people .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Frattini , Mrs Lehtomäki , the automated targeting system - referred to as the ATS - by the US authorities constitutes a huge database on European citizens who enter the United States .
It highlights once again the different approach that Europe is seeking to adopt on this issue and the growing need for greater protection of Europeans ' privacy and personal data .
We believe that the fight against terrorism cannot be effective if we treat everyone like a potential criminal .
This system also carries real risks of discrimination .
Furthermore , we would like to know how this system operates with the processing of PNR data .
Is it going to influence the negotiations on the agreement due in 2007 ?
The data from the ATS automated targeting system are supposed to be retained for 40 years .
Do the Americans want the same for the PNR data ?
Is the PNR agreement finally going to enable Europeans to uphold their rights to protection of their private lives before a US court of law , which is not currently the case ?
It is therefore crucial for us to embark on a process of parliamentary dialogue with our colleagues from the US Congress in order jointly to define a common approach to the safeguarding of our citizens ' right to the security and protection of their personal data .
I should like to remind you that , exactly one year ago today , we were debating data retention in this very Chamber and , as part of that debate , I already mentioned the urgent need for the framework decision on data protection to be adopted under the third pillar .
We voted in favour of an amendment to the legislative resolution that provided for data access to be regulated by that framework decision .
I must acknowledge the genuine efforts made by the Finnish Presidency .
A great deal has been done to step up the debates within the Council .
However , we are extremely worried about the turn being taken by the debates between the Member States .
We fear the Council stripping this framework decision of its content .
We cannot accept an agreement on the basis of the lowest common denominator .
The framework decision must guarantee a higher level of data protection by adopting the founding principles of the Community directive in this field and by obviously taking account of the specific nature of police work .
Nevertheless , we cannot under any circumstances accept a level of data protection that is lower than the one guaranteed by Directive 95 / 46 / EC and by Convention No 108 of the Council of Europe , which is legally binding on the Member States .
The speed necessary for this undertaking must not endanger the quality of the framework decision .
We are anxious to have a frank debate , which will enable us to reach an agreement without doing away with the problematic articles .
We stress , in particular , the need to use this instrument in order to deal with the transfer of data to third countries and to private parties .
We do , of course , regret not having been informed of the debates held at the Council .
We deplore the fact that the opinion unanimously adopted by this Parliament should not obviously have been taken into account as part of the negotiations at the Council .
However , the European Parliament has demonstrated its maturity and its sense of responsibility .
Furthermore , we cannot implement the visa information system without having guarantees that a framework decision on data protection will be adopted .
I should like to make it clear that this is not blackmail .
We simply wish to reaffirm the determination of a democratically-elected Parliament .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Mrs Lehtomäki gave me an amazing piece of information when she said that she has been aware of the automated targeted system since 2005 .
I am sure that our colleagues in the United States Congress will be very interested , because they learned about it about a month ago and they were outraged that this system has been in place in secret for four years , against the explicit wishes of the United States Congress .
I would like you to explain that , Mrs Lehtomäki .
Secondly , if you have known since 2005 , how come the European citizens did not know about it ?
Frankly , this is not only a clear violation of the PNR Agreement , but a clear violation of the rights of EU citizens .
If I look at the scope of this ATS , we are all talking about the fight against terrorism as a justification for collecting these data .
Well , look at the text of the proposal of the ATS .
This is for employers who want to screen job applicants ; it is for companies who want to do an audit ; it is for authorities that give out licences who want to screen applicants .
It goes way beyond the fight against terrorism and I find it unacceptable .
You rightly inquired of the United States authorities how this ATS relates to the PNR Agreement .
But I think you also owe it to the European public to see that this inquiry is published .
The European Parliament should get a copy of the letter , and you should make a statement to the press and the European public explaining what is going on with their data .
I would like to know , furthermore , if it is correct that PNR data have been fed into the ATS since 2002 , i.e. , two years before the PNR Agreement .
I would also like to know whether , at the two informal meetings held on 6 November and 13 December , i.e. today , this has been discussed ; whether you got an answer from the United States authority ; I would like to know if data protection was on the agenda and if so , on what basis .
I would also like to get an answer from both the Commission and the Council as to whether , in the future , the European Parliament and the United States Congress will be part of the high-level contact group .
I would also like to know if the Council and Commission are aware of similar databases or programmes in other countries .
Suppose , for example , that not our American friends but the Russians were to start such a programme , what would we do ?
I also think that these cases demonstrate clearly the need not only for a European arrangement for data protection , but a global standard that would protect not just the passenger data but also our bank data , our telecommunications data and heaven knows what other data .
Finally , on PNR specifically , could the Commission and the Council confirm that the push system will be tested , as agreed , before the end of this month ?
Could they also tell me - because I have been travelling to the United States recently and as a passenger have not been informed at all about the PNR programme or about my rights - whether you can confirm that information will be provided to passengers ?
A final question , can the Council confirm that the European Parliament will be formally consulted on the mandate for the future PNR agreement ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I concur with Mrs in ' t Veld 's views .
It is indeed a bit much that you have admitted to having in fact known about this system for over a year .
I should like to know whether this was actually discussed in the Council and whether the Commission had been briefed about this .
I should also like to know how this has affected the PNR debate .
I understand that a number of PNR data are being used for the new system .
With regard to the PNR system , a deadline for data storage has been agreed with great difficulty .
These data are now being used in a new system where they will subsequently be stored for 40 years .
I wonder whether this agreed deadline applies to them .
There are already strange developments taking place , also involving these PNR data .
We have all agreed on this maximum storage and on the strictly defined purposes for which they may be used .
There is also a Side Letter , a letter by the Americans in which they state , ' oh , what the hell , if we can use it for other things after all , we will do so for other risks too ; if we want to use more than those 34 information fields , then we will ' .
The Council 's only response was : OK , but surely we want human rights to be respected and you have not said anything about the status of this letter either .
Do you really think that this letter is there for no reason , or is this now the letter indicating the way in which the Americans will be using these data after all ?
I should like to hear your thoughts about the status of this letter .
Also , if you , this time round as well , request only what the Commission calls a formal confirmation to say that things have been formally confirmed ; the Bush Administration will then no doubt respond by saying that they abide by all the rules .
Will you now also examine whether it is technically really feasible for these PNR data to be actually stored for this limited period of time ?
Will you check whether this is possible ?
As I see it , though , the system makes no provision for this whatever .
I should , in fact , like to study the PNR mandate , for this will need to be written in the next few months and I hope that it will be discussed here in this House .
Finally , I have heard that bilateral talks are also being held between the United States and a number of Member States about a new PNR agreement .
If this is the case , then we are , of course , sabotaging our own efforts completely , for the United States will then be striking a deal with the country that is the most accommodating , upon which the rest of us will have no choice but to go along .
Has this been discussed in the Council and can you confirm that no bilateral agreement will be concluded between the United States and an EU Member State , whichever state this may be ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate has first and foremost dealt with work on the EU Framework Decision , and , as I said in my opening speech , this work will continue during the German Presidency .
We have worked hard to establish the Framework Decision , but unfortunately we will not now have it ready this autumn .
Regarding exchanges of information between the Union and the United States of America and the debate now being conducted on this issue , I must first say that the Member States , as independent countries , will obviously make agreements with other countries on matters within their own sovereign competence , as they are free to do , and the Council does not have the power to interfere in all bilateral relations between Member States , and will not adopt a position on them .
As regards in particular the Union 's PNR agreement and the closely connected US ATS scheme , as I mentioned in my opening speech , we are now examining how compatible ATS is with the PNR system .
We have therefore asked the United States to give an account of this compatibility , and just yesterday , at a meeting of the Senior Level Group between the European Union and the United States of America , we , as the Presidency , voiced a special concern that the ATS might not comply with the provisions of the PNR agreement and the undertakings .
We have thus focused attention on the issue in a number of ways , and we are awaiting an answer to this enquiry from the United States .
As I said , when the answer comes and the talks are proceeding , the European Parliament will be informed of developments , as Commissioner Frattini also mentioned in his speech .
Mr President , I am especially curious .
Madam President-in-Office , you say that you are now worried about the fact that there might be incompatibilities between the new system and the PNR , but you also said that you have known about the system since 2005 .
The new PNR agreement is from after that date , so why were you not worried about it when you knew about it but were still making an agreement with the US ?
Mr President , I assume that you wanted me to comment on this , even though we actually have Council question time in two-and-a-half hours ' time this afternoon .
I will say that this compatibility between the ATS and PNR is now being looked into , and we have to remember that , as it is only now being looked into , there is nothing to suggest that they may not be compatible .
We should not automatically assume that they are incompatible ; the matter is being looked into .
Mr President , I note with regret that once again the Council has not replied to a single question .
I would like to receive replies to my questions in writing and I would like to know now whether we can get the text of the Council 's inquiry and whether the Council will inform European citizens about it .
Mr President , as I said , the most important thing at this stage is obviously how the United States of America responds to the enquiry that we and the Commission have made .
With regard to procedure otherwise , Parliament may ask the Council questions in an alternative way .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the representative of the Presidency has just said , many questions will be answered when we receive a detailed reply to the joint letter that we sent today .
I can tell you that we made a specific request .
If the Presidency agrees and if Parliament makes a formal request , I have no problem with providing you with a copy of the letter that has been sent to the US Administration . Everyone will thus be able to see the terms of our demands .
I can also add that we are not investigating the United States .
The United States is a sovereign country and our main international ally in the fight against terrorism .
We want to know whether an agreement is being kept or not .
This is a very simple point , and I hope we will get a reply quickly .
The PNR system will be tested before the end of December , as planned .
If the agreements are not being kept , we will see when the time period expires , and so I think we will also have a chance to evaluate this first test , which was confirmed in the agreement signed on 19 October .
It is clear , then , as Mrs in ' t Veld has pointed out , that the information for passengers must be given to them , since it is necessary information that has been agreed upon , and the PNR test that is to be carried out is also intended precisely as a response to this commitment made by the US authorities .
I believe bilateral agreements between the United States and Member States should be avoided and that the Member States should be persuaded to wait for and to cooperate with the European negotiations .
European negotiations clearly have a great deal more force than individual Member States would have .
The more encouragement and political support we receive as European negotiators , the greater our chances of success will be .
It is clearly in the United States ' interests to have a strong political negotiating partner , but not to have one that considers the US to be a danger .
I do not consider the United States to be a danger , and I shall therefore commit myself to European negotiations , which are , I believe , much better than national negotiations .
I am also in favour of the European Parliament and the US Congress being involved .
Mrs in ' t Veld has brought up a subject that is , itself , also political .
My view is that if the European Parliament and the US Congress together ask to be kept informed or , in any case , to collaborate in the work of the high-level group that we have set up , I for one will agree , but of course I am not the only member of this high-level group .
It would , however , be useful if the two parliaments - this House and Congress - could work together .
This all needs to happen quickly because , if we want to negotiate a new agreement by early spring , we shall have to ensure that the two parliaments are informed of our intentions by the end of February or the beginning of March .
The final point concerns our negotiating mandate .
I have stated on several other occasions that I have no objection to informing Parliament first about the draft negotiating mandate that the Council will give us for the new PNR .
It does not depend on me alone , but I think informing Parliament is also a way to achieve a stronger political consensus when we come to negotiate with the US side .
The debate is closed .
Preparation for the European Council ( 14-15 December 2006 ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparation for the European Council on 14-15 December , that is to say , starting tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this opportunity to discuss here in Parliament beforehand the European Council meeting to be held on 14 and 15 December .
The main themes at the summit that convenes tomorrow will be enlargement , more effective decision-making in justice and home affairs , and immigration policy .
The Heads of State or Government will hold an in-depth debate in the European Council on how to take the EU 's enlargement process forward .
The Presidency has a clear mandate from the June European Council to hold this debate .
The enlargement strategy made public on 8 November , and the in-depth discussion in the General Affairs and External Relations Council on Monday , will provide a sound basis for the European Council discussions .
As I stated here this morning , the aim of the enlargement debate is to consolidate the commitments that we have now made to Croatia and Turkey , who are now engaged in membership negotiations , and to the countries of the Western Balkans .
It is our intention that the outcome of the European Council 's enlargement debate should result in a renewed agreement by the Member States on the future of enlargement .
It will be based on the Commission 's enlargement strategy : keeping to commitments on conditionality and better communications .
At the same time , attention must also be paid to the EU 's capacity to accept new members .
Enlargement is not the only topic of major importance to the future of the Union to be discussed at the summit starting tomorrow .
Over dinner , Prime Minister Vanhanen will give his colleagues his assessment of the confidential consultations which have been held during our Presidency on the future of the Constitutional Treaty .
He will also present the most important general conclusions from the consultations .
It was the aim of the Finnish Presidency to move on to a more active phase of the debate on the Constitutional Treaty after a year of silence .
Consultations have now been held with all Member States and with Romania and Bulgaria , which will join the Union on 1 January 2007 .
It has been rewarding to realise that internal debate has begun in the Member States , and has become robust .
It has been too early to look for ready solutions , but we have been able to identify certain priorities in the views expressed by the Member States .
We will be presenting our detailed analysis to the German Presidency to serve as a basis for the continuation of this work .
One conclusion of crucial significance for the future is that all Member States think that the Treaties need to be reformed to ensure that the Union functions properly .
We now need to consider together how best to move forward .
We need to come up with a formula that everyone can agree on .
The Finnish Parliament adopted the Constitutional Treaty at the beginning of this month , and the President of the Republic of Finland decided to ratify the Treaty last week .
This makes Finland the 16th Member State to ratify the Treaty .
By doing this , we want to send the message that we think that the Constitutional Treaty is a well-balanced package and provides a good basis to work on in the search for a solution that is acceptable to all Member States .
The general public expects effective action from the Union to combat international crime , human trafficking and terrorism .
There is quite a lot of evidence showing that the Union is currently unable to meet its citizens ' expectations as well as it might .
Time after time , the way forwards is obstructed by a small minority of Member States using their veto to block a decision .
It is disturbingly easy to come up with examples : negotiations on the European arrest warrant lasted for more than three years ; we have made no progress in the past two years in discussions on a framework decision on combating racism ; and talks on developing cross-border police investigations petered out .
Unfortunately , last week a framework decision on prisoner transfers was scuppered by the opposition of one Member State .
Examples like these explain why the Finnish Presidency made improving decision-making one of its objectives , especially when the decisions are about improving the security of our citizens .
We were also given a clear mandate for this by the June European Council .
Police cooperation and cooperation in criminal matters is a difficult area .
The Member States ' willingness to compromise is unfortunately minimal on many important issues , since the veto can always be used to block a decision at the last minute .
Negotiations deliver meagre results and little progress .
Some Member States have said that , instead of striving for more effective decision-making , the Union should concentrate on developing concrete cooperation .
Action is the best way to promote areas of common concern to us .
Practical cooperation , however , requires ground rules , and it is precisely these rules which we have found difficult to agree on .
This problem cannot be ignored .
It is clearly not just the public but also the EU Member States that have been frustrated with the way the Union operates .
This has led more and more Member States to ponder the possibility of switching to a model of enhanced cooperation .
Some Member States have decided to pursue the path of cooperation outside EU structures .
A good example of this is the Prüm agreement .
Finland has proposed switching to qualified majority voting for decisions on police cooperation and cooperation on crime , a change that is already possible under the existing Treaties .
It has become clear during the course of the Finnish Presidency , however , that the Member States are not keen on this solution .
We are still of the opinion , though , that we need a more effective , more open and more responsible way of making decisions on police cooperation and cooperation on crime .
That is why we want to exhaust all the possibilities provided by the mandate given to us last June to make decision-making more effective .
The European Council is set to discuss more effective decision-making in the field of justice and home affairs .
We hope that the Heads of State or Government will be able to make a commitment to finding a solution to this problem , which has already been solved once in the talks on the Constitutional Treaty .
The European Parliament has made its views on this matter very clear .
The Presidency very much appreciates the contribution Mr Borrell made at the informal meeting of Heads of State or Government in Lahti , where you , Mr President , clearly expressed Parliament 's opinion that decision-making in the area of justice and home affairs had to be made more effective .
A great deal of work has been done on various issues relating to immigration during Finland 's Presidency .
Good progress has been made on implementing the global approach .
That has also proven to be the right way to tackle this issue .
Immigration is currently one of the biggest challenges facing the Union , but it is also an opportunity .
During the Finnish term , special attention has been paid to cooperation with African countries .
We organised two productive ministerial conferences on immigration and development .
In addition , Frontex , the EU 's border security agency , has coordinated successful operations on the Union 's southern borders .
The next major step is to agree on the principles for a global approach for other geographical regions and to extend its scope to other policy areas too .
We have consistently stressed that the EU needs to be able to formulate a comprehensive policy for managing immigration , one that gives due attention to the issues surrounding both illegal and legal immigration , including integration .
The European Council which starts tomorrow proposes to agree on the priorities for next year .
The measures agreed will be based on the two Commission communications from last week .
It is important for us to be able to agree not just on long-term action but also on measures that the Union can take in response to sudden and unexpected migration flows .
Since there is only one official meeting of the European Council during our Presidency , a great many hopes and expectations have been pinned on the conclusions of the meeting .
We have nevertheless long held the opinion that the Heads of State or Government should see the European Council conclusions as a genuine reflection of their discussions .
They should not be just a list of all the pending issues and all matters for consideration .
Accordingly , in preparing for the European Council , we were guided by the notion that the conclusions should cover only those issues which were actually to be discussed by the Heads of State or Government , or on which political guidelines need to be set for future work .
Thus , the conclusions for this European Council will make reference not just to the discussion topics that I have mentioned , but will mention innovation policy , energy policy and climate change as a follow-up to the Lahti meeting of Heads of State or Government .
These are important themes for the future of the Union , and the European Council will monitor how work is progressing on all of them when it meets next spring .
At the Foreign Ministers ' dinner , to be held in conjunction with the European Council tomorrow evening , the discussion will centre on the Middle East , including Iran , and Africa , in particular the situation in Sudan and Darfur .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope and believe that we will have an active and worthwhile exchange of views on matters for discussion at the European Council which starts tomorrow .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mrs Lehtomäki .
Following your speech , I would like to thank you on my own behalf and on behalf of all of the Members for your efforts and your work during the Finnish Presidency that is now drawing to a close .
You have attended eight sittings , you have taken part in thirty debates on various issues and you have always been available to Parliament .
You therefore deserve our appreciation and gratitude .
( Applause )
Welcome
I would like to inform you that we have with us in the official gallery Mr Ranko Krivokapic , President of the Parliament of the Republic of Montenegro , and Mrs Gordana Djurovic , Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration .
( Applause )
As you know , the first interparliamentary meeting between the European Parliament and Montenegro is being held today , and we wish our guests the very best of luck at the meetings being held with us here in Parliament .
Thank you for attending our sitting .
Preparation for the European Council ( 14-15 December 2006 ) ( continuation of debate )
Mr President , Mr Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , the June European Council marked an important stage in proceedings for several reasons .
I should like to mention one in particular .
I believe that the June Council put to bed once and for all the idea that there is some kind of arbitration between the institutional progress made by the Union and the implementation of new policies .
Previously , it was often said that , if you spoke of the political agenda , an agenda focused on results , on practical projects , you were in some ways sidestepping the institutional debate .
If you spoke of the Constitution , on the other hand , you were accused of navel-gazing , of being obsessed with technical aspects .
I believe that this idea has been buried for good .
The two-level strategy adopted in June shows how the two aspects are linked and how they can mutually enhance one another .
Indeed , for as long as we have to work with a Union that is less effective and less democratic than we know it could be , our efforts to implement the policies expected by our people will never be entirely convincing .
Each time we put forward policies designed to improve our citizens ' lives , it can only make people feel more confident about a further step being taken on the road to European integration .
The Finnish Presidency has demonstrated a perfect understanding of this state of affairs , hence six months of pragmatic and targeted progress .
Those six months have shown that there is a genuine understanding of what Parliament , the Council and the Commission can offer Europe when they work together .
The results are there to see : an agreement on sensitive issues , such as REACH , the adoption of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund - I am particularly proud of that because , as you know , it was a Commission initiative - a rapid reaction to the Lebanese crisis , the smooth preparation for Bulgaria 's and Romania 's accession - sensitive subject that it is ! - and efforts to make the Union 's external policy more coherent .
The conclusion to be drawn from this is that progress has indeed been made .
We come now to the European Council - this week 's Council - which will focus on the crucial issues , on which the Finnish Presidency has already shown the Union to be determined and proactive .
I will begin by mentioning innovation .
The debate at Lahti on this subject was of a high quality .
This debate left behind the image of European leaders who are genuinely determined to act in favour of innovation , and I believe that , right now , it is fair to say that innovation is one of the European Union 's most important political priorities : I am delighted about that .
As you will see on reading the annual report on the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment , which we published yesterday , innovation is prioritised not only at Community level , but also at the level of the various national policies .
I therefore believe that what the European leaders said at Lahti were not empty words : important progress has been made in many Member States .
However , if the aim is to stimulate a real change in the European economy , the European dimension cannot be overlooked .
Admittedly , we need to make more effort at national level , but we also need to seize the opportunity to make the very most of the European dimension .
Your institution , Parliament , has also focused attention on intellectual property rights , on joint technological initiatives and on standardisation and so many areas requiring action at European level .
I believe that the European Council will make progress with these tasks .
On the subject of innovation , as on that of energy and climate change , the Council is doubtless going to prepare the ground for a European Council in spring 2007 , which I believe will be very important in this regard .
I am pleased that the European Commission has been able to contribute , and to contribute a great deal , to these efforts in the form of our proposal for a European Institute of Technology .
The European Institute of Technology is not simply going to contribute directly to innovation in Europe ; it will also be symbolic - it is true that , sometimes , symbols are very important - it will be symbolic , I would say , of the way in which the European Union can demonstrate ambition and show itself to be innovative .
The support of the MEPs for the European Institute of Technology is both welcome and essential .
I hope that Parliament and the Council will include the European Institute of Technology among their priorities , so that it might become operational as soon as possible .
I should like to thank the Finnish Presidency for the unfailing support it has given to this great project for Europe .
The next issue is immigration : no image hit people harder in autumn than that of the men and women willing to risk their lives in order to land on European shores .
There was a real urgent need to act , and I am delighted that Europe showed itself to be equal to the task .
Our global approach to immigration , coupled with closer cooperation at maritime borders and with enhanced instruments such as Frontex , will further strengthen our serious reaction with a very far reaching scope and practical implementation .
The European Council 's adoption of this approach would unambiguously demonstrate that this is a common problem , to which the Union will provide a common solution .
It is true that we still have problems in this area , but I believe that the approach that we have , the global approach that the Commission has formulated , may be the solution for Europe .
We must get down to work straightaway and look upon this as a long-term challenge .
We should therefore coordinate the use of internal and external instruments by enhancing the dialogue with countries of origin , transit countries and countries of destination , which means paying more attention to integration and to intercultural dialogue , too .
We need to see things as they really are : if we are to act effectively , we need to have adequate tools .
It is therefore important for us to improve our decision-making , so that we can start acting quicker , and this in the field of immigration and in the field of justice and internal affairs in general .
I strongly agree with what the Finnish Presidency 's representative just said .
If the Member States really want to show that they are determined to work together in the fight against illegal immigration and on immigration policy , justice and security , they now have a good opportunity to demonstrate this desire : by making the decision-making process at European level simpler , faster , more effective , and more practical !
It would make no sense for us to deprive ourselves of the institutional opportunities that already exist today .
Mr President , the final area I should like to raise is enlargement - final in the order of presentation but by no means final in order of importance .
To some it might not seem that the issues we face this week show the policy of enlargement as being effectively delivered .
I want to explain why this is wrong .
In the first place , I find criticism odd when we are only a few weeks away from another step forward for enlargement .
The vote of this House yesterday not only showed your confidence in two new Commissioners but also symbolised the importance this Parliament gives to the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union .
It also symbolised the key role this Parliament has played in making enlargement possible and making it work .
The benefits of the 2004 enlargement are clear to the Europe of 25 .
I have no doubt that we shall look back on the move to 27 with similar satisfaction .
However , the European Council will focus on two issues : integration capacity and the accession negotiations with Turkey .
The Commission 's report on integration capacity is the recognition that there are legitimate questions about the implications of enlargement .
Everyone here knows that there has been no attempt by the Union to conceal the consequences of enlargement .
Why should we , when the evidence before us points so strongly to the benefits ?
However , we must respect concerns and redouble our efforts to show how seriously the Union takes its responsibility to ensure that enlargement works .
Yes , enlargement works for the incoming Member States and for the European Union they join .
We should all accept a responsibility to engage more strongly in this debate .
I have said very often that enlargement cannot proceed bureaucratically or even diplomatically : it has to be done democratically .
We have to win the confidence of public opinion in Europe .
Two weeks ago the Commission made its recommendation on Turkey .
As a result , this week the Council agreed to suspend negotiations on a number of key chapters .
This is a clear signal that a breach of legal obligations cannot be accepted .
At the same time , it is clearly in our own strategic interests to continue with the negotiation process .
Both sides need to play by the rules .
We hope that the Turkish side will show its willingness to fulfil its obligations .
We understand it is important to show how credible we are when we speak about the conditions for enlargement .
We need to have the support of the public for enlargement in order to show not only that we are credible and our commitments should be respected but also that we are fair and firm in the analysis of the progress the different candidate countries make regarding their accession process .
We know that we need to keep candidate countries motivated .
Enlargement is such a positive force for progress that it is in all our interests that candidates pursue difficult reforms on a road that is bound to be long .
Croatia has made a good start and , if the reform effort continues , is likely to be the next acceding country .
The countries of the Western Balkans have also made progress , and we have offered them a clear European perspective and should show them that we are serious about that European perspective for the Balkans .
We need a renewed consensus on enlargement that both recognises the strategic value of enlargement and ensures our capacity to function while gradually integrating new members .
The Commission will continue to stick to the core principles : respect for commitments made , a vigorous and fair assessment , and a search to improve the quality of the process .
The enlargement process has shown itself to be as resilient as ever .
In conclusion , I want to tell you that I sincerely hope that the European Council this week will confirm that an enlarged European Union will be ready to face the challenges of today and of tomorrow .
Thank you for your attention .
( Applause )

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , as the President-in-Office of the Council said , we have to look to the future , and it is precisely that , I believe , that we have to do today - to look to the future , not only of the European Union , but also of Europe and of the world as a whole .
As a rule , the best presidencies are those that do not do anything spectacular , but work away with good will and determination , and we know that the Finnish Presidency has been particularly good at doing that .
I hope that , tomorrow and the day after at the Brussels Summit - for which the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will be preparing tomorrow afternoon - it will prove possible to lay down some guidelines on enlargement .
The last thing that the President of the Commission said was a call to us to send out the message that we hold to our undertakings .
We are also open to those countries which , in the very ordinary way of things , have a claim on eventual membership of the European Union , and that means not only Croatia , but also the whole Balkan region , although there are of course conditions applicable to them .
We have to discharge our obligations ; pacta sunt servanda - and that means by both parties .

I would very much like to thank you , Mr President of the Commission , and the Commission itself for your far-sightedness , your steadfastness and also the fairness , that you have brought to the issue of Turkey , for there we have a narrow path to tread , without risking any confrontation , any really serious dispute , between Turkey and the European Union , although , on the other hand , if Turkey fails to meet its obligations - as in the case of Cyprus , where it has promised to resolve the problem and recognise the customs union , but has not done so - we may not accept this in a spirit of resignation , but must , for the sake of our own credibility , send out a message that makes our position clear .
If we had sent no signal to Turkey , we would have lost faith in ourselves , and who , then , would put any trust in the European Union ?
It is for that reason that what the Commission has proposed to do about this , which the foreign ministers have accepted , shows such a high degree of responsibility and has resulted in a sound compromise .
It is now for the European Union to acquire a capacity for integration .
I am grateful to the Finnish Presidency of the Council for having , in many bilateral conversations , raised the question of how we can resolve the Constitution issue .
I was glad when Mrs Lehtomäki said that it was obvious that all governments were agreed on the need for reform .
That constitutes fundamental assent to the content of the constitutional treaty .
I would like to say , calmly and on behalf of the European People 's Party element in our group , that we need the reforms described in Part 1 to be made reality , and we also need to see laid down that which is , so to speak , the legal foundation of our values , namely that which is set out in Part 2 .
Quite apart from anything else , all this has already been adopted in Nice in the form of a Charter , and turning it into binding law should not present any problems .
For us in the European People 's Party , what we want to achieve is dependent on that .
It might perhaps be said that thanking the Commission now is a bit too much of a good thing , but where such things are justified , they have to be said .
It was the President of the Commission who suggested adopting , on 25 March , a Joint Declaration by the European Council , the European Parliament and the Commission ; we think this is a very good thing and are all in favour of it , and what we have to say to the governments is that , if anyone is opposed to this House 's involvement , they will have a problem on their hands in the shape of our group at the least , for we want a Joint Declaration that commits us to reforms and gives expression to our values .
I would like to add a final thought on a subject of which we will have to become more aware , namely climate change .
We may well be free to do as we please on this earth , but , if our climate changes in a way that imperils us and impoverishes large areas , then our political efforts will avail us nothing ; it is for that reason that this House and the other institutions must make climate change a priority issue .
I wish the President of the Council , the President of the Commission , and of course our own President , who will , as always , have an active part to play , every success at the Council in terms of our joint efforts and of the Europe in which we all share .


on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , European politics are moving into a decisive phase in the second half of this Parliament 's lifetime , which will be dominated by the finding of solutions to a number of questions and problems that are fundamental in terms of Europe 's future , and so I want to start by saying , on behalf of my group , that we are ready , during this period , to join with the other institutions - the Council and , in particular , the Commission - in a constructive dialogue aimed at finding a way out of the cul-de-sac in which the EU finds itself .
In the first half of our term , we in this House had several justified criticisms to make , some of them directed at the Commission , but we are willing to work closely with it on such things as the preparation and , above all , the evaluation of the forthcoming summit , on the basis that the European internal market will either acquire a social dimension or people will turn their backs on it .
At the Congress of the Party of European Socialists , we laid down a number of guidelines and set out certain demands that we are going to make at this summit , and my colleague Poul Nyrup Rasmussen , who was on that occasion re-elected as our president , will shortly be saying something on behalf of our group about Europe 's social dimension .
We are faced , then , with the choice between social security or popular rejection , but what would happen if the latter were to come to pass , and if the present stagnation of the project of European integration were to threaten to be the ruin of it ?
In that case , Mr Barroso , the tasks that you have described could not be performed .
The cards are on the table .
What we have to do is easily described .
Climate change is no subject for light-hearted talk ; if the Chinese and the Indians - all 2.3 billion of them - claim the right to use as much energy as we Europeans and the Americans do , then the rate at which their economies are expanding will be the death of this planet .
Here in Europe , we can reduce our CO2 emissions as much as we like , but the amount of it they pump out will be many times in excess of it .
We need to act , and Europe has to take a leading role in this .
The cards are on the table .
Russia is not a flawless democracy , and its internal policies need to be discussed , but it is a state that we need if all the international conflicts that prey on our minds ; no conflict with Iran or in the Middle East is capable of being resolved without Russia , which is itself - let this be noted , by the way - under threat from North Korea 's nuclear weapons , so let me say that I am grateful to the Finnish Presidency of the Council for having made such a great effort to prepare the partnership and cooperation agreement and to get negotiations started .
I hope that the Polish Government , too , will eventually come to see that we need this cooperation and partnership agreement .
The international conflicts that I have described - the Middle East conflict in particular - are a real and acute danger , and making peace will take much astute footwork .
One of the steps we need to take if we are to build a bridge to the destabilised regions bordering on Europe , is to give Turkey a prospect of accession .
That which has just been adopted is a resolution in the true sense of the word .
Above all else , it is a message to the Turkish Government to the effect that we want to carry on negotiating with it , and I appeal to it not to let up in its efforts at reform , not to give in to the temptation to play a domestic political card in the shape of a brief anti-European turn in the hope of a few more votes , only then to say that that was not how it was meant .
That is not on , any more than it is acceptable that we , for our part , should send out a different signal from one day to another .
That is why Mr Poettering and Chancellor Merkel , when she takes over the Presidency of the Council , will have to decide what they want , whether or not they want Turkey to have the prospect of accession ; in other words , desperately seeking this or that argument with which to be able to say that it will not happen - what one might call the Cyprus excuse - will not work , and so we have a good decision from the Commission and an inappropriate response from Ankara .


I hope that Mr Erdogan will think again , but , generally speaking , this prospect of accession is indispensable in terms of Europe 's security .
I might add that I say that even though I am well aware that most people take a sceptical view of this , but there are times when politicians must summon up the courage to say that , even though they know about public scepticism and are aware that their voters take a different view , the work of persuading them must be done , that they must put forward arguments without giving in to the opportunism of everyday politics that just might win them the next election .
It has to be said , though , that demolishing the bridge to the Islamic world that the Turks ' arrival in Europe will enable us to build will be far more dangerous than the loss of one election .
The cards for this summit are on the table .
The problems can be addressed , and I have tried to describe how we in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament can help to do that .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , observers will be delighted to hear that the Presidency-in-Office is cutting down the length of the Council conclusions .
I understand that the current draft is about 20 pages , at least in French , compared with the normal 60 .
They may not be so pleased to hear from Mr Poettering that the European People 's Party is meeting tomorrow to prepare the summit .
They are so divided over issues like Turkey that , when they prepare the summit , things never get better !
In fact , I understand that the Council Secretariat is preparing a letter saying , ' please , if things don 't get better soon , we may have to ask you to stop helping us ! '
I would like to address three issues that are on the agenda for the summit : enlargement , energy and migration .
The Council will discuss enlargement and , no doubt , integration capacity .
Perhaps they will find an agreement on where Europe ends , but I suspect that Jean Monnet might have been right when , addressing the predecessor to this assembly , the Common Assembly of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1955 , he spoke of a ' broader united Europe whose bounds are set only by those who have not yet joined ' .
As the Chinese would put it rather more prosaically , ' the people who decide when the bus is full are those on the outside ' .
It is important to discuss Turkey and I praise the Commission , and particularly the work of Commissioner Rehn , in taking action and making a firm proposal before there was time for an anarchy of reaction from national capitals ; a firm proposal that was supported by the foreign ministers and , I hope , will be taken up by the Council .
But let us then recognise that before we talk any more about enlargement , we are going to have to get our own constitutional arrangements sorted out , because the European people will not want us to enlarge further without a clear basis for the further development of our Union .
It is not going to do any good to think we can rewrite the Nice Treaty for Croatia .
Let us get the Constitution sorted first .
On energy , the great worry of my group , President-in-Office , is that the European Union is in danger of being held hostage .
Held hostage to producers , whether they be in Russia or in North Africa or in Central Asia - or perhaps even in Latin America - in the case of biofuels .
What we urgently need to do in Europe is to cut consumption by motor vehicles and electrical equipment ; cut consumption of heating through better design of buildings ; cut the consumption of electronic equipment ; and increase production of safe , sustainable energy sources - biomass , as proposed by the Commission , and renewables , perhaps through research by moving to a hydrogen economy or looking into nuclear fusion .
We need to liberalise markets , because one of the reasons we do not have a proper energy policy in Europe is that we do not have a proper liberalisation of the market .
I am pleased that even the Social Democrats , meeting in Oporto last week , have finally recognised that competition is going to be important for future development .
On migration , the Commission and the Council are concentrating too much on the security aspects , not enough on the economic or humanitarian aspects .
You cannot talk of ' effective management ' of migration , of ' reinforcing ' FRONTEX and so on , without recognising the human tragedy unfolding on our southern shores because people know they will find jobs here in Europe .
The President said this was a long-term challenge - yes , but for five years the Council has done nothing about it , and we must make progress .
Finally , if the Council does come to discuss the site for Galileo - I understand that Prague , Valetta and Ljubljana all want it - why do they not follow the example of this wonderful institution and have a three-site operation ?
At least those looking at the site for Galileo would be able to say eppur si muove !
You are not being serious , are you , Mr Watson ?
Welcome
I am pleased to welcome another delegation that is in the official gallery .
We have with us a delegation led by Mr Aleskerov , Vice-President of the Parliament of the Republic of Azerbaijan and Co-President of the Parliamentary Committee on EU-Azerbaijan Cooperation .
Welcome !
( Applause )
Preparation for the European Council ( 14-15 December 2006 ) ( continuation of debate )


on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the presidencies , and , with the forthcoming summit in mind , would like to fire off a few comments in the hope that you catch whatever energy I can charge them with , which would be a first step towards greater energy efficiency and would do the summit no harm either .
Let us kick off with Turkey , about which I should like to say something to which allusion has already been made today .
That Turkey 's accession is problematic has nothing to do with Cyprus , so let us not act as if Cyprus could be used as a means of resolving the problem of Turkey 's accession .
Yes , Turkey must accept the customs union .
We in the European Union must once and for all lift the blockade of Northern Cyprus and stop allowing the Greek Cypriots to oppress it in the way they are doing , for the people of Northern Cyprus are the victims of two strains of nationalism - Turkish and Greek Cypriot .
That is something that we Europeans have to say , and I hope that our doing so will be the making of the Summit .
Secondly , there is climate policy .
I am delighted to see that Mr Poettering and his colleagues have got in touch with the reality of climate change .
Very good , very pleasant , but please can we now get it right ?
Here in Europe , we agree on CO2 reduction , and then we conclude a stability pact ; those who fail to stick to their CO2 limits get criminal proceedings brought against them by the Commission .
I have had enough of the verbiage , of the constant need to make statements ; when we have to adopt or enact something though , we are somewhere else , like at the next football match .
So let us have this Pact ; let us say that Europe has to cut back by this or that amount .
I have heard that you want 20 % renewable energies with effect from 2012 , so go ahead and do that , but then those countries that are unwilling or unable to achieve that - whether they be large or small - must get it in the neck from the European Union .
That , for once , would be something that would do us some good .
Then there is the issue of immigration .
Yes , we do have to sort that out , but when we do , let us do it properly .
We have built ourselves a home , our common European home .
Unfortunately , we have only built the windows , and forgotten about the doors .
If you have a house with no doors , people will come in through the windows .
If you are no longer willing to put up with people coming in through the windows , you have to put doors in , and doors , to put it in plain language , can be opened or stay shut .
We have to sort out how the doors can be opened , how people can come to Europe legally , and by people I mean not only refugees , not only migrants ; there must be a legal way for people to migrate in order to work .
This has to be regulated in a positive way , in such a way that people know how , in Europe , the doors open and shut ; let us do something practical about this .
There is also Frontex , the oh-so wonderful Frontex that rescues people from the sea .
For three years , though , we have been promising people in Africa that we would supply them with ships that would enable them to prevent illegal fishing by the Chinese and others off their coastlines .
Did we supply those ships ?
No , we did not . We did set up Frontex , though .
Let us do something practical , something that helps these people and enables them to survive ; that is something Europe can do .
The Summit can be a summit in the true sense of the word , and a good one too , if a bit more energy is injected into it , with fewer flowery words , but real action instead .
Thank you very much , Mr Cohn-Bendit .
European energy consumption will have risen a little during the course of your speech .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Minister Lehtomäki , Commissioner , as the Finnish Presidency ends , the baton will be passed at the summit this week to Germany .
During its term , Finland has done its most significant work in secret for Germany .
Finland has had bilateral talks with all the Member States on the possibility of awakening the dead within the context of the EU Constitutional Treaty .
Finland will report back on the discussions that it has had at the summits .
To carry on preparing the Constitutional Treaty in secret goes against one of the Presidency 's priorities , which was to increase openness and transparency in the EU .
Preparing things in secret gives a particular image of the Community , as its political elite promotes its own interests , ignoring national opinion and ignoring the results of referendums .
Particularly scandalous was the decision by the government of the Finnish Presidency to ratify the defunct EU Constitution in the Finnish parliament .
Many members of government parties voted against ratification .
Everyone knows that the Constitution ratified by Finland will come into force anywhere .
At the summit , Finland is putting issues on the agenda concerning an area of freedom , security and justice .
Ultimately the aim is to switch to qualified majority decisions on matters under the third pillar , and making use of the ' passerelle ' procedure .
The proposal did not receive the support it needed at the meeting of Justice Ministers at Tampere .
There are countries in the EU which value the legal basis provided by their own laws in matters that have not been legally transferred to the EU 's competence .
Regrettably , Finland is not one of them .
Finland hopes that enlargement will be discussed at the summits , though not Turkish membership or the position of Cyprus .
It remains to be seen how future enlargement will be dealt with by beating about the bush and not calling things by their proper name .
The Turkey-Cyprus problem , however , is real .
Welcome

I would like to inform you of the presence in the official gallery of a delegation from the Syrian Parliament , led by Mr Numair Ghanem , President of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , who is on his third visit to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Welcome , Mr Ghanem !
I would like to stress the importance of your visit .
Your country , Syria , plays a very important role in the Middle East and your visit is of particular significance given the current situation in that region .
Furthermore , Syria is the only country in the Euro-Mediterranean region with which we have yet to sign an association agreement , despite the fact that the negotiations have been completed .
I am convinced that your contacts with the European Parliament will strengthen the parliamentary dialogue and that the talks that you will hold will mark a new stage in the strengthening of relations between the Syrian people and the European Union .
We welcome you and wish you a positive visit , Mr Ghanem and delegation .
Preparation for the European Council ( 14-15 December 2006 ) ( continuation of debate )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I should like to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission .
There seems to be some difficulty with the running order of speakers in the House after the changes that have taken place in the size of groups today .
I should have spoken earlier on , but we will deal with that later .
Obviously , some people still feel upset that there is movement within Parliament .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her contributions , not just today , but over the period of the Finnish Presidency of the European Union .
In particular , I congratulate her and her Government on their tenacity and willingness to be involved in what were considered to be many difficult issues .
Despite the fact that some of those issues continue to create difficulties , I believe that some progress has been made .
Firstly , with regard to the issue of Russia and the whole energy area , we have made significant steps with regard to creating a partnership of equals .
It is not just a matter of one side being dependent on the other ; there is an interdependence on both sides of that relationship .
However , it is unfortunate that the Russian authorities - the health and agricultural inspectorates - were giving mixed signals with regard to the issue of meat imports into Russia from the European Union and trying to divide the unity that exists within the European Union concerning the whole question of health and food safety , after we fought long and hard within the Union to create a common standard of good quality and guaranteed quality produce .
I hope that , at the Council meeting tomorrow , the leaders , the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission will deal with that issue most urgently .
Secondly , with regard to enlargement and integration capacity , particularly as regards Turkey , despite the efforts of some people to try to simplify the issue of Turkey in terms of being in favour of or against Cyprus , Cyprus is a single , separate issue .
It is a matter for the Cypriot people and the Turkish people to find a solution themselves .
However , Turkey entered into agreements with the European Union , under the Ankara Protocol , to do certain things .
If they are not willing to live up to their prior agreement and their prior knowledge as regards what we expect them to do , then there have to be repercussions , but it should not be a shut-off .
Darfur is the most appalling humanitarian crisis that we have witnessed in the 21st century - continuing genocide and ethnic cleansing - and yet we all stand back , say ' how terrible ! ' and beat our hearts but do not do anything to try to resolve the issue .
These are the issues that we have to deal with immediately , not just for our own credibility but for the safety and security of Africa and the European Union .
Mr President , tomorrow our Heads of State or Government will meet at a summit in Brussels where they will resuscitate the dead Constitution .
Finland is to issue a report on the individual countries ' positions after they have gone through a so-called confessional procedure , and the negotiations have taken place behind closed doors and under the leadership of a country in which two thirds of the voters are opposed to the Constitution .
Let us have that report now , Mrs Lehtomäki .
How has the French Government responded following the French voters ' rejection of the Constitution ?
How has the Dutch Government responded following the 62 % ' no ' vote in the Netherlands ?
The German Presidency will tinker further with the report and prepare for the Declaration of 25 March and the adoption of a Treaty text under the Portuguese Presidency .
This text will then be smuggled in by means of national ratifications .
It would seem that the response of the political elite to the ' no ' votes of the people is never again to risk referendums .
Another route could also be taken , and people 's protests listened to .
Why not involve people in drawing up new common ground rules ?
Why not hold direct elections to constitute a new Convention with the task of writing a democratic Constitution and an alternative cooperation agreement between European democracies and then put both proposals to referendums on the same day in all the EU Member States ?
In that way , we should all know the verdict of the electorate , and it would not be difficult to cobble together an agreement that people would welcome and vote in favour of .
If we were to start by deciding that the outcome would have to be voted on in all the countries in which such votes were possible , the authors would be obliged to draw up a text capable of being adopted .
The key words would then be transparency , democracy and proximity instead of secrecy , bureaucracy and government from a distance .
We should then be able to agree on a text that could ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) Mr President , I wish to urge the Finnish Presidency , in the strongest terms , to stop beating about the bush and to include a debate on the location of the headquarters of the Galileo European Navigation System in tomorrow 's Council agenda .
I was motivated to make this call by the disturbing news that has emerged from yesterday 's talks between the transport ministers of the EU-25 .
Not only did the ministers fail to decide on the headquarters of the agency , but they even called into doubt previous promises made by the Council .
In this connection , I would remind the House of the undertakings made three years ago at a summit where EU Heads of State clearly declared that the new Member States would have priority when it came to selecting locations for new agencies .
What has happened since then ?
Over the past two years , six new agencies have been founded in the Union , only one of which , Frontex , is based in one of the ten new Member States - in this case Poland .
The others have ended up in Sweden , France and Greece .
Now we hear from diplomats that the old Member States have secretly decided that the headquarters of Galileo will also be located on the territory of the old EU-15 .
Apart from discussions on the headquarters of the Galileo system , I would also call on the Council to confirm that the three year old commitment on prioritising the new Member States when it comes to locating agencies still stands .
Accordingly , Galileo should be located in the Czech Republic , Malta or Slovenia , provided , of course , that these countries can offer competitive projects .
I firmly believe that it should be part of EU policy to respect the conclusions adopted at Council summits .
Otherwise , they are nothing more than useless scraps of paper .
Mr President , the integration process of the European Union is at a crossroads .
It is necessary for the future of Europe that the European Summit finds consensus on the enlargement strategy .
The report of the European Commission published in November provides a good framework for this .
I highly support the Commission 's proposal and the two reports by Mr Brok and Mr Stubb which were adopted today .

The Union should have a wider ideological debate and commit to a sustainable long-term strategy .
We should not allow contemporary political issues to influence decisions that have effects on the days to come .
For the European Union , staying open means staying alive .
It is my utmost wish that the European Council this week does not focus solely on Turkey .
This Monday , as the Foreign Ministers met , the Finnish Presidency successfully dealt with problems created by the failed implementation of the Ankara Protocol .
More importantly , in order to solve the conflict , the Council confirmed the Commission 's proposal to freeze eight chapters of Turkey 's accession talks .
However , the other 27 chapters will all remain open for new talks and progress .
Contrary to the picture , Monday 's decisions by the Foreign Ministers have not brought the negotiations with Turkey to a halt but are in reality accelerating the phase of talks .
If the summit confirms the decision , the negotiators will get moving again ; they will not be halted .
Also , the constraining deadline of the Ankara Protocol has been removed .
This ensures a more open dialogue for negotiations in a less pressing environment .
As discussed earlier today in the excellent report of my colleague Mr Stubb , it is the responsibility of the European Union and not the applicant countries to take care of integration capacity .
That is why it is crucial to discuss constitutional matters at the European Council .
Mrs Lehtomäki , everyone is aware that there is a consensus on the need for the Treaty , but we need the real options on the table .
I think the Finnish Presidency has done a good job in the preparatory process , but now we need make moves to analyse this and get the options on the table .
Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission for an excellent job .
The list is long and you have also made preparations for the Middle East and for further progress .
I just wish to repeat what my dear friend and colleague the Chairman of the Socialist Group presented to you as an offer that you cannot refuse - a Sicilian offer .
Let me say quite seriously that , yes , we want to keep moving forward with regard to Turkey and we do not want to shut the door on the Balkans .
However , to ensure that people are with us , we must do more .
People are worried and insecure .
They do not have answers concerning their job opportunities , their children 's educational possibilities .
Do these two things have something in common with each other ?
Yes , they do .
People within the European Union are uncertain about enlargement .
Therefore , to make enlargement successful now and in the future , we need to have more jobs , we need to combine competition and social security , and that is where the PES and our Socialist Group come in .
I was not surprised to hear Mr Watson talk about competition .
But I am surprised that he did not know our position .
We are not against competition but against a one-sided approach to competition .
The only way things work in modern times is to combine social security in a new framework with competition .
That is an offer you cannot refuse , President of the Commission .
I have it here , signed by me , and with greetings from my good friend , Martin Schulz , Jacques Delors - one of your predecessors - and myself .
What is it about ?
It is simple .
It says : listen , dear citizens , Europe is the extra added value to ensure that our welfare states in the global economy do not enter into a competition of social dumping but enter into a competition of increased qualifications , better organisation of our welfare states , and reforms .
They will not be reforms that people fear will take something away from them , but sincere reforms : we are going to reform and it will not be same as before .
It will be better .
What I am saying is : let us unite our forces now and send a clear signal not just from the spring Council but each and every European Council .
Let it be a fixture on the agenda to the benefit of people , to enlargement and to the unity of the European Union .
( FI ) Mr President , the talks on membership between the EU and Turkey are a long process .
It is understandable that membership negotiations should raise many questions and even doubts .
Turkey 's possible membership would alter Europe 's borders politically , culturally , economically and strategically , though not geographically .
Turkey is and will remain an Asian country geographically : just a small part of Istanbul is on the European side .
Patience is now needed .
We have to take our time to wait and see how Turkey develops and how it meets the membership criteria .
It will not be easy for Turkey to adapt to all the changes quickly .
The decision on EU membership for Finland more than 10 years ago was a tough one , and that has been the case for all the other new Member States .
For Turkey it is far , far harder , as the EU requires so many changes .
Turkey is not ready to join now , but we have to admit that neither is the EU ready at present to accept Turkey as a member .
The time is not ripe .
A lot is being asked of the people and the decision-makers on the path towards agreement .
For enlargement to succeed , however , our own internal development also needs attention .
The fate of the Constitutional Treaty is therefore important .
Minister Lehtomäki has done some excellent work .
She has held talks with all the Member States , and I would have liked her on this occasion to shed a little light on these discussions here in Parliament .
Openness is the only way for the Constitutional Treaty to come into force in some shape or form in the future .
Mr President , there are many important issues surrounding enlargement .
As regards Turkey , we can have a consensus concerning the development of enlargement on the basis of the Copenhagen criteria .
I acknowledge the difficulties involved in Turkey joining the European Union , but I would also like to point out the dangers we face at the moment .
I understand there is an increase in Euroscepticism among the Turkish population , something that was expressed clearly by the Nobel Prize winner , Orhan Pamuk , who wrote about the sadness of a part of Turkish society at this process .
The European institutions will have to be intelligent and cool-headed to steer the process and make it finish in the right way , that is , with Turkey inside the European Union and fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria .
We should also bear in mind , however , the paradox that the Copenhagen criteria have not been fulfilled by some EU Member States .
I am also very pleased about the progress made by Croatia , and I hope that in the future we shall also see Montenegro doing the same and providing a good example of how to deal with the western Balkans .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to comment on two points concerning the forthcoming European Council .
The first is immigration policy .
A recent paper by the Defence Council states that globalisation will produce winners and losers at the level of states , regions and communities .
In Africa , the average lifespan is 22 years , while the population will gravitate towards large towns with high rates of unemployment and consequences in terms of humanitarian disasters , despair and migration .
Consequently , given that migration is the result of poverty , the summit should address its causes rather than addressing migrants themselves in a fragmentary manner with repressive measures .
The second point concerns the enlargement of the European Union and hence also Turkey 's progress towards accession .
The decisions by the External Affairs Council are , under the circumstances , satisfactory because they send a message to Turkey , while at the same time the European Union is taking the responsibility to appear consistent in its positions throughout .
As far as trade is concerned , which is not the object of Turkey 's accession , we shall not waste time repeating that we do not reject it , provided it does not cause deteriorations in the Republic of Cyprus or improvements in the pseudo-state .
The Republic of Cyprus is working constantly to improve the standard of living of Turkish Cypriots and the difficulties being addressed in this effort are in fact the result of the illegal occupation of 37 % of Cyprus by Turkey .
If nothing else , this message must not be further watered down with expediencies and competing interests .
It is in everyone 's interest for the sake of flexibility and compromise for basic principles and values not to be abolished .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Barroso for making the creation of a European Institute of Technology as one of the European Union 's priorities .
It is an important institution which , if it is to be effective , should have its headquarters in a number of Member States .
I agree with Commissioner Figel 's opinion that Poland should be among those countries , and the Polish Government has suggested Wrocław .
It is a truly European city , which meets all the requirements for being one of the bases of the European Institute of Technology .
The President of the Commission also spoke about the temporary suspension of negotiations with Turkey .
I would say , using an allusion to sport , that we should set a hurdle for the Turks to jump over .
But this hurdle has to be set at a realistic height .
For example , two metres six centimetres for men and two metres for women , something that is achievable , rather than five metres .
At that height , the stringent requirements are nothing more than a pretext for never allowing Turkey to join the European Union .
I am pleased that today we talked about accepting Croatia , followed by the Western Balkan states .
We are discussing this matter at a time when a delegation from Montenegro is visiting our Parliament .
It is a sign of the times .
Mr Cohn-Bendit spoke of windows through which emigrants are pushing their way into Europe .
The problem lies in the fact that , in fact , they are coming in through the doors as well as the windows .
Enlargement of the European Union is necessary , more necessary than institutional reforms .
Mr President , it is the end of a pretty unspectacular Presidency and perhaps we should be grateful for that .
I expect there will be some more fireworks with the Germans in the next six months !
As we head to this summit I suspect that the headlines will be about the Turkish debate , and perhaps we will hear more about climate change .
My concern is what is discussed in the area of freedom , security and justice .
There was an attempt made in September at Tampere to change this issue from one of national vetoes to qualified majority voting .
Those of us who come from countries with a custom of common law believe our rights to trial by jury , the presumption of innocence before guilt and habeas corpus to be absolutely essential .
We do not want the European Union to use the horrors that have happened around the world as a beneficial crisis in order to increase its own powers .
Indeed , if we take away from people their individual freedoms and liberty in the name of fighting terror , we have actually conceded a victory to the terrorists .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak on behalf of the new Italian Socialist Party .
Last week I took part in an interesting international conference in Brussels on the role of the European Union in promoting democracy around the world .
A large number of third-country representatives emphasised their confidence in the support that the EU can give to democratisation processes and hence to the promotion of geopolitical stability and peace at a global level .
The enlargement process and the neighbourhood policy have both proved to be effective mechanisms for pursuing these objectives .
I realised that their expectations were very high , but I also realised that the democratic process in Europe is still sometimes imperfect and that certain institutional adjustments are necessary .
Plan D for Democracy , Dialogue and Debate , which the Commission proposed for the current year , is a first step in the right direction , but , for the EU to play the role that it deserves in international affairs and foreign policy , it needs first to confront a number of basic issues that it can no longer put off addressing .
For the sake of brevity I shall mention three of them : firstly , ratification of the Constitution ; secondly , the question of the single seat in the United Nations ; and lastly , but no less importantly , energy security .
The EU needs to be able to launch a strategic plan for renewable and alternative energies so that it will no longer be in a position of weakness in relation to its largest partners and so that it can intervene firmly - that is , regardless of economic interests - even in the most serious crises .
Mr President , the Council meets this week to discuss a number of important issues that are going to resonate into the next Presidency .
Firstly , the Finnish Presidency will report on its informal consultations with Member States on the future of the European Constitution .
I hope that discussion on this matter will be open and transparent , as the Council should be .
We know that there are very serious reservations about proceeding with the Constitution in a number of countries .
The British Government has given mixed signals and appears deeply divided , the outgoing Dutch Government does not want another referendum , whilst the German Government wishes to retain as much of the current Constitution as possible .
I therefore sympathise with the Presidency in the work it will have to take on in regard to this matter .
However , one thing is very clear : there really is little enthusiasm for it .
ALDE Group Members may care to note the words of the British Liberal Democrat leader , who yesterday described it as a ' tortured document ' .
I wonder whether Mr Duff would agree with that .
I make a plea that we should now move on and start focusing on a real reform agenda , one that genuinely makes the European Union more outward-looking , flexible and competitive .
I believe that is also the way to restore confidence in Europe - and certainly not relying on PSE booklets , which will soon enough be forgotten .
The Council also discussed ideas on the future of justice and home affairs .
It is clear that we have not sufficiently explored ways of improving intergovernmental cooperation .
We should now get on with this and seek innovative ways of making that route work better .
I hope that we will also take on board the remarks of Mr Barroso , who said he would like to see a speeding-up of structural reforms in Europe .
He is right .
That is the kind of practical initiative that will improve Europe 's standing in the eyes of the people , and I for one certainly applaud it .
( FI ) Mr President , Minister Lehtomäki , ladies and gentlemen , the decision on Turkey - partially put on ice - was the right one .
It has to happen .
Turkey was not ready for political solutions .
Just think , though , about the cultural changes : they are not going to be so easy either .
Europe cannot achieve its goals either , however .
Why is that ?
We have lagged behind in research , product development and innovation , and we are going to get further and further behind .
For example , in the information and communications sector , whose share of GDP is 40 % , we are dawdling along cheerfully behind our competitors .
The situation as regards researchers is very bad .
We need more of them , but instead we are losing them .
The bureaucratic barriers are huge , our training facilities are unsatisfactory , our economic growth is slow , development work is inadequate and the lofty objectives of Lisbon are slipping out of our hands .
Energy dependence and consumption are on the increase , and our self-sufficiency is dwindling .
We ourselves created such crises as these - all by ourselves .
At the summit there needs to be agreement , or at least debate , on throwing in a lifebelt fast : there has to be a dramatic improvement in the development of research .
Some of us have given examples of this .
The Seventh Framework Programme for research and development is not enough , nor is the Research Council or the European Institute of Technology .
We need more money , more innovation , and more investment : an intelligent lifebelt for Europe 's future .
That is what we have set our sights on .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Presidency for reporting upon the results of their soundings on the future of the Treaty , although one might have expected a slightly fuller report from a Presidency that has been so properly committed to improving transparency .
However , the truth is that Member States cannot form a constructive opinion about the future without a concrete proposal for its renegotiation from the Commission or from the Presidency .

I would say to Mr Kirkhope that at least my party leader speaks about the issue , whereas Mr Cameron seems far too scared even to speak of it at all !
The Presidency should point out that it is not any good for Member States simply to agree that they all wish to salvage the Treaty and , at the same time , block the removal of national vetoes and the extension of QMV .
If they do that , we will have more poor outcomes and slow progress .
Therefore , could the Presidency assure us that at the summit it will expose the absurd contradiction between those two positions ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have to realise that Turkey is playing a game with Europe and with the negotiations over its accession to the European Union .
The democratic reform process is at a complete standstill in Ankara .
The revocation of Article 301 of the Criminal Code on the freedom of expression has been shelved sine die , and the Cyprus issue has turned into a dance of proposals and counterproposals from Mr Erdoğan , which in reality are attempts to avoid the fundamental question of ratification of the Ankara Protocol .
That is not to mention the Kurdish issue and the recognition of the Kurdish people 's fundamental rights , which have so far been denied .
I confirm that my group is in favour of Turkey 's accession to the European Union , but it is now clear that Prime Minister Erdoğan has decided to respond more to extremist nationalism and the Turkish Kemalist military than to Europe .
Instead of making democracy and the rule of law the cardinal points of a new policy for modernising Turkey in the context of the accession negotiations , Mr Erdoğan has clearly chosen to be the leader of old Turkey , at least for now .
We therefore endorse the Commission 's decision to materially suspend negotiations on eight important chapters in the bilateral treaties .
Turkey should understand that the doors to Europe remain open , but they remain open to a democratic Turkey that respects people 's rights and the fundamental freedoms of all - both Turks and Kurds - in Turkey .
The ball is now in Mr Erdoğan 's court .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the very serious problem of the European Union 's relations with Russia and , in particular , the problems of energy security and trade .
Regarding the first issue , I would like to point out that Russia is still using the supply of raw materials we use to produce energy as a political tool to influence both European Union Member States and third countries .
Russia is also trying to draw up a new agreement with the European Union and wants to join the World Trade Organisation while at the same time breaching its fundamental principles by restricting the import of goods onto its market for political purposes .
An example of this behaviour is the year-old embargo on imports of Polish consumer goods to the Russian market .
It has cost Polish entrepreneurs hundreds of millions of euros .
This is a case where European solidarity is needed more than ever .
Unfortunately , this solidarity has not been very noticeable over the last few months and it was only the Polish veto , which blocked the start of negotiations between the Union and Russia , that resulted in more frequent references to solidarity as a necessary tool for solving the most serious challenges facing the European Union .
I hope that the forthcoming German presidency will remember this principle and will actually apply it when it heads the work of the European Council .
( FR ) Mr President , the German Presidency of the European Union looks set to be a test .
A test of the ability of the institutions to take account of the will of the nations .
The period of reflection is going to come to an end and the hurdle of the French elections will have been overcome .
Those who did not want to accept the demise of the Constitutional Treaty are going to be able to go on the offensive .
Dividing up , decoupling and chopping up : the recipes are many , the plans numerous , but none of them propose a real alternative to the supranational project .
Only the means of bypassing the Dutch and French referendums are considered , and the positions adopted - I should say the threats made - by Mrs Merkel do not bode at all well .
While those who are against the Constitution are scarcely tolerated within our Assembly , do not forget that they are heard by the people .
Under those circumstances , I can only reiterate my warnings .
The German Presidency must not be the one to do irreparable damage by reviving a Constitution that no one wants , apart from the system , and I dare to hope that this Assembly is not just a chamber that echoes the system , but that it still aspires to represent the nations of Europe , nations that want to remain masters of their own fate on their own soil , that is to say , to be sovereign nations .
( NL ) Mr President , the Turkish Government has stated that it will not yield to what it itself describes as the pressure on the part of the Cypriots to get Ankara to take so-called unilateral measures in order to solve the problems between Turkey and Nicosia .
It appears that the European Union , to which Turkey is so keen to belong , has caved in to the pressure from Cyprus .
The Turkish Government has now made it known that it will not be taking so-called unilateral measures , in other words , it will not meet us halfway in the agreements contained in the Ankara Protocol concerning Cyprus .
I do hope that tomorrow and the day after tomorrow , the European Council will seize the opportunity to cross the T 's and dot the I 's , because this is not about unilateral measures , but about a situation that is perfectly clear and can be summed up in a few sentences .
The fact is that it is unacceptable that a candidate Member State that has held a piece of territory belonging to another EU Member State under illegal military occupation for more than 30 years should become a Member of this Union and - as if that were not enough - should consider it fair to pass the buck to the victim , for this is what this situation amounts to .
The fact that Erdogan refuses to open up Turkish ports and airports to Cypriot ships is only a logical consequence of Turkey 's imperialist attitude towards Cyprus .
The negotiations should not just be suspended , they should be broken off indefinitely .

( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Lehtomäki , Mr Barroso , Mr Barroso recently mentioned the fact that it would be unwise to proceed with further enlargements without settling the institutional issue .
The institutional mechanisms already no longer allow the Union to function satisfactorily .
This is particularly the case as regards European immigration policy , badly managed as it is as a result of the unanimity rule .
Giving the impression that one is going for broke means quite simply running the risk of endangering the European Union .
If the enlargement process is to be completed with the support of the European people , it is crucial that they are shown the need for appropriate institutions to be put in place .
The issue of the never-ending enlargement of a Europe without defined borders was an important factor in the ' No ' vote when the Constitutional Treaty was rejected .
Providing the European Union with a geographical and political framework would appear to be a prerequisite for allowing the people to take back Europe for themselves .
As regards Turkey , I note the decision taken by the Council to partially suspend the negotiations on eight of the thirty-five chapters .
Nevertheless , I feel that this is an inadequate measure given that Turkey has not respected its commitments regarding the Ankara Protocol .
I therefore believe that these negotiations should be suspended in their entirety .
It is unthinkable that Turkey should still not acknowledge the existence of an EU Member State , namely Cyprus , which it has partly occupied for more than 30 years .
Finally , I must emphasise integration capacity .
This capacity is not inexhaustible .
Moreover , it must become an enlargement criterion , even if we were told otherwise by the Finnish Presidency this morning .
We need to act responsibly faced with this key issue of Europe 's borders .
On the subject of climate change , I would say this : it is a matter of urgency , it is the major challenge of this century , it requires a universal commitment and any differences must be overcome .
We need to convince the other economic powers , too , and make them want to support us .
In short , we expect a strong signal from this European Council and , above all , no waffle !
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whenever a presidency 's term of office ends , it makes me think of the cry ' the King is dead ; long live the King ' .
After the Finnish Presidency , which has put in a creditable performance , Europe is preparing to work under the new King , the Queen , by whom I mean Mrs Merkel .
The presidencies succeed one another ; the problems remain .
As from next year , the Union will be represented by 27 commissioners and 785 MEPs : this is clearly an inflationist process , which disrupts the running of our institutions .
I have always worked for the enlargement of the Union .
Europe has never been destined to remain an exclusive club for Christian nations .
For that reason , Turkey must be given a credible prospect of accession .
Turkey is part of our history , of our common culture : the Iliad took place in the so-called ' Asian ' part of Turkey .
Europe needs a democratic and secular Turkey to act as a link between the different cultures of the Mediterranean basin .
However , before we enlarge again , if only towards Croatia , our Union must reform itself , must change its structures and the way in which it operates .
It was a serious political mistake to proceed with successive enlargements without first strengthening the institutions .
The Treaty of Nice is just a patch-up .
Even though Finland has just ratified it , the Constitution seems to be in limbo .
The Union 's budget is woeful .
The financial perspective is nothing like what it was supposed to be .
The Union needs own resources quickly if it is to tackle our economic , social and environmental challenges .
Viewed from the outside , Europe seems to be a kind of heaven on earth , which explains the high number of potential immigrants , of both the legal and illegal kind .
Yet , the people of Europe are familiar with the Union 's shortcomings and expect real political decisions from their leaders , not just the kind of talk that promises a great deal , but delivers little .
Will the Finnish Presidency be able to finish on a high note ?
There is room for doubt .
Mr President , I hope the European Council will express its condemnation of the Holocaust Conference - or , more accurately , the ' Holocaust Denial Conference ' - just held in Iran .
I appreciate the fact that the President of Parliament did just that this morning .
It is essential that the European Union makes clear at the highest level - that of the assembled Prime Ministers - its opposition to this outrageous exercise in mischief and hate .
On enlargement , it is very disheartening that some EU countries and some MEPs seem able to contemplate Turkey only in negative terms of doom and gloom .
In fact , Turkish accession would be a great asset for the EU .
Of course , there are difficulties and Turkey does have legal obligations it is not fulfilling , but it might help if the Council also fulfilled its political pledge to end the isolation of the Turkish Cypriots .
The European Council also needs to fulfil its commitment to keep the door open to the Balkan countries .
On making the EU more effective in law enforcement , the draft European Council conclusions are an exercise in contortion .
They start by emphasising , quite rightly , that our citizens want concrete results on cross-border crime and terrorism and that the EU is failing to respond adequately .
But they end only by confirming the principles of the Constitutional Treaty - which is great , but gives us no medium-term solution .
The fact that the Council could not agree a prisoner transfer measure because of a veto by one Member State just adds to the long list of failures and inaction .
The criminals are laughing all the way to the bank .
Finally , a word about extraordinary rendition , torture flights and secret prisons .
I can but dream of a united European Council enjoining each of the Member States to carry out a thorough examination into possible complicity .
Maybe there would be more of a chance of such an outcome if the Council did not treat the European Parliament 's temporary committee with such disdain .
In its 2006 Human Rights Report , presumably produced under the authority of Council Secretary-General Javier Solana , it says : ' The EP carried out an inquiry led by Mr Dick Marty ' , but Mr Dick Marty led the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly 's inquiry !
If Mr Solana cannot even bother to distinguish between the two bodies , perhaps our draft final report description of him as ' uncooperative ' can be considered justified .
( NL ) Mr President , the Finnish Presidency has taken the initiative to hold secret discussions with all Member States about what they want to do with the Constitution , the outcome of which will be discussed during the forthcoming Summit .
There is not one legitimate reason why such discussions could not be held in public .
It is now apparently the intention , since the Constitution has been shot down in public debates in the Netherlands and France , to force this document through in backrooms .
During the Dutch elections a month ago , it was only the parties opposed to the European Constitution that were successful .
According to opinion polls , even more Dutch people are now reported to be opposed to the Constitution .
The fact that the Council , the Commission and this House appear unable to accept this reality is a scandal that will continue to undermine the EU 's reputation .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to send a strong message to the participants of the European Council , which begins tomorrow .
The message can be summed up in a single word : solidarity .
Europe needs to show solidarity with my country and with other post-Communist countries , to show solidarity in its diplomatic relations and solidarity on energy issues .
It needs to have a clear and decisive position with respect to Russia .
This position should first and foremost reflect the interests of Europeans , and not of the Russia Federation .
I have the fortune to be speaking in this house today , on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the shameful declaration of martial law in Poland .
I lived under Communism for forty years , I was active in the underground movement and it is hardly surprising that I do not trust Russia .
Europe now faces a serious test .
The outcome will show whether we can count on its support in issues which are so difficult for us .

( DE ) Mr President , it almost hurts to see the Finnish Presidency of the Council , still spending hours in this place , having now spent half a year sitting there , familiar with the mantras of politics and of its customary to-and-fro , sometimes listening , sometimes not , and sometimes hearing things when nothing has been said .
I have a simple request to make of them , speaking as one who , like many millions of Europeans , is predisposed to look favourably on their country .
I ask them to consider once more what , over this past six months , was , in their eyes , the main problem , one on which the Germans may perhaps be able to make progress , perhaps a word , a sentence , solidarity , the constitution , subsidiarity , or bureaucracy , but it should be brief and to the point .
It should be a message . Perhaps that would help us make a little bit of progress .
Mr President , if we are describing the changes in our societies in the European Union as threats , of course the citizens will listen and be afraid .
I am surprised to see that my Danish colleague Mr Rasmussen is not here , considering his comments earlier .
However , if we describe the changes we are making as a way of meeting the challenges we face - the global challenge and security threats - that is another matter .
I believe that one of the responsibilities of the Finnish Presidency and of the Commission is to underline what we have achieved this autumn under the Finnish Presidency .
We have a new seventh Framework Programme , we have finalised our decision-making with regard to REACH and the Services Directive .
That is a change of some magnitude and it is making Europe better .
We have prepared enlargement for Romania and Bulgaria and have appointed new Commissioners .
Slovenia will enter the euro cooperation .
It is a significant moment in the development of the European Union .
Does that make Europe worse ?
Does that make people feel threatened ?
Of course not .
It makes Europe better for its citizens .
That is the situation .
If we say that clearly and loudly people will also see the rationality of the changes we are making .
That should be the responsibility not only of Mr Rasmussen but also of the European Council and the summit meeting .
Regarding enlargement , let us say loudly and clearly that we are laying down tough criteria while making it credible that those who fulfil them can be members .
The Presidency should lay the groundwork for a new policy with Russia - firm but open , open but firm .
We need Russia for energy security but we also need to apply stringent rules and a firm policy regarding democracy and respect for fundamental human rights .
That is the way it should be and that is what we should hope for in this final meeting with the Finnish Presidency .
You have done a good job and you can do even better in the coming days .
( NL ) Mr President , a few weeks ago , Commissioner Rehn said that he did not want a repeat of the Turkey Summit in 2004-2005 , and from that point of view , last Monday 's Council meeting was a great success .
The European Ministers reached agreement about suspending talks on a number of negotiation chapters .
This decision is in line with the Commission 's recommendation , which our group had already welcomed .
It sends a clear message to Turkey to the effect that the implementation of the Ankara Agreement is a non-negotiable part of the accession process , and that failure to implement the additional Protocol fully will inevitably have consequences for the progress of the negotiation process .
There has never been any doubt about this , and we would therefore ask the Turkish Government to adopt a more constructive stance in this matter .
At the same time , the Council decision makes it clear that the negotiation process can , and indeed must , go on .
It is of the utmost importance that the channels of communication be kept open , and a constructive stance will be required from both sides to ensure that the accession process is not delayed or does not completely degenerate into mutual distrust .
So there will be no Turkey Summit , but I hope that the leaders who will be present tomorrow and the day after will nevertheless realise that the door to Turkey is , and should remain , open and that the Commission and Council will need to make an extra effort to do something about the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriots .
Any progress in that area will also help get the Ankara Protocol issue back on track .
( PL ) Mr President , the forthcoming European Council summit will , to a certain extent , mark the official start of the German Presidency .
We all know that we have high hopes for this particular presidency .
Today , the list of issues the Union needs to tackle is already so long that it will certainly take more than six months to get through it .
That is why it is a cause for concern that one of the issues to be discussed at the European Union summit is the unfortunate constitutional treaty , which was pronounced dead and buried in the French and Dutch referenda .
No one is still brave enough to return to the first version of the treaty and instead there is talk of taking individual chapters from the draft and of presenting our citizens with some sort of watered-down treaty .
Instead of providing specific answers to questions relating to the further development of the continent , the peoples of Europe can instead look forward to another serving of newspeak .
No amount of linguistic acrobatics can hide the fact that the French and the Dutch people clearly stated their opposition to the draft constitution .
They were opposed to the idea of a centralised European superstate .
The European Council summit and , by extension , the German presidency , should send a clear message to the peoples of the Member States that their will , and the previously established rules , are being respected .
( ES ) Mr President , the truth is that reality , any kind of reality , cannot be constructed by simply narrating and evoking the past .
If we do not have a clear view of our projects and our possibilities , Mr President , we will not be able to build the future or understand the past .
I am therefore pleased that the Presidency-in-Office of the Council is aware that its role is to try to bring together wills and forge consensuses so that the European Union project can move forward .
However , that is a necessary but insufficient condition , because we need all of the institutions to be operating harmoniously .
Within this context , I believe that we should welcome the fact that the Council of General Affairs Ministers has decided that the next three Presidencies - the German , Portuguese and Slovenian Presidencies - should draw up a strategic plan .
Presidencies-in-Office of the Council come and go , however , Mr President , but the Commission remains .
The Commission must therefore be closely involved in this strategic plan of the next three Presidencies and it must also be closely involved in the preparations for the European Councils .
It is very reassuring to hear the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso 's , message regarding the future of Europe , the internal dimension and external projection , the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy and the progress yet to be made in the fields of security , freedom and justice .
Mr President , I believe that each institution must play its due role according to the balance laid down in the Treaties , but I believe that it is essential to restore the harmonious partnership , the strategic alliance , between Parliament and the Commission , which has allowed us to achieve so much progress and success in the European Union and which should allow the European Union to awake from what some say is a state of lethargy , of institutional siesta , and take a decisive step in the right direction .
( FR ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , some great European events have taken place in Helsinki .
My impression , however , at a time when you are about to hand over the baton to the German Presidency , is that your own Presidency will not figure prominently in anyone 's mind , given the problems that still loom .
In the end , however , these problems are the responsibility not of one Presidency but of all of us .
We need to pull ourselves together and relaunch the European project .
From this point of view , the debate we have had in this House on absorption capacity - the subject on which we have just voted - is , I believe , fundamental .
It again poses questions about how effective and democratic the European Union is and about its financial capacity .
I hope that , when you hand over the baton to the German Presidency , these issues will be clearly set out so that , in the near future , we might get Europe back on track again and , above all , enable our fellow Europeans to see Europe as the solution rather than as the problem .
If we are to do those things , two issues need to be dealt with carefully .
Firstly , there is the issue of the internal market .
I am familiar with the zealots of the internal market for whom that market means nothing more than the free movement of services , goods and capital .
Without a social model or a social dimension and without a directive on public services , the internal market will serve only those who are strongest and richest and will militate against what our fellow Europeans expect of the European Union .
Secondly , there is the energy issue .
In this area too , I have had experience of those who fervently advocate market liberalisation as the only solution to all the difficulties with which we are familiar .
That is a rather limited view of things .
The fact is , we also need to raise the issues of research , taxation , interconnections and geostrategy , and I know that , on these points , you have clear views , Madam President .
Be firm at the European Council so that we might make progress in this area .
Take heart !
Mr President , it is obvious that the European Union has two major headaches today : one is the Constitutional Treaty and the other is enlargement .
On the issue of the Constitutional Treaty , we have to admit that we did not make much of it - we failed to achieve positive and tangible results .
We have to work harder so that we will soon have a constitutional charter for the European Union .
With regard to enlargement , unfortunately , whenever we speak about this , we refer to Turkey , and the situation is aggravated when we take into consideration the lenient position of the European Union towards Turkey .
We strongly support the Europeanisation of Turkey .
On the issue of the failure of Turkey to implement its commitments towards the European Union , we hope that Turkey will be made to understand that it was Turkey that applied for accession to the European Union and not the other way round .
We will have to wait and see .
The method of compromise is good , but , when it violates the boundaries of principles and values , it is bad .
Turkey has to get rid of the headache that is the Cyprus problem by allowing a fair solution acceptable to both communities , by withdrawing its forces and by ending the isolation of the Turkish Cypriots , because the cause of isolation is the occupation .
The European Union has to play a decisive role in finding a solution to the Cyprus problem based on European values and principles .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , contrary to the pessimistic and even depressing opinions expressed by some previous speakers , I take the view that Europe has made considerable progress in the past six months under the Finnish Presidency .
Today in Parliament , for example , the pioneering REACH legislation has been adopted , the Globalisation Adjustment Fund has been set up , the Union has responded flexibly and effectively to the Lebanon crisis , and Romania and Bulgaria will join the family of EU Member States on 1 January .
Are these not , ladies and gentlemen , clear examples of progress and success , and evidence of the fact that , despite the huge challenges and problems the EU faces , it is capable of acting effectively ?
Yes , the EU needs to make its decision-making mechanisms more effective and more flexible and to adopt the fundamental principles contained in the European Constitution , with which , let me remind you , all of the EU-25 governments have identified .
I should like to thank Finland not only for being the sixteenth country to adopt the Constitution but also for taking the debate on the future of the European Constitution further .
What we need now is also a clear position and clear statements from the leaders of countries like Poland , the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic that have yet to ratify the Treaty as regards what they want to do next with the document , when they will ratify it , and if they are not going to ratify it , what alternative solutions they are proposing .
I would like us to have such a statement this week at the EU summit in Brussels .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , today is not yet the time for a final assessment of what the Finnish Presidency of the Council achieved in the second half of 2006 ; that is something we will be able to do next week in the light of what emerges from the Summit .

I do believe , though , that we must not let go of one very striking point , something that has been a particular motivating force behind what we have been doing over the last few days , that being the question of what our attitude is towards ourselves and all the things we have brought into being over the last 50 years , and whether we are willing to justify them to those who are desirous of accession to the EU .
The reason why I say this with a great deal of passion is that I know from experience , especially from conversations with Turkey , that we may well use the same terminology , but actually mean quite different things .
For our own sakes , we must become clear in our own minds about what it is that unites us .
The impression I get from listening to this afternoon 's debate is that we are a very colourful Christmas tree , under which everyone puts their presents , and , seeing their own there , like the rest of the tree as well , but that is not how Europe functions internally , and nor is it going to be successfully sold to the outside world on that basis .
Even now , I am hearing once more that , even though eight chapters have been put to one side during the negotiations with Turkey , another might be opened after all .
We will get nowhere if we do the things that ended up making matters difficult for us in the last enlargement round , that is to say if every presidency of the Council wants to outdo its predecessor in the number of chapters it manages either to open or to complete .
We must define for ourselves what we stand for and what unites us - I have just discovered that there is relatively little that unites me with Mrs Berès - and that is something we now have to sort out internally if we are to be able to communicate it to the outside world .
That is the message that should go out from the December Summit and from the Finnish Presidency of the Council .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the President-in-Office on the way in which , with characteristic Finnish honesty but uncharacteristic Presidency bluntness , he has described the difficulties in the Council of getting Member States to agree on things , and how impossible it is to make progress in certain areas where we have unanimity .
It is very important that the EU delivers in areas like justice and home affairs and immigration policy , and we must ensure that we make progress for the benefit of our citizens .
I would hope that in areas where we have almost reached agreement , such as prisoner transfers and the possibility of a rapid response instrument for emergencies , we will be able to carry these through in a summit .
We can also apply the same principle to Member States in other areas as the Commission did yesterday in taking action about opening up energy markets and on economic reform .
Let us not lose sight of the importance of getting Member States to deliver on what they promised to do on the whole Lisbon Strategy .
However , enlargement is clearly the big issue .
We seem to have avoided a train crash with Turkey , but that does not guarantee the train is not going to come grinding to a halt , because if that train does come to a halt , the consequences will be very severe not only for the European Union but also for the Balkans .
We must move ahead with enlargement .
We must not become distracted by things like absorption capacity , because we all know that if Norway wanted to join , nobody would want to talk about absorption capacity .
It is a code word for something else .
Let us make progress on enlargement ; let us keep the show on the road .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too shall focus on the major issue of enlargement , which has again predominated recently .
First of all it is clear that the European Union must keep its promises .
Consequently , the promise we gave of European prospects both to Turkey and to Croatia and the other countries in the Western Balkans cannot be revoked .
It is likewise clear that the integration capacity of the European Union is a serious factor which should be taken into account by all the members .
There can be no enlargement if it has an adverse effect on the cohesion of the Union and its efficacy in preparing and implementing policies .
This is in the interest not only of the European Union but also of the candidate countries .
This being so and irrespective of the sanctions which will be imposed in the event of non-compliance , it is in the interest of all the candidate countries not to demonstrate a position of filibustering or constant procrastination when it comes to complying with the negotiated framework .
This framework is defined by the European Union , not by them .
Progress by the candidate countries in honouring their European obligations may well be a painful process , but it is also the only opportunity for them to modernise and , as such , they must deal with it .
Finally , let us not forget the Union 's constitutional problem , which is still unresolved .
It is clear that further enlargement of the Union cannot be attempted if this problem is not successfully resolved first , because a European Union which is not functional is very simply unable to accept new Member States .
( NL ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I cannot imagine that the Council would not say anything about the restructuring exercise at Volkswagen 's Vorst plant .
Restructuring exercises are becoming increasingly more common and the decision by Volkswagen is a harsh one that will , either directly or indirectly , plunge thousands of families into uncertainty .
I think that Europe can lend a hand not just via structural funds or a globalisation fund , but I think that the Commission should also monitor those exercises .
Were the trade unions consulted on time ?
I think that this can certainly not be said in the case of Volkswagen .
Is the restructuring exercise based on economic motives , or did other national motives come into it ?
The Volkswagen Vorst plant is the second most productive site .
It is correct that the automotive sector is producing in excess of requirement , but I think that it is exactly at those times that a real industrial policy is called for .
CARS 21 is an initial step , although it strikes me as far from adequate .
( ES ) Mr President , I shall focus on two issues concerning the forthcoming European Council .
Firstly , enlargement .
Enlargement has been and remains a success for the European Union : it has brought benefits in political and economic terms and it has strengthened Europe 's role in the world .
I am convinced that it will be positive for Bulgaria and Romania .
The fifth enlargement has demonstrated the so-called ' transforming power of the Union ' , which has stimulated profound and positive political , economic and social changes in countries that until recently were under the Communist yoke , but since enlargement has been a success story , that story must be properly told .
I therefore support the Commission in terms of the importance it attaches to communication .
That is to say , the citizens must be made more aware of its benefits .
I hope that the forthcoming European Council will also be aware of it .
I also support the idea of conditionality .
The candidate countries must fulfil their commitments and carry out the necessary reforms .
Naturally , throughout the process , we must take account of the Union 's capacity to integrate all of these countries .
Furthermore , the enlargement process cannot carry on indefinitely ; I therefore also agree with the Commission 's idea of consolidation .
The other issue is immigration .
In my country , illegal immigration is unfortunately an extremely topical issue .
Mr President , I would like to insist that illegal immigration must be a central issue in the Union 's relations with third countries .
I am pleased that , during the Finnish Presidency , the European Union has held ministerial meetings on immigration and development with African countries in Rabat and Tripoli , but we must move on from final conclusions to actions .
For example , it is essential that we sign re-admission agreements . That is unfortunately a long way away .
For how many years has the Commission been negotiating the re-admission agreement with Morocco , and the one with the ACP countries ?
We have the Cotonou Agreement but , despite its Article 13 , neither re-admissions nor re-admission agreements are making any progress .
I am also rather concerned about the optimism I have heard expressed about the situation of Frontex .
Mr President , illegal immigration is a very serious problem , with far-reaching consequences , and a space without borders , such as Schengen , affects all of us .
We must act in a firm and determined fashion in order to ensure that the statements and commitments repeated at so many ministerial conferences are turned into realities .
The forthcoming European Council must promote this objective decisively .
( MT ) Mr President , I too will be speaking about immigration .
In fact , to be fair , I think we should say that this year could go down as the year during which Europe finally started to face reality with regard to the issue of illegal immigration .
It has been a year during which Europe has realised that Southern European countries cannot be left to face this problem on their own , a very different proposition from the ' doors ' and ' windows ' mentioned by Mr Cohn-Bendit .
In fact , we have started to witness the inception of common action : short-term measures that are just as necessary as long-term measures .
For the first time , we have seen European patrols in the Mediterranean Sea as well as in the Atlantic .
Next year , these patrols must not only be continued , but also strengthened and extended throughout all the months during which we are vulnerable .
Thanks to this Parliament , we have seen a bigger budget allocated to the Frontex agency , which has a crucial role in this sphere .
Moreover , tomorrow we will be voting on four new funds , among which is a European fund aimed specifically at strengthening external borders .
This is something we must do if we want the flow to decrease .
I expect these funds to be used in an effective manner as from this January .
It is encouraging that these funds will have an emergency clause so that assistance can be given immediately in cases of emergency .
Moreover , at the end of November the Commission , which I congratulate , announced new proposals designed to strengthen external maritime borders in Southern Europe .
These proposals include the establishment of a network of coastal patrols and of the European system for frontier surveillance .
I congratulate the Commission on these proposals .
Therefore , during discussions about immigration , European governments must show the necessary political will and solidarity , so that we can proceed on the road we have finally embarked on - the right way .
Moreover , if , during this year we have finally started facing reality , next year must be the year during which we can prove clearly that when we work together we can meet even the most difficult challenges .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the President of the Commission on the good team spirit and control he has in his cabinet because it seems they have to have colour-coordinated ties .
I think that is very good - it shows that they have things under control !
This European Council is about three things .
I thought that the Socialists were against product placement , and I can tell Mia De Vits that this summit is not about Volkswagen , it is about three things : enlargement ; the Constitution ; and justice and home affairs .
What do I think the key message for enlargement should be ?
It should be threefold : first , we need to continue our commitment to enlargement .
If we get that into the conclusions I think it is a success .
Second , I think that integration capacity should be defined but it should not be a condition for enlargement .
If you get that through , I think it would be very good .
Third , I think we need a little more public debate on enlargement and , certainly , on public defence .
Right now , we have a political leadership in many countries that first takes a decision on enlargement and , right after it has done that , starts blaming enlargement for all the bad that we have in the world .
I do not think that is the right way to go about it .
Second , the Constitution .
As a former civil servant , I understand the necessity for confidential consultations .
Nevertheless , it would be nice if you could throw some light on what those consultations would lead to .
I would also like to thank the Finnish Presidency and Finland for ratifying the Constitution .
I think that was a very important step and an important gesture .
There is a lot of debate about the Constitution right now .
I , personally , am against the idea of a mini-treaty .
I would like to have a ' treaty plus ' - in other words a second edition of the Treaty .
If we achieve that in 2008 or 2009 I think that would be quite good .
Finally , justice and home affairs .
I am sick and tired of hearing people say that we cannot advance on this thing because of the Constitution .
No - we decided in Amsterdam to move to qualified majority voting , we reinforced that in Nice and we did it with the Constitution .
If we have the political will - and this goes straight to the German Government - we can move to qualified majority voting in all justice and home affairs questions .
I would like to congratulate the Finnish Presidency for a job very well done .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , thank you for this excellent debate and the comments and counsel the Presidency has received during the discussions .
In my opening speech I did not go any deeper into the enlargement debate , nor will I now , because we discussed this in the House very thoroughly this morning .
It is one of the European Council 's main concerns , but we debated the details in our sitting earlier today .
In several speeches , questions about a social Europe arose .
Let me remind you , however , that at the informal summit at Lahti there was also a social summit , and as President Barroso mentioned , this autumn a decision on the Globalisation Adjustment Fund was reached .
We in Finland are in the habit of reminding ourselves that you first have to create prosperity for it to be shared , and that is why there was so much attention paid to innovation and competitiveness policy during the Finnish presidential term .
Regarding immigration , the Union is specifically aiming at a comprehensive debate on immigration issues , and this the European Council intends to confirm in its discussions at the weekend .
It is comprehensive in the sense that it will not be exclusively about border control or just about illegal immigration .
It will also be a tremendous opportunity to discuss legal immigration .
In the summer and this autumn we organised two conferences with our African partners on this , so that we might examine the root causes of illegal immigration in particular and get to grips with them over the long term .
It is well worth endorsing the work of Frontex , but that is just a small slice of the whole issue of immigration policy .
As for Galileo , there is no decision on its location in sight in the European Council , and there are no plans to discuss it .
I would remind members from the new Member States that we sometimes need painstaking effort to establish EU agencies .
Finland has been a Member State since 1995 , and with the adoption today of the Chemicals Regulation by the European Parliament , Finland now is to have its first European Union agency , after more than 10 years of membership .
I would like to thank Parliament for that .
Finally , I would like to return to the debate on the Constitutional Treaty .
We have to remember that the bilateral consultations engaged in by the Finnish Presidency are due to the conclusions of the June European Council , which gave Germany the task of reporting on the situation regarding the Constitution for the European Council next spring .
The report , however , needs to be based on very intensive consultations with the Member States .
We have now got through the first round of consultations .
It was done in a spirit of trust , which is why very little information on it was or is being made public , because the intention is for the German Presidency to be able to continue the work , based on our analysis , and then produce a report for the European Council .
As has appeared evident from this debate , everyone seems to have an idea about what others think .
We all seem to know very well what people think in different countries .
Our round of consultations was an attempt to discuss directly and specifically with governments how they see the situation , and to look for possible ways to proceed .
It is still not the time for a decision , however , and not even the time for negotiations .
This has simply been an opportunity to hear people 's opinions , and there are only very tentative conclusions to be drawn .
If the situation had to be described in one word , as one of the Members of Parliament suggested , I would describe it using the word ' reform ' .
We have broad consensus on the need for reform , and now we are deliberating on how we can proceed and what sort of reform there should be .
Mr President , as this is my last appearance in plenary , apart from question time which follows soon , I would like to thank the European Parliament personally and on behalf of the Presidency for its very diverse , even kaleidoscopic , but always excellent cooperation .
( Applause )
There is no doubt that , despite naturally differing views , this debate has revealed areas of firm consensus , which I would like to highlight because some of them are important .
We are looking to build a new consensus on the enlargement and , let us be frank , the Turkey issue is a sensitive one that strongly divides public opinion in our countries .
The fact that the Commission 's proposal - supported by the Finnish Presidency and formulated in close cooperation with the Finnish Presidency at every stage - obtained unanimous support from the Member States via their Foreign Ministers was crucial because we could have had a very serious problem on our hands today .
On an issue as sensitive and delicate as this , we have succeeded in achieving a position that we consider to be balanced , credible and fair , and today it obtained a resounding majority among the Members of this House who had their say .
We will now hopefully be able to hold a proper strategic discussion on enlargement .
I should like to underline Mr Stubb 's remarks , which I found highly pertinent .
It is vital that European leaders at all levels , not just the Heads of State or Government , including the European Parliament and others in positions of political authority at national level , hold a serious debate on the issue of the enlargement , regardless of whether or not Europe sees enlargement as a great opportunity , which is precisely what enlargement represents for Europe , politically , economically and culturally , and I would even say historically .
For this to happen it was important to ' cleanse ' this debate of the most difficult issues that were on the table so that we could focus on the important business .
I hope the Council marks this new consensus .
We need it and we need to have the courage to debate , with our citizens , what enlargement represents .
Earlier today I was in Berlin , taking part in an interview with Chancellor Merkel on a popular German television programme , in which the public asked us questions such as how much Germany stands to lose from enlargement and what companies would leave .
My job was to explain that , for example , Germany is profiting hugely from enlargement ; that enlargement is helping create jobs in Germany ; that Germany went from EUR 17 billion in exports to what are now the new Member States in 1994 to around EUR 80 billion this year ; that Germany exports more to the new Member States than it imports ; and that enlargement is creating , rather than destroying jobs in the EU-15 .
The enlargement has been positive for the EU , and this , in my view , has been the main contribution of the Council .
Let us work to achieve a new consensus on the enlargement . I do not intend to go over the other issues that were explained so well by Mrs Lehtomäki .
I should like to express my thanks for the positive spirit of collaboration we have enjoyed with the Finnish Presidency and I would add , in response to a question raised , if I remember rightly , by Mrs Ludford - because this issue was not mentioned in my first speech - that the Commission vehemently condemns this so-called conference on the holocaust held in Teheran .
If it were not so tragic , it would be laughable .
It is wrong to insult the memory of so many victims of the holocaust in this way .
On this issue too , we need to uphold a position of principle .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
I am astonished that several Members have focused on their opposition to the Constitutional treaty in their contribution to this debate , although the matter is not on the agenda of this Council , but of the one to be held in June .
Nor is it right for them to say that the issue is dead , having been ' rejected ' .
It hasn 't .
It has been rejected by 2 countries and accepted by 18 , with the remainder waiting to see what happens .
What we have is not rejection , but divergence .
It is quite right for the European Council to try to overcome that divergence , taking account both of the views of the minority that rejected the treaty and of the majority who support it .
To claim that the current treaties should forever remain unamended because of the rejection of this treaty by France and the Netherlands is untenable .
( PT ) As we all know , as social problems in the EU pile up , there is ever greater pressure to pursue neoliberal policies , and the disastrous problems we know are associated with those policies , namely unemployment , precarious work , poverty and social inequality .
What emerges , on the other hand , is an emphasis on immigration policy , and an attempt to increase the implementation of qualified majority voting , on the pretext of facilitating policy in this area , whereas the real intention is to implement more securitarian measures .
Similarly , there is increased focus on institutional issues , in an attempt to relaunch the so-called European Constitution .
It is symptomatic that in meetings with representatives of future presidencies , such as Germany , the institutional question always rises to the top of the agenda , closely followed by the completion of the internal market , and the issue of energy .
Equally symptomatic is the way in which social and environmental issues are played down and no mention is made of reviewing the status and guidelines of the European Central Bank , in spite of the dire consequences of its policy on the most fragile economies , families and micro- , small and medium sized enterprises .
( PT ) Just a couple of comments in the 200 words available to me ...
Perhaps the most important aspect relating to enlargement is the reaffirmation of the need to comply with UN resolutions on Cyprus and not to manipulate the Cyprus question in the context of the contradictions surrounding Turkey 's accession to the EU .
As regards the so-called ' constitutional process ' , the proposals are clear and the contradictions are still there .
While the need to relaunch the ' European Constitution ' has been reaffirmed , we now hear of a consensus that is ' less ' ambitious but delivers the core elements .
They speak of a name change and of a ( pseudo ) ' mini-agreement ' , with the accent placed on institutional issues ( on the pretext that the EU needs to function , but in reality guaranteeing that the major powers dominate the decision-making process ) and on what is termed ' the EU 's role in the world ' ( in other words its militarisation and foreign interventionism ) .
There are even those who say that if we ' sell ' the idea of such a ( pseudo ) ' mini-agreement ' , referendums will not need to be held in some Member States .
This ' mini-Treaty ' would take the thrust of the content of the ' European Constitution ' , and give the impression that it is actually something different .
In other words , this is another attempt to ( re ) impose the rejected Treaty , and the Portuguese Presidency will be given this particularly unacceptable task in the second half of 2007 .
Council Question Time
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , many of the decisions taken by the European Union have a direct or indirect effect on children 's lives .
Examples of this are laws on social protection , the job market , health , justice and gender equality .
The harmonisation of family policy , work and family life and the promotion and preservation of good working conditions are also crucial to the welfare of children and families .
These and other matters were on the agenda at the informal meeting in early July of the EU Ministers for Employment , Social Affairs and Health .
Measures that are effective and taken as early on as possible to eliminate poverty and social exclusion enhance the welfare of children and families with children .
Last March the European Council stressed the need for action to eliminate child poverty , and this was also discussed at the Fifth European Round Table on Poverty and Social Exclusion held in mid-October .
The subject was also included in the National Strategy Reports on Social Protection and Social Inclusion produced by the Member States for the Commission in September .
The harmonisation of work with family life is a major challenge in a changing job market .
Child welfare means that both parents have to be responsible for the everyday life of the family .
The Finnish Presidency has made fatherhood and the more equal involvement of men in family life the subject of debate .
At the start of October a conference of experts was organised called ' Men and Gender Equality ' , and in December the Council 's conclusions were adopted on it .
During the Finnish Presidency the Commission forwarded a communication on children 's rights .
This was discussed by various working groups in the Council and the Permanent Intergovernmental Group L 'Europe de l 'enfance , which is made up of high-ranking officials with responsibility for child and family policy in the Member States .
During the Finnish presidential term , the Council has worked hard on the proposal to establish the DAFNE III Programme .
This programme could also be used to finance some of the measures mentioned in the communication on children 's rights .
The aim is for Parliament and the Council to take a joint decision before the end of the year on the basis of political consensus reached on this in the December Council .
Finally , let me mention that Finland organised an open seminar on pre-school education towards the end of November in Helsinki .
It is therefore probably true to say that during the Finnish Presidency the Council of Ministers has been active in several of those areas of policy that are closely linked to children 's welfare .
The Presidency is itself also responsible for several important initiatives relating to children and families .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Minister for her update and detailed presentation of all actions , of both the Presidency and the Commission .
I trust that the same efforts will be continued by the next Presidency , so that we achieve results .
I have no supplementary question .
Mr President , in the work of the Council we strive to preserve continuity in all areas of policy .
The Finnish Presidency has worked very closely in various areas of policy with Germany , the next country to hold the presidency , and I am confident that the good policies will continue and strengthen during the next presidency too .
( DE ) Madam President-in-Office of the Council , we know that most workers are employed in family firms .
Family-friendly business plans exist .
Do you intend to pursue these further and do you believe that proposals could also be submitted relating to the tax treatment of families ?
Mr President , tax incentives can also be used to harmonise work with family life more successfully , but , as the honourable Member must know , the harmonisation of taxation at EU level is still rather limited .
It is nonetheless important that , while we ponder these questions , one of the criteria is surely the family-friendly view .
( ES ) Madam President , the welfare of children in the European Union is still facing certain difficulties , but they have been more or less resolved .
However , what happens to children who are in the European Union but are not its citizens ?
There is international legislation making it obligatory to protect these children , but in some regions numbers of immigrant children have been accumulating because they cannot be returned to their countries of origin , and regional or local authorities have to take responsibility for them .
Has the Council considered the possibility of taking any measures with regard to immigrant children within the European Union ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Hague Programme for strengthening freedom , security and justice in the European Union , which was approved in November 2004 , and the related Council and Commission action plan of 2005 both establish a framework within which to develop an EU policy on legal immigration .
Under the Hague programme , the vital role of legal immigration in , for example , enhancing the Union 's economic development , is already recognised .
At the same time , the programme states that it falls within the competence of the Member States to decide on numbers of legal immigrants .
With this in mind , the Commission intends to submit for approval several proposals for acts set out in the action policy programme on legal immigration adopted in January 2006 .
The first of these is a proposal for a general framework directive whose main purpose would be to guarantee common rights for all nationals of third countries who already work legally in a Member State but who do not as yet have the right to long-term residency status in the EU .
In addition , the Commission will submit four separate proposals for a directive with reference to those groups of workers which the Member States generally need .
These proposals apply to immigration and residency requirements for highly trained workers , immigration and residency requirements for seasonal workers , immigration and residency requirements for employed trainees , and the procedures for regulating the immigration of personnel sent by their company to another country temporarily , and temporary residency and stays in a country .
Another priority is better access to information on various aspects of immigration , the exchange of information on them , and the more effective dissemination of information .
New instruments are intended to be developed for this in the next few years .
There will be five of them in all , and the first is this year 's European Year of Workers ' Mobility , to be followed next year by the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All .
The second instrument is the EU 's immigration portal , which is to be set up by the end of next year .
The third instrument is the interactive information system on Member State measures in matters of asylum and immigration .
The fourth instrument is the European migration network , and the fifth is the further development of the European Professional Mobility Portal and EURES Network , as they are considered able to promote the management of economic immigration .
With regard to the integration of nationals of third countries into the society of the host countries , which we spoke about in connection with the previous question , the Union aids integration policies in Member States by means of financial instruments , among which are preparatory measures on the integration of third-country nationals .
A newly allocated solidarity instrument within the framework of the financial perspectives for 2007-2013 , the European Fund for the Integration of Third-Country Nationals , will give a new boost to integration policy in the Member States .
The aims of the fund relate to the challenges that crop up in integration and therefore complement measures under the European Social fund .
These aims are based on the Common Basic Principles on Integration adopted by the Council in November 2004 .
( ES ) Mr President , the number of questions presented on this issue demonstrates the current level of interest in immigration issues amongst us representatives of the peoples of Europe .
I would like specifically to thank the Finnish Presidency for the importance that it has attached to this issue .
My supplementary question is : does the Presidency believe that immigration is now a Community issue and that , in compliance with the principle of subsidiarity , it cannot remain in the hands of the States , but rather it must be in the hands of the European Union ?
Specifically , does the Presidency-in-Office of the Council not believe that this is an appropriate time to apply the passerelle clause ?
With regard to the previous question , it did not relate to immigrant children who are in Europe with their families , but rather to immigrant children who arrive in the European Union alone : nobody is dealing with them and the governments do not know what to do .
Mr President , when before question time we were discussing the agenda for this week 's European Council , it was made very clear that the EU Heads of State or Government would also be discussing Union immigration policy this week .
In that sense it is becoming very much more a Community issue , because we believe that it would be very useful if we had common guidelines and basic principles relating to immigration policy .
As I said in my original speech , however , the Member States will consider , for example , volumes of legal immigration and how many people they want to take from their own point of view .
With regard to the ' passerelle ' clause , to which the honourable Member refers , during a recent debate I described in detail how hard the Presidency had tried to make decision-making more efficient in justice and home affairs , but we did not succeed in this attempt .
( LT ) Madam President , you mentioned that a directive is being prepared to encourage and regulate the migration of highly qualified specialists .
We have here , in the European Parliament , a Development Cooperation policy which seeks to improve life in countries from which people are migrating .
Do these policies and outlooks not clash ?
We will invite qualified migrants into our countries , will not let them create wellbeing in their own countries but instead will use them to our advantage .
Mr President , first of all we should remember that it falls exclusively within the Commission 's competence to make proposals for legislation , so the Council will not be working on this directive .
Instead , the Commission will draft it , although the Commission has not yet referred it to the legislative bodies .
The question of the status of trained workers is just the sort of matter where a very global approach to the European Union 's immigration policy is required .
On the one hand , the Union is aiming to recruit to some extent highly trained people from developing countries for its own needs .
On the other hand , we must also admit and acknowledge that it will be harmful to the developing countries ' own development if skilled human resources leave these countries .
Accordingly , it is important that these very sensitive issues are also discussed at Union level , and that they are also discussed with our partners , as was the case at the two conferences between the European Union and Africa in the last six months , at which these questions , which are very multilateral in nature , were tackled .
Mr President , I do not have a supplementary question .
I just wanted to draw your attention to the fact that I am present for my own question , which you have already got tabled .
( DE ) Madam President-in-Office of the Council , do you think it is helpful if European Member States unilaterally carry out as many as 1 million naturalisations over a short period , thereby , of course , setting a precedent for the others ?
Is this one of the subjects that the European Council can and will discuss over the next few days ?
Mr President , a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council to declare 2007 the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All was agreed in May .
It is the Commission 's task to ensure that any forms of discrimination referred to in Article 13 of the Treaty are addressed and dealt with impartially .
All stakeholders are to be included in these measures .
The aim , under Article 2 , is , firstly , to raise awareness of the right to equality and non-discrimination ; secondly , to get those who have suffered discrimination more involved in society ; thirdly , to increase respect for diversity and equality ; and fourthly , to promote cohesiveness , by eliminating stereotypes , prejudice and violence .
To achieve the aims of the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , the action taken is to include various meetings and events , information , promotional and training campaigns , and Community or national surveys and studies .
Each Member State will be responsible for what it organises over the coming months .
To underline the importance of the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , there will be an inaugural conference on it hosted by the forthcoming German Presidency in Berlin .
With regard to the European Year for Intercultural Dialogue , I would like to say that the Commission submitted a proposal for a decision on it to the European Parliament and the Council in October last year .
In the proposal for a decision 's explanatory memorandum , it states that the experience gained from the organised projects next year , the European Year of Equal Opportunities , should be taken into account during the European Year for Intercultural Dialogue .
The Council 's common position on the decision was adopted in mid-November and submitted to the European Parliament .
The proposal for a decision states that the priority task for the Member States and the Commission is to implement the projects and events planned .
It states that special attention should be paid to cooperation with the European Parliament .
The purpose is to encourage civil society and players at European , national and local level to activate both exchanges of experience and best practices .
The main target should be youth .
The challenge is how to bring intercultural dialogue into schools and colleges , work , leisure , cultural and sports centres , and civil society organisations .
deputising for the author . - I wish to thank the President-in-Office for that comprehensive answer , and would simply ask what plans there are to ensure the synergy between the two different years - 2007 and 2008 - so that a holistic approach is adopted and that they benefit one another and interact , rather than being organised totally separately .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Presidency still believes that the High Level Dialogue meeting of the Council , the European Parliament and the Commission on the fight against terrorism is of benefit in the promotion of openness and accountability in the strategy to combat terrorism in the EU .
The meeting on 10 May , during the Italian Presidency , was the last indication of this commitment .
With regard to the claim made in the question that the invitation was sent at the last minute , the Presidency wishes to point out that the President of the European Parliament was sent an official invitation on 10 April 2006 .
It does not fall within the Presidency 's competence to guess the reasons why it took so long to send an invitation to the Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , but we are pleased that the Chairman of the Committee was nevertheless able to attend .
During its presidential term , Finland tried to honour its obligations under the strategy and organise this high-level event , but possible dates were always being cancelled before the invitation was sent , owing to one of the parties or because of some other major problem .
The Finnish Presidency regrets that it did not manage to organise the event , despite all its efforts to do so .
We hope that future presidencies will meet with more success in this , because regular contact needs to be maintained with the European Parliament on this important issue .
Thank you , Minister , but the fact is that second meeting did not take place , so one has to question the priority .
And to have the chairman of the committee at just one meeting in one year is really not very stunning .
We as the Parliament were not involved in the drawing up of this counter-terrorism strategy or in the action planned , despite repeated requests .
You were having discussions - we had a debate earlier this afternoon about the Automated Targeting System , which you knew about in September 2005 , although you did not tell us .
If there really is a commitment to keep us informed of all important developments in the field of counter-terrorism , why did we not know about that ?
Why are we not involved in all the discussions with the United States on security and privacy ?
I beg to differ on your commitment to this dialogue .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , as I said , we worked hard to organise this High Level Dialogue , but , unfortunately , it happened not to work out in terms of the timetable .
I am sure that those here in this House understand that such things are possible in today 's world .
If there are a few failures in trying to get all the main parties around the same table , it just shows that six months is a very short space of time .
As for the debate we had earlier today on the US ATS , as I mentioned and as I understand it , this was referred to in September 2005 in papers which were also sent to the European Parliament , but this was never before such a major issue .
( DE ) Important as anti-terrorism may be , one gets the impression - as a shocking example from the United States in particular shows us - that this kind of policy is being used to restrict democratic freedoms , indeed almost to abolish them , and to curtail the freedom of the press .
What has the Finnish Presidency done at European level to prevent things moving in that direction here as well , in view of the fact that we will , in the end , have either a democratic Europe or no Europe ?
Mr President , human rights and data protection have always been crucially important in all discussions whenever European policy on counter-terrorism has been formulated and implemented .
In this House I have frequently expressed the Council 's position that human rights and the obligations under international agreements must be respected even when counter-terrorism measures are being implemented .
This is also actually the basis for fighting terrorism in the European Union .
We have to remember that European society is very much based on individual freedoms .
We have to take extreme care that when we are defending and protecting this society and its model for living we do not at the same time introduce measures that in fact undermine this society based on freedom of the individual .
As the author is not present , Question No 5 lapses .
Subject : Lithuania 's energy prospects
Lithuania is one of the new EU Member States that is most dependent on Russian energy , which is used by Russia as a means of attaining its political objectives .
Only electric energy is produced in Lithuania itself and 80 % of this energy is provided by the Ignalina nuclear power plant , which is scheduled to close in 2009 .
Decision No 1364 / 2006 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down guidelines for trans-European energy networks includes plans for the construction of a link between Poland and Lithuania ( Ełk-Alytus ) .
However , the town of Ełk in Poland does not have a developed energy infrastructure or a high-voltage electricity link with western energy networks .
This link does not solve the problem of how to connect Lithuania to the EU energy system .
A new nuclear power plant in Lithuania could not be built before 2014 .
The absence of a common EU energy policy and common energy sources ( electricity , gas ) , coupled with a lack of solidarity on the part of EU Member States , threatens to isolate Lithuania from energy suppliers .
Prior to its accession to the European Union , Lithuania signed Protocol No 4 on the Ignalina nuclear power plant in Lithuania .
Under this protocol , Lithuania made a commitment to close unit 1 of the Ignalina nuclear power plant before 2005 and unit 2 by 2009 .
Without prejudice to this commitment , the general safeguard clause referred to in Article 37 of the Act of Accession is applicable until 31 December 2012 if energy supply is disrupted in Lithuania .
Given such an uncertain state of affairs , could Lithuania apply Article 37 of the Act of Accession and prolong the operation of the Ignalina nuclear power plant , provided that safety standards allow , until Lithuania 's energy problems are resolved ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the honourable Member alludes to the application of the general safeguard clause in Article 37 of the Act of Accession .
The Council would like to draw the honourable Member 's attention to the answer which was given to her oral question H-0815 this year .
She will certainly have realised that it is for the Commission , if requested with justification by a Member State , to decide on protection measures that it deems necessary in order to respond to a Member State 's request .
Let me say here that last week an electric cable connection was established between Estonia and Finland , which will connect electricity networks in the Baltic and the Nordic Countries , and so also improve energy security in Lithuania .
This will also be an important step forward in developing European networks .
- ( LT ) Madam President , Article 4 of the Accession Treaty establishes a common defence condition until 1 December 2012 .
Meanwhile Article 37 ( 1 ) of the Accession Treaty foresees defence measures in the event of energy difficulties within a three-year period from the date of accession .
It would mean until 1 May 2007 for Lithuania .
Perhaps the Minister could explain the possibility of reconciling these two normative acts and how they could be applied in practice ?
I would request a reply in writing .
Mr President , these safeguard clauses may therefore be applied if a Member State makes such a request , if it is thought to be justified , and if the Commission considers that protective measures are necessary in response to it .
I would say again , however , that it is for the Commission to decide on protective measures for a Member State .
- ( LT ) I would like to ask the Minister about the construction of nuclear power plants .
As we know , each European Union state decides for itself whether it needs to build new nuclear power plants .
Finland does this and does it successfully .
Bearing in mind that nuclear power plants are growing more reliable with every passing year , and that science and technology are reaching ever-newer levels , has the time not come for this question to be reconsidered at the European Union level as well , and for a more positive attitude to atomic energy to be expressed ?
Mr President , this question is fundamentally linked to the common European energy debate .
The Finnish Presidency has adopted the view , one that has been approved widely in the Council , that decisions on methods of producing energy are now , and will be in the future , left to the discretion of the Member States .
This is what happens now too .
When we talk about nuclear power , we have Member States where at present more nuclear power stations are being built , Member States that are cutting capacity , and everything in between .
It is nevertheless very important from the point of view of the European energy markets and energy security in Europe that we can create and establish an infrastructure which actually connects the European energy networks , though in this we are still virtually at the starting post .
( DE ) What can the Council do to get dangerous nuclear power stations taken off line by court order ?
What proposals can you in the Council make in future for the safety of the European public ?
Mr President , the Act of Accession is associated with regulations on certain nuclear power units , and at EU level special attention has also been paid to safety in the means of energy production .
It is nevertheless the job of the national authorities to ensure that these safety regulations are also implemented .
This is a crucially important matter , however , which deserves attention .
I should like to ask a question concerning Question 6 .
The Rules of Procedure only allows two supplementary questions per question .
On this occasion , however , I shall give you the floor .
President-in-Office , my question is about Lithuanian energy prospects .
Lithuania is planning to build a new nuclear power plant in Ignalina .
It will be a joint project involving Poland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania .
Those countries will not be able to do this before 2015 .
According to our previous agreements we have to close one of our blocks in 2009 , and Lithuania will suffer from energy shortages .
Do you , as the representative of the Presidency , think it is possible to prolong the life of Ignalina 's second block until 2015 ?
Mr President , deforestation is one of the most significant factors in the problem of global climate change , accounting for around 20 % of the total for man-made greenhouse gas emissions , thus around a fifth of emissions resulting from human activity .
It is the aim of the European Union that , in order to reach the fundamental target in the UN Climate Treaty , the overall average rise in temperature of the earth 's surface cannot be more than two degrees centigrade above the temperature during the pre-industrial age .
To achieve this goal a considerable reduction in total volumes will be required , in accordance with common but differentiated areas of responsibility and capabilities .
Because the destruction of tropical forests has major significance for overall emissions , the developing countries have or may have a key role in alleviating climate change , so that emissions caused by deforestation can be cut and sustainable forestry boosted .
Such measures would also help these countries to adapt to climate change and would also have other useful benefits .
The EU therefore stresses the importance of examining the various options with regard to how emissions from deforestation can be cut and , in particular , exploiting synergies with measures taken in other contexts .
I wish to thank the President-in-Office for that answer .
I did not get a ' yes ' or ' no ' to my question , but a very interesting résumé of the problems of climate change - all of which I agree with , but I already know .
My question was whether the Council agreed that avoided deforestation must be included in any post-2012 settlement - in other words , the second commitment period , if we are still talking in Kyoto terms .
Would it be the Council 's view that avoided deforestation would be part of our tools and mechanisms for reducing carbon dioxide emissions ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has not yet begun any preparatory work on this .
It will take the necessary decision in good time in compliance with its obligations under the Protocol on the Enlargement of the European Union annexed to the Treaty of Nice .
At this stage , however , it is impossible to say precisely when this will happen .
Let me just say that if the negotiated Treaty on the Constitution comes into force , that will do something to resolve the issue .
Thank you for the answer , which demonstrates that , whether it is under the current Treaties as modified by Nice or under the Constitutional Treaty , the Council has to get to work on a new system for the composition of the Commission , presumably with a rotation .
If that is the case , and if it is going to enter into force in time for the next Commission , would it not be a good idea to begin work sooner rather than later ?
Mr President , it is rather hard to say that it would be better to start soon , but we have to remember that these matters are all connected .
It is a question of the entire institutional package , which in turn is connected with the Constitutional Treaty , which includes the composition of the Commission .
I would say again that the Council has not yet begun the preparatory work .
Question No 9 has been withdrawn .
Subject : Status of Kosovo
How does the Finnish Council Presidency explain that , despite the hopes of the highly competent UN Chief Negotiator Ahtisaari , the question of Kosovo 's status will not be resolved before the end of the year , and how does it rate the chances of success for next year ?
Mr President , since the beginning of the year , UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari has been taking forward talks between the parties using mainly a bottom-up approach .
In July Mr Ahtisaari organised the first high-level meeting between Belgrade and Pristina in Vienna .
The presidents and prime ministers from both sides attended .
At the meeting Belgrade and Pristina expressed totally opposite views on the status of Kosovo .
It is still the strategic goal of the European Union to find a quick and lasting solution to the situation in Kosovo , without endangering Serbian democracy and general stability in the region .
When notification was received that the Serbian parliamentary elections were to be held on 21 January 2007 , Martti Ahtisaari said that he would put a proposal to the parties immediately after the elections , as he did not want the solution to Kosovo 's status to become an election weapon in Serbia 's future elections .
The European Union continues to support Mr Ahtisaari fully , and also his endeavours as leader of the political determination process in respect of Kosovo 's future status as well as his recent moves to produce a comprehensive solution .
It is in the Union 's interests that the process should have a favourable outcome .
Success is vital , because it would offer favourable prospects for the future , both for the inhabitants of Kosovo and for general stability in the region .
The European Union is now preparing for its future presence in Kosovo as part of an international civil mission .
The EU 's preparations for the rule of law and a police operation are also in progress .
( DE ) As you know , the population of Kosovo has been through a great deal , so it is naturally anxious about the continuing postponements .
Do you believe this is the last postponement and that the final report really will be presented in February or March ?
What have you to say about the fears aroused by the plans for a division of Kosovo or by the territorial claims upon Kosovo contained in the new Serbian constitution ?
Mr President , the Council has never discussed this , because it does not fall within its competence .
The European Union treaties have not bestowed on the Community or the Union the competence whereby the Union could regulate on abortions .
The Member States thus have the competence to regulate on this and ensure compliance in their territory with the laws that they pass .
The EU cannot interfere in unsatisfactory states of affairs due to differences in the legislation of Member States when it comes to areas that are not within its competence .
( NL ) Mr President , I do indeed understand that this is about who has power over what , but it has to be said that this is a cross-border issue , and so I am surprised that it has not been discussed at all in the Council .
If we talk about European values - something which has also been in the news a great deal - and we also consider the issue of the free movement of people , then we have a European problem , certainly if we take into account the fact that Dutch doctors were involved in this affair .
In short , I should like to ask you again how this relates to the freedom of movement of people , and whether we are not dealing with a European problem of a cross-border nature .
Mr President , I would just like to say that the free mobility of people is one of the European Union 's basic concerns .
The movement of services has also been established for a very long time , and if there are illegal goings-on in Member States , it is their responsibility and duty to monitor them and intervene .
In this case it is incontrovertibly clear that big differences between the laws in Member States lead to very different practices around Europe .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Driving licences ( debate )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it was a hard task .
We started work on it two and a half years ago .
The legislative period was not the most auspicious for getting agreement at first reading , but I believe we have brought the dossier to a good conclusion .
I would like to begin by thanking my colleagues , because we had a very open debate in committee and found that the issue was not so much party political differences as traditions .
My special thanks go to those colleagues who largely backed the project despite the sensitivities in their own countries .
I would also like to thank the Council , because both the Finnish and Austrian Presidencies and not least the Luxembourg Presidency , which created the basis for the compromise , have helped to make it possible for us to reach a good conclusion tomorrow .
( FR ) Commissioner , I too should like to thank you because you yourself , as well as your team , have done a very good job of supporting this project .
I am particularly keen to emphasise the expertise that has been shown by the members of your administration in dealing with this very complex matter and that has led us to what I believe are worthwhile solutions .
( DE ) I believe the challenges with this directive can be summarised as follows :
Firstly , we thought it was important not to create an additional driving licence , the 111th or 130th , but , over a period of time , to introduce a single European one .
That was to be seen more as a symbol , however , because when driving licences are exchanged we really wanted a record to be made of the licences in circulation and to have documentation so that we know precisely how many driving licences are in circulation in the various countries and who owns them , so that information can be exchanged .
Ultimately it was also about road safety , and there was a particular need for action here in the area of motorcycles .
We achieved that , too .
Moreover , the directive also strikes a good balance between economic viability on the one hand and safety on the other , especially where caravans are concerned .
These common challenges resulted in a common position .
In six years ' time , countries will introduce the new driving licence model for new applications .
That will gradually affect 300 million citizens . But its value for those citizens is more than merely symbolic .
It was this added value that persuaded us all .
We see an improvement in mobility .
A single driving licence that is recognised everywhere will see the end of the problems over the recognition of acquired rights in the various countries , not only for tourists but for professional drivers as well .
That will now be secured once and for all with this proposal .
Legal certainty is one of our most important concerns , and we have created it with this project .
Since this is a compromise , we have to speak about deadlines .
Personally , I would of course have been very glad if everything , both the initial exchange and the regular exchange procedure , had been completed within ten years .
However , some countries insisted that the time allowed for this definitive exchange should be 20 years .
I am rather philosophical here on the principle of better late than never .
I do hope , though , that it will happen rather sooner than the deadline provided in the directive .
In my opinion , safety remains one of the most important aspects .
We have focussed on two important areas here : firstly , the prevention of ' driving licence tourism ' .
If countries show good will , the data held in different countries can be used to prevent driving licence tourism when licences are withdrawn , restricted or suspended .
We believe that a person who is a hazard on the road in one country must also be banned from driving in the other 26 countries .
The foundation has been laid ; we are waiting for a clear sign from the Member States here .
A second important safety point was in relation to motorcycles .
The principle of progressive access to large motorcycles , which may perhaps in time also be expected in other areas , is based on the accident statistics , which are unfortunately not so good where motorcycles are concerned ; it is also a good combination of theory and practice .
Theory first and then practice will make access easy .
In the area of caravans , a good balance was found between economy and safety .
I am pleased that the Commission has accepted our proposal .
We have not only required the additional B + E driving licence for mobile homes and caravans , but also , above a certain weight , a small test .
In conclusion I would say that , thanks to the close cooperation between the three institutions , and also between my fellow-Members of this House , this directive represents added value for the public : greater legal certainty , improved road safety , more mobility , less driving licence tourism and also a plus for the economy and tourism .
Over all , I therefore believe that with this report we have set an example of the pragmatism that is possible in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Mr President , I do apologise .
In fact , a man in my position , having had the honour of participating in parliamentary assemblies for many years , should never be late .
Mr President , honourable Members , please accept my apologies .
Having said that , my embarrassment is still greater , since I must pay tribute to Parliament 's excellent work on this very important issue of the directive on driving licences .
I would like to extend my warmest and most sincere thanks to Mr Grosch , whose report is of an extremely high quality , and to the Committee on Transport and Tourism for the support given to the Commission 's proposal .
It is clear from the numerous reactions generated by this proposal during the legislative process that this issue is very important to you .
This is to be expected , since the driving licence is the most commonly held qualification in the Union today .
Almost 300 million people depend on their driving licence for their mobility and , of course , in everyday life .
The number of experts in the field , or those who consider themselves as such , is almost as high as the number of holders of driving licences , and each one has their own opinion on the subject .
However , after the political agreement reached in the Council last March and the vote by the Committee on Transport and Tourism at the end of November , a broad consensus is taking shape , confirming that the other institutions approve of the objectives proposed by the Commission .
Although the process has taken a little longer than expected , we are now on the verge of reaching an agreement on second reading with the Council on a very sensitive proposal .
We have perceived the need to apply the new comitology procedure to this proposal for a third directive on driving licences .
This will make the process of amending its technical annexes more transparent .
On this point , an agreement was quickly reached during informal negotiations between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I therefore warmly welcome Parliament 's amendments on this particular subject .

I am going to take the liberty , Mr President , of giving a brief reminder of the three objectives that this proposal for a directive on driving licences is designed to achieve , by expounding on Mr Grosch 's very pertinent comments .
The first objective is to aid the fight against forgery .
A single model of driving licence , in the form of a plastic card , will in time replace the current system of no fewer than 110 models .
The administrative validity of the licence will be limited to 10 years , with a possible extension to 15 years .
We will reinforce the principle of a single licence per driver and introduce an optional microchip .
These are the measures to combat forgery , as Mr Grosch explained clearly .
The second objective is to improve road safety .
Yes , we will introduce a real driving licence for the most vulnerable users of two-wheeled vehicles , namely drivers of mopeds .
We will put in place an enhanced system of progressive access for driving motorcycles and heavy vehicles , redefine categories B and B + E for driving cars towing heavy trailers and , finally , introduce compulsory initial and ongoing training for examiners .
This point is , in my opinion , particularly important .
The third objective is to facilitate freedom of movement .
We will therefore reaffirm the principle of mutual recognition of driving licences within the European Union .
We will harmonise both the rules on the validity of driving licences and the frequency of medicals for drivers of heavy vehicles .
I would like to conclude by saying that the common position , accompanied by the amendments on the comitology procedure , represents a successful compromise .
I feel that the final text is well balanced and is a real improvement on the current Directive .
Thanks to Mr Grosch 's excellent work , we have taken a step towards achieving our common aim of cutting the number of deaths on the roads of the European Union by half before 2010 .

Mr President , honourable Members , if I may , I would like to concur with the wish expressed by your rapporteur , Mr Grosch , that the Member States will not wait until the final deadline to introduce this European driving licence , which will be a strong symbol of our European citizenship and of the responsibility assumed by each driver when taking the wheel .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I will be brief .
First , I would like to extend my special thanks to Mr Grosch for all he has done .
However , we must first make clear to outsiders what he has achieved , because to the public it looks as though all he has done is to make three applications for the comitology procedure and that otherwise the Council has had its way .
It was , however , Mr Grosch who , in cooperation with his shadow rapporteurs , spent weeks and months negotiating to get a proper , acceptable Council common position together at all .
We must draw express attention to that , or else people will think that all we are doing is approving the common position .
No , we thank Mr Grosch and his colleagues for negotiating for weeks on end to get the Council to present a common position that had been agreed with us .
Two further brief remarks : I am one of the Members who were against mandatory exchange and against limited validity for licences .
We then nevertheless agreed that in the interests of road safety and preventing the forging of licences it is acceptable for citizens to have to exchange their driving licences after 26 years .
Many of us will perhaps not have to do that , if we are wise .
In that regard , 26 years is probably a good compromise and we can readily accept it .
My final remark , Commissioner , is that you were right to say that we hope many Member States will bring all these measures into force earlier .
Please see to it that the Member States act on their promise to put into effect quickly the exchange of data on driving licences , for we will be able to prevent driving licence tourism only if Member States exchange the relevant data and know that they must not issue this or that citizen with a driving licence because he is still banned .
So let us make sure the Member States build the information network quickly .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , at long last , we can begin the move to a common European driving licence .
We have , unfortunately , been forced to accept a latest deadline of 26 years for all the Member States to have introduced the common driving licence .
This is much too long a period .
Like previous speakers , I believe that things will progress more quickly than that .
We must now call on the Member States to take this matter seriously and work towards having a common driving licence sooner , and one , at that , that is replaced at regular intervals .
We must also call on the Commission to assist the Member States in this work , just as Mr Jarzembowski said .
This is an important issue for Europeans , as it affects so many people .
A majority of European citizens possess a driving licence .
There is one thing that we know with certainty , and that is that the people of Europe want it to be easy to drive in their own country and in others and to be able to use their driving licences without administrative hassle .
However , Europeans also want those driving on the roads to be properly qualified so to do .
It should also be possible to punish those who break the law or the rules , even if they come from a different country .
The new common driving licence will , over time , meet all these needs .
Clearly , this has to happen in a timeframe shorter than 26 years .
As has already been pointed out , this measure will improve road safety , but it will also , at the same time , counteract social dumping , so that those aiming to exploit the fact that there are fake driving licences in circulation will not , in future , be able to make financial gains from this .
I would like to close by thanking all the fellow Members I have worked with for the cooperation we have enjoyed .
We have been working on this issue for a long time , and it is no small number of us who have taken an active part in the debate .
Finally , I would like to add that I think it is a positive development that access to motorcycling will be on a progressive basis .
I believe this is a good thing for road safety .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the recommendation in the European Commission 's Directive concerning the new version of driving licences , replacing the 1991 Directive , solves a range of important issues , namely reducing opportunities for fraud , guaranteeing rights to freedom of movement for citizens , and improving road traffic safety .
I would like to highlight the importance of such a licence for freedom of movement for citizens .
In the EU there are over 100 various forms of driving licences with various validity periods and different intervals for medical testing of professional drivers .
Free movement of individuals also creates opportunities for the abuse of driving licences : having lost permission to drive because of an infringement in his own country , an EU citizen can get a driving licence in another country .
Such behaviour by unscrupulous drivers creates a hazard for traffic safety in all of Europe .
Therefore , it is truly essential to implement the principle of driving licence uniformity .
Speaking of the implementation period for the Regulation , it is projected to be unjustifiably long .
The driving licence 's validity may be extended to 15 years , and changed - about 20 years from the Directive coming into force .
Therefore , such periods truly reduce and make more distant the goals defined by the Commission in the recommendation reducing opportunities for fraud and improving road traffic safety .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by extending my sincere thanks to the rapporteur .
I believe that , together with his colleague Mr Jarzembowski , he spent most of his time trying to get a common position .
It was a very difficult task , but he did nevertheless succeed in it , so warm congratulations are due to him .
After a discussion that began more than 10 years ago in the early 1990s , the single EU driving licence in credit-card format will at last become reality and replace the 110 different driving licences .
It will have to be renewed with an up-to-date photograph every 10 or 15 years .
Even though a medical examination will not be required - it has been an accepted fact of life in Italy for years - the EU driving licence will be a contribution to road safety because it will also prevent driving licence tourism .
Anyone who has driven too fast or been caught with alcohol in their blood and lost their licence can at present go abroad and apply for a new licence there .
This practice carries serious risks for road safety .
Traffic offenders often go to Poland or the Czech Republic , thus avoiding not only the months of disqualification but also the medical and psychological examination they urgently require .
With the EU driving licence , that will no longer be possible .
There will be no more opportunity for all-inclusive packages that have enabled people found guilty of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs or of speeding to obtain a new licence abroad .
In that way , highway hooligans have for EUR 1 000 avoided not only tiresome waiting times but also expensive medical and psychological examinations .
Given the high rate of accidents caused by speeding and drunkenness , this is an important contribution to road safety .
Random checks have shown that 75 % of German car drivers using a foreign driving licence had previously had their licence withdrawn because of alcohol or drug problems .
This abuse will be impossible with the EU driving licence because a thorough exchange of data will prevent it .
I regret to say that my home country , Germany , has had its foot on the brake and , after the 15 years it took to reach a decision , has pushed through a further transitional period of 26 years before drivers will have to exchange their existing licences .
That is not only an act of social injustice at the expense of future generations - the renewal period means that new licence holders will already be on their second driving licence before the old ones have to be exchanged even for the first time - but also a further instance of the state tolerating organised crime by delaying the exchange of data .
In the interests of road safety and especially because of the length of time taken to reach this decision , Parliament and the Council should not have allowed any transitional period , but instead set uniform rules for the validity of old and new driving licences .
Member States are free to shorten the deadlines and I therefore urge you to do so and make the EU driving licence a reality in 10 years .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , two major problems surrounding driving licences have been the cause of public annoyance .
The first is driving licence tourism , as a result of which people can get a driving licence without having any real entitlement to one , and the other is the dangerous situation for riders of two-wheeled vehicles in amidst busy car traffic .
We could solve the second problem nationally , but not the first .
For a very long time , we have been familiar with the situation where people take driving lessons during their holidays , upon which a driving licence is issued in the Middle East or the Caribbean that does not meet the requirements we prescribe at home .
Even more alarming is the situation when somebody who has lost their driving licence following a serious traffic infringement or reckless driving , is given the opportunity to sit another driving test in another Member State of the European Union .
Mutual recognition of national driving licences makes it possible for them , even though they have had theirs withdrawn , to be given the right to drive a car in their own country .
These people misuse national borders and constitute a serious threat to traffic safety .
One of the EU 's core tasks is to fight cross-border nuisances and breakdowns in communication , the present situation involving driving licences being one of them .
We must , as a priority , spell out that the Member States of residence should in no way be hindered in combating this dangerous abuse .
The text now before us , which has emerged from second reading , goes about making this possible in the right way .
More controversial is the way in which attention is given to accidents involving motorcyclists and moped riders , which often involve young people , whether as the victims themselves or as the cause of accidents to others .
Some novice riders on two wheels take pride in showing off to others their ability to perform highly dangerous stunts .
We are justified in our attempts to protect people who may cause accidents against themselves and also to protect other road users against the reckless behaviour of a handful .
There is also another side to this : motorcyclists and moped riders are right in believing that car drivers own the roads , which is why the latter would prefer to ban the two-wheelers from them .
Motor cyclists experience it as discrimination if they have to meet more stringent requirements than car drivers , and if they , in practice , also have to be older as a result , before they are entitled by law to use the public roads for the first time .
Not until the age of 24 can they be given the right to ride the heaviest motorcycles without any intermediary steps .
This leads to a clash of interests between the young and old and between drivers of armoured four-wheeled vehicles and vulnerable two-wheeled vehicles .
My group would instinctively prefer to stand up for the riders on two wheels , who are the weakest group , but , in some countries , the aggression manifested by car drivers can lead to a needless increase in the number of victims within this group .
Perhaps this sensitive issue should be addressed in each individual Member State , but in times of increasing cross-border traffic , enforcement would prove impractical .
Three years of discussion about the proposal to harmonise driving licences that were national to date has led to the largest common denominator of requests made by different Member States and pressure groups , which is not to the satisfaction , not by a long shot , of everyone involved , including motorcyclists ' organisations .
It is likely that the practical experience we will gather with this directive and the possible problems involved will lead to adjustments being made .
Even so , my group prefers this proposal to be in place for the time being rather than perpetuate the present situation .
The alternative upheld by Mr Bradbourn may work well in the splendid isolation of the United Kingdom , but not for Member States with national borders that cross densely populated areas .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , early this year there was a terrible car crash in my parish .
Four young eastern European citizens died .
They had tried to negotiate one of those dreadful Irish country roads in the dark and they were not used to the different driving conditions of Ireland .
Unfortunately , this is not a lone incident .
Similarly , an Irish neighbour died while working in Spain .
Europeans are on the move .
I go to your country , you come to mine .
It is a wonderful thing , yet when it comes to driving in safety it is a fact that some are used to driving on the right and others on the left , that drivers are used to varying acceptable levels of speed , different weather conditions and vastly differing roads and , critically , that drivers are trained , tested and licensed to different levels of competence .
A learner 's permit in one country may be equivalent to a full licence in another .
Because we are free to move around Europe , we are driving on each other 's roads .
The problem is that when such differences lead to death , these discrepancies can no longer be tolerated .
I agree with several things in the report .
The principle of progressive access regarding two-wheeled vehicles would surely improve safety .
It is also clearly not practical to have 110 different-looking driving licences , which can be displayed but not understood , so the idea of having a single format and code for categories is reasonable .
However , the traffic laws , roads , weather , etc. are so different that a national test and licence will remain essential for a driver .
However , a European driver 's licence should be available , like the old international licence , for those who drive in other countries of the Union for more than just a brief holiday .
Finally , although it is not in the report , if we are ultimately to have a European driver 's licence , we should look at a different model from the one-test-for-a-lifetime model that we have in Europe .
With such a model , the quality of the test can be very high , which makes it very difficult and very expensive for young people to get , and yet no one looks at the skills of a driver 20 years on .
I would recommend the American model of repeat tests : a written test is taken every four years and a road test every eight years and skills must be kept up .
The level of safety is high in the test , probably the level of technical knowledge , etc. would not be as great , but people continue to drive ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , we really should congratulate ourselves this evening !
If we have a European legal text that really does matter to the man and woman in the street , we hide it in the night sitting . That way no one can see or hear what we are actually doing for European concerns in European legislation .
A lot might be said about the European added value that could be obtained with the single European driving licence .
We have to thank Mr Grosch for bringing this flea circus together .
He has already mentioned a few things .
We are simplifying , we are making one European driving licence out of 110 national driving licences - and with the new Member States it is already appreciably more than 110 .
We are making things safer .
Progressive access has already been mentioned , and many more details might also be mentioned .
We are trying to prevent driving licence tourism , and I can only add my support to those who have called on the Commission to pin the nation states down on this as quickly as possible .
We have also ensured that older drivers will not be discriminated against by permanent medical examinations .
Older drivers may indeed be dangerous in certain driving situations , but the real dangers on the roads are frequently caused by the younger ones .
I am glad - as Mr Grosch has also said - that the Austrian Council Presidency has contributed to today 's success .
It fits the picture that that government was then voted out of office by the citizens at home .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with tomorrow 's vote the European driving licence will at last be cut and dried .
It has taken a long time , it is a compromise , but with effective and significant steps forward .
The most important advance is perhaps that it will put an end to the unspeakable driving licence tourism .
If , for example , someone 's licence is withdrawn for drunken driving in Germany today , they can easily , and quite cheaply , get a new one in a neighbouring country and then drive on Europe 's roads again completely legally .
This scandal will be put to an end .
This trick has been played one last time ; it will now be laid to rest , and a good job too .
Freedom of movement for drivers in Europe is a plus .
With more than 110 different driving licences , however , controls are more than problematic .
The so-called ' grey rag ' in Germany , that was issued in the fifties or sixties with a nice , youthful photograph , and which has been in the washing machine at least four times , is certainly a fine piece of nostalgia , but it is no longer any use as identification at police checks .
Personally - and many other honourable Members obviously agree with me - I think the 26 year deadline that has now been negotiated for exchanging licences is much too long ; it is more of a biological solution than a real practical one .
It has been pointed out that Member States can do it earlier . We shall see .
All the accident statistics clearly show that most road deaths occur among young men between the ages of 18 and 25 on motorcycles .
Progressive access to a motorcycle licence is therefore sensible .
It will save human lives and improve road safety .

On behalf of my Group , sincere thanks are due to Mr Grosch , the rapporteur , who has negotiated well , and so there will be no transitional periods , no exemptions and no restrictions in tomorrow 's vote : we shall back you wholeheartedly and unanimously , together taking the matter to a successful conclusion .
Thank you for your work !
Mr President , yesterday the President , faced with a directive about a paperless environment , whispered ' dream on ' .
The EU is behind the paper curtain or , in real English , the big EU paper wet blanket .
Over-regulation closes businesses and the EU paper wet blanket is putting out the fire of enterprise and the ember of innovation .
The single market , we were told , was about trade , not about paper regulations on how to ride a moped .
Or are you resisting an invasion of British mopeds on the beach at Dunkirk ?
Dream on !
Certain EU states treat EU papers as joke sheets enforced by paper tigers with paper teeth , but they still sit on committees like nodding paper dogs generating more crazy paper regulations for the rest of us and filling in paper forms for expenses , while not enforcing simple rules about crash helmets .
It is now only a matter of time until such a paper dictates that the British will drive on the right hand side !
In this report , the EU has ignored its own research paper , according to the British Motorcyclists Federation , which says that these proposals are inept and ill-conceived .
The BMF has pointed to the motorcycle accidents in-depth study showing that most motorcycle accidents are the result of low-speed urban collisions , usually the fault of the car driver .
It was funded by EU taxpayers at EUR 2.5 million and this directive will now be a EUR 2.5 million waste of paper .
The BMF says that motorcycling elements in the directive are diametrically opposed to the UK Government 's own motorcycling strategy , do nothing to improve road safety , and lead to poor compliance with a possible negative effect on safety .
BMF government relations executive Trevor Magnus said this is typical of the lack of democracy in the EU , treating citizens with contempt .
I conclude that the entire proposal should be placed in the waste paper basket and recycled , but not into another wet blanket , please .
( PL ) Mr President , I think that it is a very good thing that we are approaching the end of our work on this important report .
Each step along towards improving safety on the roads is really a step that is worth taking and it most definitely includes introducing an international registration procedure for all cases where driving licenses have been revoked or suspended .
The point is clearly to eliminate driving licence tourism .
It is , however , the Member States which bear the primary responsibility here .
They are the ones who should , first of all , improve their system of registering people whose licences have been banned from driving temporarily or permanently .
I hope that this Directive will force the Member States to sort out their own administrative procedures in the first place .
This is , of course , a cause of satisfaction , but it is hard , at this juncture , not to express our regret that the single European driving licence will not come into force for another twenty-five years yet .
Is it not rather paradoxical that incredibly complicated legislation such as REACH , or the Services Directive , will become binding almost immediately , but that an incredibly simple document , such as a driving licence , will only be fully introduced in 2033 ?
By then things may have developed so far that a driving licence may not be at all necessary , and replaced by other mechanisms , such as electronic mechanisms .
We may even have European citizenship by then , but not a European driving licence .
I understand that some Member States want to stick to tradition but , at least to me , this seems to have nothing to do with tradition .
If anything it is an obsession rather than a tradition .
Mr President , my assistant recently discovered a website which advertises quite openly that if you have been banned for driving in one country they will find , for a fee , a driving licence somewhere else .
That is clearly unacceptable in modern society , just as it is completely unacceptable that people who commit serious offences in one country can avoid being penalised in another country .
This proposal will gradually end that situation , but I regret that it will take so long , and I hope the process can be speeded up .
This proposal brings simplicity and transparency and cuts red tape , although I notice that Mr Nattrass has not bothered to stay to hear that observation .
It is , in fact , a key element in better regulation .
The original proposal was much more bureaucratic , and we in Parliament have done a good job of making it much simpler .
It will improve road safety and combat fraud .
I particularly welcome something nobody else has mentioned yet : the emphasis in the report on the competences of driving examiners .
We need to raise the general level of driver training throughout the European Union .
I am not happy with the motorcycle proposals : they are unnecessarily complex and do not give enough emphasis to training at the very earliest stages and the requirement for compulsory testing .
However , I recognise that there is no real support for this either in Parliament or the Council , so I must concede defeat .
Contrary to some of the scare stories some of my colleagues have spread , there is very little in this proposal that differs from existing UK tradition and practice .
Mr President , firstly I would like to point out to the House that throughout the progress of this legislation I have been in favour of a common format - and I stress ' format ' - for a driver 's licence across Europe .
This would achieve the objective of easier recognition of licences by police and enforcement agencies in all Member States and lead to less fraud , which has been talked about already .
This can , however , be achieved without all the red tape included in these proposals and in my view it is key to the principle of subsidiarity and proportionality that Member States retain the power to determine how their citizens obtain and retain their licence .
For example , the measures now proposed would completely change the burden of proof , requiring citizens to prove that they can drive safely rather than , as at present , the state having to prove that they cannot .
Regular renewals , even so-called administrative renewals of licences , would just push up costs to licence holders without improving road safety in the slightest way .
I shall cite one example concerning motorcycles .
These measures are ill-thought-out , over-prescriptive and will not lead to any improvements in road safety , simply to making it more difficult for motorcyclists to progress to more powerful bikes .
This is not a road safety measure , it is nothing less than a cynical attempt to make life more difficult for those who use this mode of transport .
Unfortunately , time does not permit me to detail all the matters in this directive to which I object but , put simply , in my opinion there is no added value in these proposals .
They are over-regulatory , over-bureaucratic and unnecessary .
I urge colleagues most sincerely to support my amendments to reject the common position in its entirety .
( PL ) Mr President , in contrast to the previous speaker , I would like to stress that the document we are discussing on a single European driving licence is perhaps the first document on European identity .
It is an important document , which will allow me , as a European , to feel safe .
I would like to express my admiration for Mr Grosch .
He has brought together three groups : the pragmatists , the traditionalists and the ultra-traditionalists .
This has been the reason for the delay .
I would personally tend more towards introducing the new licences within a shorter timeframe , but this is a compromise solution .
Let us respect it .
One important fact I would like to point out is that the way in which licences are obtained , the training methods and the examination methods have become more harmonised .
This is also likely to lead to the elimination of differences in behaviour on the road .
There will be more travel between the Member States .
This is a very important aspect of improving road safety .
Another factor is the creation of a database .
I see nothing wrong with obtaining a driving licence abroad .
What is wrong is when people get them after breaking the law and losing their licence their own country .
Overall , I am very happy to vote in favour of this proposal .
( PT ) We are confident that tomorrow 's vote will confirm the timeframe involved in the legislative process of adopting a European drivers ' licence .
I should first like to congratulate Mr Grosch on his outstanding report .
He was in charge of this long process , which was characterised by positive dialogue and effective action leading to a compromise that , reflecting the perspectives of the various Member States and Community institutions , succeeded in maintaining consistency on an issue that , as he has correctly pointed out , affects around two thirds of the adult population of Europe .
My main concern was that a good idea might be undermined by excessive regulation , and would thus fail to benefit road safety .
The consensus achieved , however , built on the key axes of the directive , enables us to look ahead with optimism .
The text appears on the whole to have achieved the objectives it set out to achieve , whilst complying with the subsidiarity principle and with practices that are legitimately established by the Member States .
This is a positive development that will provide the citizens with clearer , standardised rules conducive to mobility and road safety . The rules will also prevent the fraudulent use of counterfeit licences and will lead to more effective measures to deal with offenders .
The new directive will reach those it is intended for by means of what I hope will be a simple , easily understood message , with which hopefully the citizens will comply without much difficulty .
It should be clear that our objective is to facilitate the citizens ' lives and the lives of those operating in the sector , and to promote safer road transport .
To conclude , I wish to comment on the controversial issue of phased , gradual access to motorcycles , and the imposition of a minimum age of 24 for the most powerful motorcycles , in the absence of previous experience .
Speaking as a biker - yes , I am an old biker ! - I recognise that age is not the only indicator of maturity and a responsible attitude on the road , but along with experience it is the best indicator that the law has at its disposal .
The point is that there are motorbikes on the market that can reach speeds close to those of Formula One .
Such vehicles should not be within reach of young people barely 18 years of age .
I for one would never let a child of mine of that age have access to one .
I therefore endorse the solution reached aimed at the most vulnerable motorcyclists , who are the youngest members of our society .

( ES ) Mr President , I believe that we must thank the rapporteur , Mr Grosch , in particular for this Christmas present from the European Union to 300 million European citizens .
It is true that he has been accompanied in this role of an early Santa Claus by Commissioner Barrot and his services , as well as the shadow rapporteurs , with whom he has done an excellent job .
Thank you , Mr Grosch .
Thank you for adding to the road safety aspects such important elements as the fight against fraud and licence tourism by improving control by means of an on-line database .
For a country of tourism such as mine , that was essential and urgent , and now more than ever since , with the application of the points system on licences , an utterly condemnable form of tourism is being created involving new licenses from over the border or via the Internet , as Mr Titley has just said .
With regard to motorcycles , a wisely educational procedure of gradual access has been introduced which will help our young people to grow up , although some of them believe that they can go quicker .
The provisions relating to trailers and motor caravans improve control without increasing burdens .
I am also grateful for the fact that this instrument adds greater visibility and enhances the free movement of persons .
This instrument is also going to be very useful for professional drivers .
It is true that the timescales seem eternal , but I share the rapporteur 's optimism that , in practice , the change will take place more quickly .
The citizens are almost always ahead of their legislators .
Finally , and although the rapporteur advises us that the periodic and obligatory renewal of licences does not involve obligatory refresher , medical or sight tests for drivers , I believe that we have here an excellent basis for progressing towards a future practical consensus on this new aspect .
I am optimistic about this as well and I would therefore encourage Mr Grosch to work towards making a success of that new element .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Grosch on a good result .
In the negotiations with the Council , he succeeded in getting many points of Parliament 's position included in the final compromise .
Thus , in addition to the euro - our European currency - we will get a European driving licence .
This will finally end driving licence tourism : if your licence is taken away in one country , you will be unable to get a new one in another country .
It is also very good that fraud will be reduced , as we have succeeded in getting a limited period of validity from the Member States .
It is a pity for Mr Jarzembowski and other German colleagues , but it is good for road safety in Europe .
A compromise always means you win some and you lose some .
It would have been fairer on the motorcyclists if they could get access to heavy motorcycles at the age of 21 instead of 24 .
You can drive a big SUV or a Ferrari when you are only 18 years old but , under this proposal , you have to wait another six years to get direct access to heavy motorcycles .
That is disproportionate .
If the Commissioner really wants to do something about the safety of motorcyclists , he should improve research in that area and take measures based on that research .
It will become clear that , in addition to good driving education , we need to improve our infrastructure - with better crash-barriers , for example - in order to improve safety for motorcyclists .
Finally , I am pleased about the introduction of extra possibilities for drivers with a category ' B ' licence to tow heavy trailers .
Therefore , I strongly support this new directive for a European driving licence .

Mr President , I primarily want to thank Mr Grosch and all the other Members of this House who have worked on this important piece of European legislation .
I would support almost anything that will improve the safety of our roads .
I come from a Member State - Ireland - which has one of the worst fatality rates of all , which is causing considerable concern to all our citizens .
It is partly to do with the fact that we do not have adequate training of drivers , partly also that we have so many drivers on the road who are unqualified .
Of the 2.5 million drivers on Irish roads , 410 000 do not have a driving qualification - they are on what are known as provisional licences .
Some 30 000 of them are on their fifth provisional licence .
Clearly they are a danger to other road users , so I appeal to those who have reservations about this piece of legislation to support it and support the preservation of life on our roads .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to welcome the achievement of the policy and interinstitutional agreement on an issue which is so important to road safety and legal security in Europe , to freedom of movement , to transparency and to the functioning of the single market .
I consider our unifying procedure to be an important success .
The some 110 models of driving licences crystallise the various traditions and various practices in the public administration of our countries and for us to manage to combine effective European harmonisation with respect for subsidiarity is a challenge and constant endeavour .
Thus , I believe that the result on the basis of which we shall have a single type of driving licence in the form of a credit card and the provision for older driving licences to be replaced over a satisfactory period of time are very important , so that the public agencies can make financial and bureaucratic adjustments .
This endeavour is also complemented and derives added value from the need for uniform models for training and for controlling instructors and will of course acquire even greater added value if it is complemented by suitable infrastructures , with road signs and every sort of infrastructure which facilitates safety , including the quality of roads .
We believe that the European driving licence brings Europe very close to the citizens and is a wager we must not lose .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has long been taken for granted that forms of personal identification such as passports and identity cards have to be renewed at particular intervals of time .
That is not the case with driving licences . Even if a person 's name has changed several times and the photograph is over 40 years old , many are still driving with their original licence .
Is that not an invitation to lawbreaking and driving licence tourism ?
Is it not frequently a cause for unpleasantness during road checks ?
Even the registration numbers of vehicles licensed in the EU have a recognition value .
They make a contribution , albeit very small , to the development of a European sense of identity .
The 110 valid models of driving licence , on the other hand , show Europe as a patchwork quilt .
Is that what the directive 's critics want ?
It really is time for a standard European driving licence in credit-card format .
The Council common position to all intents and purposes reflects the will of Parliament and promises great steps forward in road safety .
We should vote for it tomorrow so it can be introduced as quickly as possible !
I still cannot understand , however , why we are allowing the Member States such long transitional periods .
I call on my own country , Germany , to set a good example and respond more quickly of its own free will .
If every country does that , the driving licence directive 's positive developments could come into effect within the period of the third EU road safety action programme , that is to say , by 2010 .
Sadly , the Council 's decisions are not always consistent with the Lisbon Strategy .
Potential for growth and employment will be unnecessarily lost , for example , if workshop personnel are allowed to drive 40-tonne trucks for repair purposes , but not empty buses any more .
And I do not understand the logic if a B licence is under certain circumstances to be enough to drive car and caravan combinations up to 4.25 tonnes , but not to drive a mobile home that is easier to manoeuvre .
What a pity !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank you for this rewarding debate , which has confirmed the very broad support from which the compromise negotiated between our three institutions now benefits .
I should very much like to congratulate you all , and in particular Mr Grosch , your rapporteur , for this excellent outcome .
In response to the handful of negative remarks that have been made , I should like , honourable Members , to point out that we have a moral commitment to a major objective : that of halving the number of people killed on our roads between now and 2010 .
It is therefore up to each one of you to consider what share of responsibility you have in this connection .
Together with the Member States , we have adopted an across-the-board approach based in the first place on vehicle quality .
In conjunction with my colleague , Mr Verheugen , we have drawn up a road map whereby motor manufacturers might progressively introduce all the systems that help make vehicles safer .
The second key element in our approach is the Commission 's adoption , on 5 October 2006 , of a proposal for a Directive on road infrastructure safety management .
Indeed , we want to see better account taken of safety , from design right through to infrastructure building , and this for the benefit of all road users , including motorcyclists .
The third key element is , of course , the personal behaviour of each driver - something to which the document that you will have before you for approval tomorrow makes a major contribution , in my opinion .
In this connection , I should like once again , Mr President , to emphasise the extent to which Parliament has genuinely championed the European interest where this matter is concerned .
By putting forward significant plans and having them accepted - for example , the progressive replacement of old driving licences and the implementation of conditions under which access is granted on a progressive basis to certain categories of vehicle - the European Parliament has vividly demonstrated something that really goes without saying : its concern to champion the interests of Europeans .
A few worries have emerged regarding motorcyclists , motorcycle safety being an issue of great concern to us .
Despite the improvement in road safety in general , motorcyclists are the group most in danger on our roads , with one person in every five killed on European Union roads being a motorcyclist .
It is in order to reverse this trend that , in this directive , we have emphasised access to the most powerful motorcycles on a progressive basis .
More experience , targeted training or an appropriate examination would enable us to reduce the number of fatalities .
This is not a matter of red tape .
On the contrary , matters are being simplified .
It is only logical , however , for motorcyclists to be given some degree of training .
It is essential that motorcyclists be trained .
Annex 6 to the directive in question is devoted to such training , and it will be possible for this annex to be modified as needs change .
Mr President , honourable Members , the agreement that will be voted on tomorrow constitutes an important stage in our action plan on road safety .
In view of the very nearly 40 000 people still killed each year on European Union roads , Parliament may be considered to be doing some very worthwhile work in undoubtedly saving a number of lives by means of these new provisions .
I would therefore offer my sincere thanks to Parliament and the rapporteur for the sterling work they have done .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.00 a.m.
Double-hull or equivalent design requirements for single-hull oil tankers ( debate )
The next item is the report by Fernand Le Rachinel , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 417 / 2002 on the accelerated phasing-in of double-hull or equivalent design requirements for single-hull oil tankers and repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2978 / 94 C6-0104 / 2006 .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to present to you today the amendment to the regulation on double-hull oil tankers .
This proposal is designed to bring the regulation into line with the political statement made at the International Maritime Organisation in December 2003 by the Presidency of the European Union on behalf of the Member States and of the European Commission .
This statement was extremely clear .
It was designed to indicate to all the parties signatory to the MARPOL Convention that no EU Member State would authorise oil tankers flying its flag to make use of one of the exemptions laid down by the Convention , namely that relating to the use of single-hull vessels to carry oil .
With regard to the ban on carrying heavy grades of oil in single-hull vessels , the current regulation only applies to vessels entering waters under Community jurisdiction .
This means that a Member State may in theory , and contrary to the public commitment of 2003 , authorise the carriage of heavy grades of oil in single-hull oil tankers flying its flag - that is to say , one of the European flags - as long as these vessels are operating outside Community waters .
This situation , honourable Members , is unacceptable .
It is easy to imagine the consequences , in a third country , of an oil slick caused by an oil tanker flying a Community flag , and this at a time when Europe , for its part , protects itself against such eventualities .
I would add that almost all the Member States have already formally informed the International Maritime Organisation that they would not make use of this option .
Our political commitments to our partners in the interests of maritime safety need to be given practical form and guaranteed legally .
That is the purpose of this proposal .
I should like to thank Mr Le Rachinel and the Committee on Transport and Tourism for having supported it .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to thank , in particular , the secretariat of the Committee on Transport and Tourism for its excellent preparative work and its work in consulting the interested parties in the context of this important matter .
What we are mainly concerned with here is the protection of the environment against marine pollution .
The report that I am submitting to you today is about the accelerated introduction of double-hull or equivalent design requirements for single-hull oil tankers .
In particular , it is a question of putting an end to the exemptions that have existed since 2002 .
Indeed , after the ' Prestige ' oil tanker went down in 2002 , the Commission had decided , in accordance with the December 2002 regulation , to speed up the withdrawal of single-hull oil tankers .
It was also a question of banning , with immediate effect , the carriage of heavy grades of oil in single-hull oil tankers bound for or leaving ports in a Member State of the European Union .
At present , international maritime legislation specifies that a vessel flying the flag of a Member State may take advantage of the exemptions from this ban , insofar as - and this goes without saying - it is operating outside European ports .
As Mr Barrot has just mentioned , it was at a meeting of the International Maritime Organisation that the Italian Presidency of the EU stated , on behalf of the 15 Member States , that the latter would not authorise their tankers to make use of this exemption from Regulation 13H .
According to the Commission , it was therefore appropriate to amend the 2002 regulation by doing away with the last exemption to Regulation 13H and , therefore , to ban the carriage of heavy grades of oil in single-hull oil tankers flying the flag of a Member State , whatever the jurisdiction applicable to the ports , offshore terminals or maritime area in which these tankers operate .
Only one European country - Greece - had refused to accept this political position adopted by the Italian Presidency , believing that this statement was not binding on it .
It wished , it seems , to continue to authorise its single-hull tankers to operate outside European ports with , of course , heavy grades of oil on board .
Finally , this objection was not renewed during the work done by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The 25 Member States of the European Union have now agreed that not a single oil tanker carrying heavy grades of oil will any longer be authorised to fly the flag of a Member State if it is a single-hull vessel .
In reality , this only confirms what is already complied with and applied by the vast majority of Member States .
The absolute demand for compliance with the objective of maximum maritime safety has again prevailed in this matter , in the same way as the demand for a reduction in the risks of pollution by hydrocarbons .
There are many pollution risks , which may vary in nature .
Barely five days ago , in my region , toxic barrels were drifting between the Cotentin and the Atlantic .
In the course of last Friday evening , these barrels had been lifted by a storm from the deck of a Swiss container on its way from Antwerp to Portugal .
Admittedly , the new double-hull legislation constitutes a notable advance in the field of preventing marine pollution , but there is a need to continue issuing standards enabling tankers and merchant ships to offer the maximum number of safeguards .
The motorways of the sea are a way of relieving congestion , but vessel safety must not be neglected under any circumstances .
What is at stake here is the future of the whole planet .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to emphasise that I am tabling a technical amendment , which also has the support of the European Commission , that prevents our having to change a series of cross-references .
Being of a linguistic nature , this amendment only concerns the English version .
It does not alter the substance of the text , and the Finnish Presidency has confirmed to us that it does not present any problem to the Council .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats thanks the rapporteur for producing his report promptly , quickly , clearly and precisely , and we are able to support it .
I also hope that the Council will , as promised , accept our amendment , so that we can bring this dossier to a conclusion at first reading .
Mr Vice-President , you are absolutely right .
We must abolish the exemption that still exists regarding the non-use of double-hull tankers .
I find the last sentence , which we are taking over from the rapporteur as an amendment , quite classic ; it says quite plainly that oil tankers carrying heavy grades of oil , irrespective of their flags - not only Member State flags - will not be allowed to enter ports or offshore terminals or to anchor in areas under the jurisdiction of a Member State unless they are double-hull tankers .
That is important ; we have already had some very difficult situations in the Baltic , and I hope that what we said in 2003 - namely that heavy-grade oils may only be carried in double-hull tankers - will now at last be enforced .
If we are indeed concluding the Commission proposal with the amendment quickly at first reading , then we should remind the Council that next year we have to deal with seven separate proposals in the Erika 3 package .
I hope the Council will work with us on them just as quickly so as to improve flag state controls , port state control and liability .
I am eager to see whether the Council will pluck up the same courage as the Commission and Parliament next year to take active measures to prevent environmental pollution at sea .
Mr President , if we want to know about the consequences and repercussions of bad and old single-hull tankers , we must go to the Breton or Galician coast and talk to the people who live there .
The names Erika and Prestige bring back terrible memories for them .
The Commission 's Erika packages were a sensible response to those disasters .
They include Regulation 417 / 2002 with the more rapid introduction of double-hull tankers and the ban on carrying heavy-grade oil to and from European ports in single-hull tankers .
The Commission 's proposal that tankers carrying heavy-grade oil under European flags must now be double-hull tankers is consistent and brings a little more safety for shipping and the sea .
You see , Commissioner , Parliament is able to accept and commend proposals from yourself without more ado .
Now , as Christmas approaches , the Commission should again be complimented for such good proposals , to which no one can object !
Parliament need not be perturbed if the International Association of Independent Tanker Owners , Intertanko , is not exactly pleased at the Commission 's proposal .
Mr Le Rachinel , the rapporteur , was well advised to give priority to maritime safety and not to Intertanko , and at this point I want to say a sincere thank you to him on behalf of my Group .
I therefore expect that we shall have a good vote in Parliament tomorrow over all , thereby making our seas a little safer .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after several catastrophes involving single-hull tanker ships on the shores of France and Spain , experts have come to the conclusion that single hulls do not sufficiently protect ships , that inappropriate methods for testing ships are used , and furthermore , that it is essential to more effectively tackle the issue of ' flags of convenience ' - flags of those countries that do not conform to EU safety requirements .
In 2002 , the EU adopted a Regulation specifying a double-hull or equivalent design requirements for single-hull tanker ships , and specifying that single-hull tankers should be gradually phased out of EU waters .
Not later than by 2015 they should be replaced by much safer double-hull ships .
The Regulation stipulates that one year after the completion date of constructing the ship , single-hull oil tankers are forbidden to sail under the flag of an EU Member State .
The Regulation also stipulates that after this date no oil tanker , regardless of what country 's flag it sails under , will be allowed to sail into any port under the jurisdiction of any EU country , except for double-hull oil tankers .
In October 2003 , a Regulation came into force partially replacing the 2002 Regulation , forbidding the transportation of petroleum in single-hull tanker ships into and out of ports under the jurisdiction of EU Member States .
More changes are being recommended in the proposed 2006 EP and Council Regulation .
It is recommended to increase the requirements on the transportation of crude petroleum products by ships sailing under the flag of an EU Member State and the areas of application , prohibiting the transport of crude petroleum products by all single-hull ships sailing under the flag of an EU Member State , regardless of the jurisdiction of the ports , the sea terminals or sea zone in which they ply their trade .
It is recommended to impose a total ban at the EU level , and to let third countries decide for themselves whether or not to accept entry of single-hull tankers into their ports .
I would like to highlight the issue of ' flags of convenience ' , in other words , the possibility of registering ships in countries where it is cheap and where no technical safety and environmental standards are enforced .
In the event of an oil spill it is very hard to determine who the vessel 's proprietor is , and who the polluter is .
An example of this could be the toxic pollution in Côte d 'Ivoire ( Ivory Coast ) .
I believe the issue of such registration should be discussed separately in Parliament .
Another important matter - the qualifications of ship employees .
On ships registered in EU countries , one-third of the crew are citizens of third countries , and , according to expert opinion , most accidents on board happen because of the crew 's lack of qualifications .
My country , Lithuania , imports petroleum using a terminal in the Baltic Sea ; therefore , we are concerned about both the safety of ships and the environment .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , 10 years ago , the idea of tough measures to put an end to single-hulled oil tankers was not yet a realistic one .
The problems were underestimated and it was the costs involved in changing them that received most attention .
We first needed the disasters involving oil tankers and the extensive destruction of marine and coastal environment before the realisation kicked in that Europe should not lead the way rather than lag behind .
Single-hulled tankers for the transport of heavy oil types are dangerous and should be phased out as soon as possible .
Not until an American ban and the threat that all old tankers from America would head for Europe did we see a majority in favour of such a phase-out policy .
Unfortunately , the 2002 Regulation does not appear to be sufficiently clear .
Single-hulled tankers under European flag , in particular 20 old Greek tankers , can still cause disasters in other parts of the world .
We need to close this loophole as a matter of urgency .
Europe may not want single-hulled tankers from others in its ports , but we should not send single-hulled tankers to ports of other countries either .
The freedom for existing single-hulled tankers to continue to transport heavy types of oil until 2015 could well cause major problems .
Whilst this problem is not being solved , it is positive that we are tackling the other problem now .
Objections raised by Intertanko , the International Association of Independent Tanker Owners , and by Greece , should be secondary to the protection of our marine , coastal and port environment .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left will be supporting this proposal at second reading too .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his decisive attempt to secure conditions for preventing accidents at sea which have terrible repercussions on maritime pollution .
It is a moral and political duty both for the European Union and its Member States and for international organisations .
For my country , Greece , given that two Members referred to it , environmental protection is a particular objective , given that it is a country with a coast , islands , a large tourist economy and aspirations to become a transit centre in the Eastern Mediterranean , which means increased shipping traffic and increased dangers of pollution and accidents .
This strategy is expressed both in the policy of its government and in the huge investments by Greek shipowners in modern ships .
At the same time , however , due to our huge merchant fleet , we are also a country which faces huge problems in adapting to a new regulation which differs from international conventions and unavoidably results in rapid changes with economic repercussions .
The business capacity and jobs which risk being lost are parameters which no country faces as seriously as Greece .
That is why we would hope that the regulation will take account , as far as the timetable is concerned , of commercial activities under way and the contractual obligations of tankers .
Furthermore , we all know that no isolated measure suffices .
Shipping registers also have a huge responsibility .
Staff training , agreement and coordination between Member States and the availability of ports of refuge play a huge part .
We shall endeavour , through the general objectives of the European Union , to combine in the very best way environmental protection , the competitiveness of our European fleet and our economy .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should once again like to thank Mr Le Rachinel and the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their excellent work , which should enable the proposal to be adopted at first reading .
I would also thank all the MEPs who have spoken in order to emphasise the extent to which this obligation was an integral part of our efforts in the interests of maritime safety .
The amendment that you have proposed , Mr Le Rachinel , and that was voted unanimously in favour of by the Committee on Transport and Tourism is no less important for being technical , as it helps make the text still clearer .
I am therefore able to accept it .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would thank Parliament for again becoming involved in this maritime safety policy which - as one of the speakers emphasised - is all the more necessary in that the development of motorways of the sea and of maritime traffic will demand ever greater vigilance in the area of safety .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.00 a.m.
Development of the second-generation Schengen Information System ( regulation ) - Development of the second-generation Schengen Information System ( decision ) ( debate )

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I consider it my duty to thank the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , for the excellent work he has done on these proposals and also for the speed with which we have received the reports and have come to have this plenary debate this evening .
Many Members will know that the Council of Home Affairs Ministers adopted some important conclusions last week .
These conclusions once again confirmed that the Schengen II Information System is the European Union 's main priority , and therefore it is clear that extending the Commission 's mandate on SIS II is essential in order to ensure that it can continue to develop the system in close cooperation with the Member States .
You will also be aware that the Council has accepted a proposal from the Portuguese Government - which I myself endorse on behalf of the Commission - for a temporary solution , which we have called SIS One For All .
That is to say , it is a mechanism designed to ensure that the internal borders of the new Member States can be removed during the phase of transition to SIS II , while keeping the original deadline set for the end of 2007 .
That does not make us lose sight of the main objective , which is SIS II , which will guarantee greater security in border controls . It will confirm the outcome that we want to achieve by the end of 2007 , which is to remove controls on the internal borders of the new Member States that have asked to join the enlarged Schengen agreement .
Therefore , if these countries meet the necessary security criteria at their land and sea borders and at their airports , as I hope they will , they will be able to crown the political completion of their accession by forming a European domestic area without border controls , extending from Portugal across to Lithuania .
That will be an enormous political success for Europe .
SIS II will in any case continue to be our main objective : it will guarantee a higher level of security , be of greater help to the police authorities in charge of control and security , and provide better protection of personal data , which will be included in the system on the basis of greater transparency and accountability .
For all these reasons , SIS II remains the objective for our European area of security and freedom of movement , and that is why , in line with the rapporteur 's position , we are asking for an extension to the Commission 's mandate so that we can continue to develop SIS II .
The Council of Ministers ' acceptance of the Portuguese proposal will entail a delay in implementing SIS II .
It will not be an enormous delay , and I can tell the rapporteur and Parliament already that in February 2007 the Commission will submit a definite proposal for the final date for developing SIS II . The delay will be no more than six to eight months following the date originally set .
All in all , that is acceptable , if you consider that in the meantime the new Member States will have achieved the political success of joining a European area without internal borders .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , we are all aware of the importance of the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) , and Mr Frattini has just reminded us of this .
The advent of free movement within the Community area and the absence of internal borders means we must strengthen the security of the Union 's external borders and this can only be done if information is shared between all members of the Schengen area .
Mr Frattini also said - and this is a view I share - that SIS II is not only a new generation of the Schengen Information System ; it can also be said that this is a new Schengen Information System , with new functions , new uses and new imported data .
Apart from the technical issues involved in building a new system , there is also a political issue , relating to the legitimate ambition of the new Member States to join the Schengen area at the earliest opportunity .
This is a crucial issue for the new Member States ; it is about whether or not they can offer their citizens the chance of free movement in the Community area .
In order for them to be in the Schengen area they have to join SIS .
As we know , SIS is not in itself sufficient , in other words , merely joining SIS is not enough in order to be in the Schengen area .
There is a series of other prerequisites that must be fulfilled .
It is a necessary requirement , however ; one cannot be in the Schengen area without being in the Schengen Information System .
Consequently , the creation of SIS II has to be a priority for us , and this is why we worked so hard to achieve the adoption of the legal basis of SIS II at first reading - and , having worked closely with Parliament on this objective throughout the process , Mr Frattini is an eyewitness to this .
The adoption of the legal basis will prevent us suffering worse delays in implementing the SIS II , and I should like to thank him once again for his decisive help in achieving this objective .
The mandate granted by the Council to the Commission to develop SIS II finishes in a few days , on 31 December .
The Commission is proposing that this date be extended to 2007 , and admits that the system will not be operational before 2008 .
The proposal to extend the deadline to December 2007 is the optimistic version .
I was very pleased to hear Mr Frattini say that in February 2007 he will set out a definitive timetable and that he is only expecting a delay of six to eight months .
I must say that this prediction is considerably more positive than the worrying information that had been circulating .
It is still a delay but it is much less serious than we feared .
I hope he is right , as there are those who believe that we may face bigger delays .
In any event , Mr Frattini will know that Parliament always fulfils its monitoring obligations .
We want to monitor the implementation of this process , and if there are delays , we want to know why they have taken place .


I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs from other political groups , in particular Mrs Mastenbroek and Mr Lax , and I should like to thank publicly those MEPs on my side of the Chamber who have kept a close eye on this issue , who have always encouraged me and who have constantly showed their great concern over the pace at which SIS II was being implemented , in particular Mrs Bauer from Slovakia , Mr Brejc from Slovenia , Mrs Gál from Hungary , Mr Demetriou from Cyprus and of course Mrs Kudrycka from Poland , who will speak on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in this debate .



on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would very much like to thank Mr Coelho for such an excellent report and I would like to say that the extension of the Commission 's mandate has raised no reservations .
SIS II is , and should remain , a priority .
The European Parliament has done everything within its ability to ensure this is the case .
We still wish to support the Commission so that SIS II can be implemented as fast as possible .
The original aims of the new system were to upgrade SIS I and to expand it to incorporate the new Schengen states .
The first of these aims has yet to be fulfilled .
The second required a political decision and the creation of an alternative ' SIS I for all ' system .
It is unfortunate that it had to come to that , but the European Union must keep its credibility and fulfil its political obligations towards the new Member States .
However , I am hoping for a clear definition of how , in terms of organisation , time and funding are concerned , the ' SIS I for all ' project will influence the implementation of the second generation SIS system .
We still need close cooperation and Parliament needs to be kept up to date regarding both projects .
We also expect the Commission to adopt a more assertive and demanding attitude towards the Member States , to avoid recriminations later on .
SIS II is a Community project funded from the European Union 's budget .
This means that the Commission and the Member States bear the responsibility to a greater extent than was previously the case with the international SIS 1 + system .
The Commission can count on the European Parliament 's political support .
However , lessons need to be learned from the mistakes and failures that have occurred so far .
I also hope that , in the end , the work of the Commission will result in all Member States feeling that they all own the SIS II project together , with no divisions between the new and old Schengen Member States .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Schengen Information System , or SIS , as it is known , is a database which allows the appropriate authorities in the Member States to cooperate and to exchange information for the purpose of creating an area without internal border controls .
This system makes it significantly easier for the citizens of the European Union to travel and gives the forces of law and order better conditions under which to fight crime .
However , SIS has been up and running since 1995 .
This is a very long time in an age of extremely rapid progress in the field of information technology .
That is why , as early as in December of 2001 , exactly five years ago , the Council assigned the Commission with setting up a second generation SIS II system .
It is vital for the expansion of the Schengen area to include the new Member States .
It is hardly surprising that public opinion in these countries is concerned whenever it hears about delays in implementing this system .
Although European Union home affairs ministers have recently decided that eight out of the ten new Member States will join the Schengen area in late 2007 and early 2008 , which means being in the SIS I system for a while , this is a stopgap solution , which will be costly and far from perfect .
I hope that the Commission will learn some lessons from the delay in implementing the SIS II system and that , in the future , it will work more efficiently on projects that are important to the European Union as a whole .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , a properly functioning information system is the basis for a successful exchange of data between the Member States .
This applies as much to police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters as it does to border controls and the issuing of visas and residence permits .
Moreover , a system of this kind should lead to greater security by providing a tool which is sound and at the same time flexible , and can be used to meet changing requirements .
In view of the fact that the efficiency of the current system allows it to serve a maximum of eighteen Member States , it is very important to implement the new generation Schengen Information System as soon as possible .
So far the implementation of this ambitious project has run into numerous problems resulting in serious delays to its implementation .
That is why , in the future we must do eveything in our power to prevent similar situations .
The delays in the implementation of the SIS II system are very dangerous in the view of the new Member States .
They mean a delay to their full integration into the European Union and restrict their ability to take full advantage of the achievements of the Schengen system and the removal of border controls on their own internal borders with other Schengen countries .
I would also like to draw your attention to the Eastern Dimension of the European Union 's foreign policy and the changes which have to be taken into account as consequences of the expansion of the Schengen area .
Today Poland , which does not belong to this area , collects either no visa fees from its Eastern neighbours or fees which are very low .
From the moment that the Schengen area is extended , Poland 's eastern border will become the only eastern border of the European Union .
This will mean higher visa fees running into tens of US dollars , which would also hit the citizens of Belarus or Ukraine .
This situation might be difficult for our eastern neighbours to accept , considering the fact that both Poland and the European Union have certain political plans with respect to deepening cooperation with these countries , and which may result in the creation of something similar to a new Berlin Wall .
This is something the European Union cannot afford to do .
( PL ) Mr President , the implementation of the SIS II system reflects the organisational powerlessness of the organisational department to which this task was given .
Every day tens of thousands of drivers queue up like refugees at the borders of the European Union , in abysmal conditions .
Companies are losing thousands of euros .
People wonder about the nature of a European Union which scores own goals like that .
In Strasbourg , beautiful administrative buildings stand unused for 80 % of the time .
The cost of maintaining them is more than 200 million euros per year .
At the same time we are told that there will be delays because no buildings are available to house the system .
The citizens simply cannot comprehend the ineffectiveness of those in charge .
I think that the European Union would benefit if the people responsible for this situation were made to spend the night in an HGV .
Soon the nights will be brilliant with snow , while a bit of fresh air does no one any harm and actually increases alertness .
I propose that we finally move to clarify this matter which is so important to our citizens .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.00 a.m.
Violent video games ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on violent videogames .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am particularly grateful to the few , perhaps less than ten , Members present in this Chamber to debate a subject that affects many tens of millions of young and very young people - our children - in the European Union .
The protection of the law and of the fundamental rights of young people and children must remain a major priority for the EU .
It is a priority for the European Commission , and I have to say quite frankly that the acts of violence and sadism that appear in some particularly bloody videogames are a cause of great concern to us .
New technologies that have enabled young and very young people to use the Internet and technological games have changed the relationship between adults and children .
Young people , our children , are often much more familiar with these technologies than adults are .
What is essential , therefore , is primarily greater responsibility and consciousness on the part of adults and parents , as well as focus and education to make parents , above all , fully aware of the risks and able to make informed decisions .
There is a classification system with labelling for the content of films , and also for games and videogames , that may be of use .
This must , of course , be combined with a mechanism providing for more effective education .
These components are necessary if we want a solution that works .
The European Union already has instruments for fighting these worrying problems within the policy areas of justice and security , and also the information society and internal market rules .
I must say quite sincerely , ladies and gentlemen , that I have also been highly impressed by certain child protection monitoring and enhancement initiatives that I was informed about by some Home Affairs Ministers before and after the Council of Ministers , and which have been taken up by some national political parties in certain Member States .
I refer in particular to increased control over the sale of particularly violent games and videogames to minors .
In my view , it is equally important to hold videogame producers responsible .
In 2003 , a European self-regulation system , known as Pan-European Game Information , was adopted in order to help parents choose when buying videogames intended for minors .
This self-regulation system is supported by a large majority of producers .
It was developed after consultation with the industry , parents ' associations and consumer associations .
It covers 27 countries and includes an indication of the minimum age for access to a particular game and a mandatory description of the content of a game or videogame that is placed on the market .
This system , ladies and gentlemen , helps parents to choose - assuming that it is the parents who decide what videogames their children buy - but it does not concern and it contains no reference to the content of the videogame .
Such self-regulation was established on the one hand to protect minors , but also , on the other hand , to comply with another fundamental principle : freedom of expression .
I intend to meet very soon with producers and the associations representing them in order to evaluate to what extent the indicators used in the self-regulation scheme are relevant or , I would say , up to date .
I think the time has come to assess whether those indicators have perhaps not been working as we would have liked them to .
With regard to the content of games or videogames that can be found on the Internet , in contrast , there are systems out there , but they are applied and implemented at the initiative of certain respected consortia .
The first is one known as the Platform for Internet Content Selection , and the second is the Recreational Software Advisory Council , both based primarily in the United States .
I must point out , however , that neither the United Nations study on violence against children nor the World Health Organization 's world report on violence and health analyses this problem ; it gets just a passing reference as if there were absolutely no need to examine it in greater depth .
In 2005 , the Commission conducted an enquiry financed under the Daphne programme .
This enquiry , based on a series of studies of the violent videogame sector , revealed the need for a multidisciplinary approach , which currently does not exist . One result of this study was that violent images have an undeniable influence on young people .
This influence may , however , show itself in different ways , depending on various factors .
These , for example , include affluence ; the young people 's situation ; where they live ; whether they have an active parental figure close to them , or whether they have no parents close to them ; control over the youngsters ' access to the media and the Internet , in other words whether or not their parents exercise any control over whether they can have absolutely free access to the Internet ; the level of education given ; and the family 's socio-economic level .
All these factors affect the way in which violence can influence the minds and mentalities of young and very young people .
There are other important elements to consider .
Firstly , this is not just a technical issue but rather an issue of education , which involves control for preventive purposes .
When I say control over the sale of violent videogames , I mean effective control , because today there are no mandatory instruments that make it possible to check whether or not a person under the age of 16 can buy videogames that incite or glorify acts of violence or even actual criminal acts .
I believe this House will at least want to consider this problem , in view of the fact , as well , that the schemes that Daphne has financed to combat violence against children are based precisely on this idea of how to protect young and very young people .
To conclude , following on from the child protection strategy that we launched in July , I intend to refer this problem to the European Forum for the Rights of the Child .
As you know , this forum has been set up to commence work at the beginning of 2007 .
At its first working meeting I intend to start a public , transparent debate involving all stakeholders : non-governmental organisations , the Member States , parents ' associations , young people , minors and also the national mediators responsible for children 's rights .
The four keywords on this subject are : parents , communication and education professionals , producers - because we cannot tackle this problem at its roots if we cannot prevent the production of these violent games - and lastly politics .
It is a case of examining how politics can draw up a strategy to actually protect children without resorting to censorship .
These are the pillars on which we must address the problem that I have put to you this evening .
In the spring I will submit a communication on cybercrime to you .
In my view , criminals , law-breakers and Internet offenders see the young and very young as particularly vulnerable victims .
It is our political , institutional and moral duty to react firmly , with a European strategy against incitement to violence , against the exaltation of violence and against the glorification of violence .
Thank you , Mr Frattini .
I agree with your tactful opening remark , which confirms the need to bring some reflection and a few changes to the organisation of our parliamentary work , especially with regard to our plenary debates .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Frattini for his very helpful and very commendable introduction to this important subject .
We probably have not given enough consideration to this issue in this Parliament .
I am glad that we are now having this debate because there is considerable evidence to show that violence in videos has an effect on minors who watch them - very detrimental effects , which we need to get to grips with .
I think it is becoming clear that the self-regulation that Mr Frattini talked about is probably no longer enough .
We need to look at this further , to ensure that young people have controlled access and that the videos themselves are not gratuitously violent .
We see this kind of violence around us on our television screens and we are becoming more and more accepting of levels of violence in a way that we should not be and in a way that is not acceptable .
So , this is a good initiative and one which I hope that we will be able to take forward .
I am very pleased that the Commission undertook the survey and that it was done under the Daphne programme because not only do we see gratuitous violence on videos but also a representation of women that is unacceptable .
So , not only do young people see violence as such , they also see violence towards women and a portrayal of women that is not what we would wish .
There are two things that need to be dealt with : the protection of children and young people and making sure that women are not portrayed in unacceptable ways in these video productions .
We need to be clear about not being seen as a ' nanny state ' .
This has to be introduced in a reasonable way , in a way which is acceptable to everybody .
We also need to give special attention to the Internet .
The Commissioner mentioned this .
It is difficult because regulation of the Internet is very much in its early days , but we must not shy away from it .
We need to find ways in which we can sensibly regulate the Internet in everyone 's interests .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mr Frattini very much for the highly practical proposals that he has put forward this evening .
There is no doubt that Europe is seeing a worrying and exponential growth in cases of violence , bullying and violence among children , and television and the Internet are undeniably affecting the way our children behave , as is the spread of violent videogames , which are becoming increasingly common and increasingly brutal .
I shall just give you one example : there is a very recent videogame called Rule of Rose , which is a really serious problem in that the main characters in the game are children , and many of the images are on the borderline of sexual perversion and sadism .
We therefore warmly welcome the current debate , even though - as the President has mentioned - it has been tucked away in an evening slot and has very few participants .
That is a real shame .
Even so , we expect some sort of action to be taken in this matter , and certainly not through censorship , as Commissioner Reding has already said .
We support your initiative , Mr Frattini , of sending a letter to the EU Home Affairs Ministers asking them to carry out a careful check on the controls that exist regarding videogame violence .
After what Mrs Reding said , we hope that the PEGI ( Pan-European Game Information ) system will really become a body able to exercise more effective control .
To conclude , we strongly call for practical measures to be developed to control and prohibit the distribution of violent videogames and to set up a kind of European monitoring centre for childhood and young people , not least so as to carry out preventive monitoring of game and videogame content and , if possible , to draw up a single code for the marketing and distribution of videogames for children .
The debate is closed .
Amendment of the Rules of Procedure ( committees , quaestors ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jo Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on amendment of Rules 15 and 182 ( 1 ) of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure - Election of Quaestors and committee bureaux .

deputising for the rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to begin by giving the apologies of the rapporteur , Mr Leinen , who could not be here tonight because he has to represent Parliament in a far-away part of the world .
He is on his way there as I speak .
I rise to propose , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , an amendment to our Rules of Procedure , which would see a fourth vice-chairman elected in each parliamentary committee , a bureau of four instead of three , and a College of Quaestors comprising six members instead of five .
Why has such a proposal come forward at this stage ?
It arises from an amendment to our Rules tabled by just two Members of the European Parliament - Mr Schulz and Mr Poettering - who considered that this would facilitate the participation of Members of Parliament from across 27 Member States - as we will be in January - in positions of responsibility in Parliament .
It would be a measure that would be inclusive , that would enable more Members to hold positions of responsibility , and that would make it easier to distribute such posts politically across Parliament .
We took cognisance of that proposal in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
It is a very important consideration .
We also heard that there were strong arguments against creating what many considered to be an inflation of Parliamentary posts .
There is , after all , no functional necessity to have a larger bureau of each parliamentary committee .
Perhaps - although that is more debatable - there is no functional necessity to have a larger College of Quaestors .
It was pointed out by many colleagues that we have enough positions of responsibility across this Parliament for most Members who wish to exercise such positions to have one .
It was felt that perhaps this was a rather hasty change to the Rules being put forward , for reasons that were not convincing for all of our Members .
That is why we came up with a compromise in committee .
The rapporteur - the chairman of our committee - asked me to deputise for him tonight because I was the one that proposed that compromise , which is that we have a fourth vice-chairman of each parliamentary committee and a sixth Quaestor for the remainder of this Parliament , until 2009 , but that we do not make it a permanent change .
In 2009 we should revert to the current situation of three vice-chairmen of each parliamentary committee and five Quaestors .
Indeed , the size of Parliament , which is about to increase with Romania and Bulgaria joining , will actually decline in 2009 , back to 732 Members .
I am sure Mr Duff will correct me if I got the figure slightly wrong .
It is logical to take this step now , for inclusive reasons , but not make it a permanent change ; to revert to the present numbers in 2009 .
That is the position of the committee , which I put forward .
I must also say that it is the position adopted by a majority in my political group as well .
I know that there are other views in Parliament , but I submit it to Parliament for consideration .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we are therefore looking at these two amendments .
What are the reasons for the change in the number of Quaestors ?
When Parliament had 500 Members , we had five Quaestors , in other words , virtually one for every 100 MEPs .
If we stuck with that ratio with the proposed 780 Members , we would have a very high number .
If , as the Committee has suggested , we increase the number of Quaestors to six , that would be one Quaestor for every 130 Members of the House , still a larger number than was for many years the case .
I believe that the complexity of developments and of the problems that will arise in the House with 25 languages - I am now including Catalan and Irish , for example - that this complexity affecting the conduct of business and decisions justifies increasing that number from five to six for a time .
The same applies to the increase in the number of committee vice-chairmen .
It is an indisputable fact that , so far as anyone can judge , we will now from January 2007 to the middle of 2009 have the largest number of Members this Parliament is ever planned to have .
This unusually large number of MEPs suggests that , or is the reason why , a larger number of elected representatives will be appointed to the committees for the same period .
It is of course not only to do with the conduct of business but also with the fact that people are already in these posts and the new Bulgarian and Romanian Members are now coming , who are of course also entitled to such positions .
We would have to take them away from existing Members and give them to new ones .
From a formal , legal point of view that is of course possible , but it would not be conducive to , let us say , committed internal parliamentary work .
There would be frustrations and disappointments , which can be avoided by taking this approach .
I grant that one thing has perhaps not gone as well as it might .
We could and perhaps should have recognised this six months earlier .
That would have made it easier to talk these things through quietly with all the parliamentary groups .
The fact that this idea unfortunately occurred to those responsible only very late in the day made it look as though a sitting had to be held on Monday and a vote taken on it on Thursday .
I ask for your forbearance .
It can happen in political life that you hit upon a good idea later than events really require .
I ask for your understanding for that and readily admit that many honourable Members found this fact rather hard to understand .
There was no ill intent behind it , no funny business ; only when the new situation became clear did we suddenly find there was a new problem we had not seen before .
To sum up , I believe this compromise of creating an extra post in two areas for a limited period while making clear that we will return to normal at the end of that period is a reasonable proposal that will be good for the conduct of parliamentary business and I ask for your agreement and understanding .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I do not expect that I will take up six and a half minutes on this matter , but I would like to thank Mr Corbett for nobly standing in to prosecute a cause for which I think he personally lacks a certain degree of enthusiasm , and to thank Mr Friedrich who , with his customary courtesy , is declining to upset current postholders by ousting them from the positions that they enjoy in Parliament .
But the fact is that for 53 more Members of Parliament we are creating a further 23 posts .
Some of these posts are described as jobs , as if there was employment attached .
That is not the case for the majority of vice-chairmen of the committees .
For the Quaestors , there is perhaps a solid argument for an increase to six .
Perhaps there really is work for six Quaestors , but for the vice-chairmen of the committees I fear it is inflation of posts for its own sake .
That cannot present an especially attractive side of our parliamentary life and I am anxious about the reaction of public opinion .
I also think it is not conducive to increased efficiency or effectiveness .
There is no functional necessity for these posts , rather the reverse .
There is a risk that the bureaux will become top-heavy superstructures .
I also disagree that we are facing extraordinary circumstances .
When Parliament expanded to accept these MEPs from 10 new accession states in 2004 , we did not increase the size of the bureaux of the committees .
We all agree with and are grateful for the proposal to include a sunset clause .
I fear that when we come to 2009 , a sort of bureaucratic paralysis will fall upon Parliament and we will all decide it is safer and quieter to stick with this inflated size of committee vice-chairmanships .
May the sun set upon this manoeuvre as soon as possible , and my own group will oppose the change of rules tomorrow .
Mr President , if , like me , you learned the political ropes through many years of experience from the perspective of a minority and in opposition , you will be familiar with the arrogance and nonchalance with which those in power allow themselves to be identified with the institutions in which they have a majority .
Then there are the moments of suffocation in which you feel like a fish in an aquarium .
You open your mouth nice and wide , but nobody can hear you .
The sun went down long ago , but this debate is taking place before the European public .
Parliament , which screams for transparency and presses the Council and the Commission to take citizens and their cares seriously , is discussing its own affairs late at night , and then after long squabbles and only when forced to do so by the small parties .
These are not , in fact , Parliament 's affairs but manifestations of the psychological , group-dynamic greed of the big groups in this House , nationalistic balancing acts - a vanity fair - that are all to the cost of this House .
There is no rational justification for this measure .
Yes , there are two new Member States . That much is true .
Yet a short while ago we gained 10 new Member States and there was no expansion of the offices .
There are more MEPs , but not more committees .
The Quaestors do not have any extra work any more than the committees do .
This motion does not serve to meet Parliament 's needs and improve the way it works , but rather to satisfy the greed of the political groups and to pacify their fights about distributing spoils , and all of this at the cost of this House 's reputation for dignity and its ability to do its work .
So , as a silenced fish in an aquarium where the lights are about to be switched off , I say to you that this is a shameless , unnecessary and politically indefensible act , and we will be voting against it .
It is a shame that two MEPs are defending this proposal , but the whole of this House will adopt this motion with a large majority tomorrow lunchtime .
That is very sad .
deputising for the rapporteur . - Mr President , I just wish to say that , while I understand fully the arguments against this proposal , it is unfair to characterise it , as Mr Voggenhuber did , as a conspiracy between the two big groups .
After all , the extra positions created would also benefit the small groups .
Indeed , the D 'Hondt system that we customarily apply is one which , when there is a small number of posts to be distributed , arguably favours the big groups , but , when there is a larger number of posts to be distributed , it favours the small groups .
Therefore , I do not think the conspiracy theory is a correct analysis .
Certainly , on top of that , it was contested in my group : there was a lively debate on whether this was a good or bad thing for Parliament .
Opinions were divided , which was why we were so happy with the compromise that has been adopted with this ' sunset clause ' .
On this point I do not think there are any rules to be formally adhered to , and therefore Mr Voggenhuber may take the floor briefly , although the debate itself cannot be reopened .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Corbett is right , and he has the honour of being one of the two Members given the task of defending this proposal .
I was not attacking him , specifically .
If the small groups were to take part in this shamelessness and keep their mouths shut , a crumb might fall from the cake for them too , here or there : of that , we are well aware .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.00 a.m.
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.25 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
A European strategy for sustainable , competitive and secure energy - Biomass and Biofuels - Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mrs Morgan , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on a European strategy for sustainable , competitive and secure energy - Green Paper ,
by Mr Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on a strategy for biomass and biofuels and
by Mr Seppänen on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the draft Council regulation establishing an Instrument for Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance [ 09037 / 2006 - C6-0153 / 2006 -
Madam President , Members have decided to hold a joint debate on the three reports by Mrs Morgan , Mr Langen and Mr Seppänen .

This provides an excellent opportunity to discuss topics of key importance for energy policy just before the new year , topics that brought a great deal of inquietude last year .
Let me begin by addressing the report on a European strategy for sustainable , competitive and secure energy .
First , I wish to congratulate and thank the rapporteur , Mrs Morgan , for her impressive work on the energy Green Paper .




I also wish to thank and congratulate the draftsmen , Mr Zieleniec , Mr Wijkman , Mr Markov , Mr Ehler , Mrs Tzampazi , Mr Takkula and Mr Vlasák , for their contributions .
This document is an important contribution to the Commission 's work on the strategic energy review .
Your work over recent months has fed into the Commission 's wider deliberations on the future of energy policy in Europe .
I agree that the European Union needs an integrated , coherent and consistent European energy policy that maintains Europe 's competitiveness , safeguards our environmental objectives and ensures our security of supply .
I also agree on the nature of the climate change challenge . Climate change provides the strongest encouragement for a new energy policy .
Energy accounts for over 90 % of carbon dioxide emissions in the European Union , so we cannot tackle climate change without the right energy policies .
I agree that the European Union needs to show vision and determination to lead the world in accelerating the shift to a low-carbon economy .
At the heart of this must be ambitious but credible targets for further reductions in greenhouse gases beyond 2012 .
Without a functioning internal market , the emissions-trading system - the cornerstone of our efforts to deal with climate change in a competitive manner - will not work properly , nor will we achieve our aims of competitiveness and security of supply .
Therefore , the Commission will keep up the pressure on Member States to implement the legislation fully .
This week , we adopted another package of infringement measures against 16 Member States .
At this stage , we are conducting infringement proceedings against 19 Member States , and I believe that shows our determination really to implement the internal market .
In addition , in line with the conclusions of the internal market report and the final report on the energy sector inquiry , the Commission now intends to take action to address the remaining issues under the following headings : ensuring non-discriminatory access to well-developed networks , notably by looking at the issue of unbundling ; improving regulation of network access at national and EU levels , which includes better cooperation at EU level between regulators ; reducing the scope for unfair competition , through increased transparency and improved access to storage facilities ; providing a clear framework for investment ; and strengthening the focus of the public service obligation .
However , the internal market can achieve its goal only on the basis of decisions taken by European citizens .
The role of citizens is particularly important with respect to our energy efficiency agenda .
This is an area where everyone can contribute to a more sustainable and secure world , and we welcome your support for the energy efficiency action plan .
Europe 's citizens can also make a difference to the role of renewables in our energy mix , but we cannot expect people to make the necessary shift unless the political and investment plan is right .
That is why I agree with the need for a stable and long-term framework for renewables .
Climate change , globalisation and longer-term targets call for a renewed effort on the technology front .
We all want to see Europe lead the way in global research , which means spending existing research budgets better , getting them to work as a catalyst leading to increased industry research funding in the European Union .
The importance of the external dimension is also well articulated in the report .
This year , our external policy has taken some very important steps : the establishment of the energy community and new agreements with several producer countries and transit countries , including Kazakhstan , Azerbaijan and Ukraine .
I would like to address Mr Langen 's report on a strategy for biomass and biofuels .
First of all , I would like to thank Mr Langen for this valuable contribution and his great help to us in the Commission as we look forward on the issue of renewable energy , including bioenergy .
First , the EU , acting collectively , will need to strengthen the legislative framework for renewable energy , committing itself to the establishment of a stable regulatory framework based on ambitious targets .
Longer-term , more ambitious objectives up to 2020 will need binding obligations on the part of Member States to guarantee burden-sharing and the development of an internal renewable energy market .
At the same time , we should allow a certain degree of flexibility to enable Member States to focus their attention on certain areas on the basis of their specific strengths and weaknesses .
Second , this framework will need to include legislative measures tailored to the specific obstacles facing renewable energy in individual sectors .
For example , access to the grid is a key issue for renewable energy in electricity .
The existing provision in this area may need to be strengthened .
As regards heating , measures are needed to overcome unnecessary planning barriers to solar panels , for example , and to create a level playing field for district heating .
In transport , it is necessary to take into account the fact that the extra cost for biofuels is greater than that of renewable energies in other sectors , but we need biofuels in the energy mix because they are a tool not only for combating climate change , but also in terms of security of supply .
In looking at the detail of the report , there are three basic points that I would like to highlight .
First , I welcome the emphasis the report places on the certification of biofuels to ensure that , whether produced in Europe or abroad , they need sustainability standards .
I understand the logic behind the proposed ban on the use of palm oil .
However , as the work of the round table on sustainable palm oil has demonstrated , the environmental impact of palm oil production can display enormous variations , and this has to be taken into account .
Second , I share the view that second-generation biofuels are critically important .
They offer better greenhouse gas performance and improve security of supply by widening the range of feedstocks from which biofuels can be made .
However , let us not create a false opposition between first- and second-generation biofuels .
First-generation biofuels improve security of supply , too , by reducing dependence on oil , and they also offer greenhouse gas savings compared with conventional fuels .
Moreover , first-generation biofuels serve as a bridge to the second generation .
As second-generation biofuels come onto the market , they will take over the supply and distribution networks and plants of the first generation .
Finally , I would like to endorse the view that there is a need to do more to inform society in general , and farmers in particular , about the use of biomass and biofuels .
We should particularly encourage farmers to venture into the new world of production of farm food and energy grasses .
Now I would like to address Mr Seppänen 's report on the Council regulation establishing an instrument for nuclear safety and security assistance .
I wish to acknowledge and thank Mr Seppänen for the efforts made by the rapporteur and by Parliament as a whole to present this report in good time in order to have the new instrument available before the end of this year .
Improvement of nuclear safety has been an important part of our work in central and eastern European countries , as well as in the Community of Independent States , notably in Ukraine and Russia .
But we have also made an effort in other countries , such as Armenia and Kazakhstan .
It will remain essential in the coming years , as most of our neighbours and emerging economies rely heavily on nuclear power in order to satisfy their energy needs .
Because of the lack of time , I cannot comment on each amendment .
However , I should like to highlight some important considerations that prevent us from accepting some of the amendments .
I will not address the amendments on which we agree .
In Amendment 3 , the rapporteur proposes to add a reference to the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation .
The Commission considers that this is not the objective of this instrument and that it is covered by the instrument of stability .
Amendment 7 states that ' priority should be given to assisting nuclear installations and activities which are likely to have significant effects on the Member States ' .
I understand the concerns that have led to this proposal .
I would stress that the Community primarily supports improvement in nuclear safety installations close to our borders .
However , I should like to repeat that the new instrument has a global objective ; a nuclear accident in one place is a nuclear accident everywhere , as direct or indirect consequences will affect the whole world .
Finally , Amendments 27 and 28 , limiting the scope of application of the instrument ' only to nuclear facilities that are or were in operation in third countries on the date of [ the instrument 's ] entry into force ' .
While it is clear that we will not provide assistance to the design and construction of new plants in third countries , there should be a possibility to provide assistance vis-à-vis all existing plants .
Otherwise , we would lose an efficient instrument to influence nuclear safety abroad .
To conclude , I once again pay tribute to the work of Parliament and all the committees involved on the Green Paper , the strategy for biomass and biofuels and the nuclear safety instrument .
I look forward to continuing our joint work for Europe 's energy future .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - Madam President , at the beginning of this year a harsh shiver went through the homes of many people in Western Europe as the Russian firm Gazprom turned off the supplies to Ukraine .
The effects of that were felt throughout the European Union .
A harsh shiver went down the spine of many politicians as we realised that in future , if we were to continue on our current trajectory , over 80 % of our gas was likely to come from outside the EU .
There are real security-of-supply issues that need to be addressed very quickly .
On top of this , there is an increasing awareness of the climate change agenda .
It is affecting our planet more quickly and in more dramatic ways than were hitherto imagined .
If we are to stem the tide of the effects that humans are having on the environment , we surely have to start by making radical changes in the way we use and produce energy .
I would like to think that the report we are voting on today will be an adequate response to those challenges .
The Commission has set out its stall on the scale of the problem .
We hope we have responded constructively to some of the tough choices that need to be made .
There has been no doubt that this is an opportunity for the EU to prove itself to the citizens of Europe .
This is one of the greatest contributions that Parliament has made to this debate , putting citizens and consumers right back into the centre of the energy debate .
If we are to take on these challenges the consumer has to be involved and we have to recognise that energy poverty is a real issue for millions of our citizens .
Energy efficiency is surely the most cost-effective way of meeting some of the energy challenges we face , and the Commission has come up with a very comprehensive action plan on energy consumption and energy efficiency .
It is imperative that we try to make the European Union the most energy-efficient economy in the world by 2020 .
This is a great example of a situation where we already have reams of legislation in place and Member States are ignoring the laws that they have signed up to .
We have to reach a stage where we cut our energy consumption by 20 % .
Implementation on this is absolutely crucial and I would like to ask you , Commissioner , what further steps we can take .
You suggested that we are going to initiate more infringement proceedings - but can we do more to name and shame Member States that are not implementing the laws that they have signed up to ?
For too long , many Member States have been more concerned about getting the best deal for their national energy champions than helping or providing benefits for the consumer .
Why is it that in the UK last year 19 % of the public switched energy companies , while in France the figure was less than 2 % ?
Is it because all the citizens in France and in Germany are happy with their energy suppliers ?
I doubt it .
I suggest that it is because it is extremely difficult for many companies to access these markets because of some companies ' in-built vested interests in keeping others out .
That is why we have to do something very serious in opening up and unbundling the energy networks .
When you arrive in the UK on the Eurostar , the first sign you see is a huge sign which says that Électricité de France is giving power to millions of Londoners .
I dream of the day when I can get off the train in Paris and read a sign that says : ' Centrica - still not in Russian hands - providing power to millions of Parisians ' .
I am afraid that day is a long way off .
Security of supply and sustainability have to go hand-in-hand .
We have to use mechanisms such as the emissions trading scheme to drive the economy .
Energy mix is up to Member States , but let us be sensible and acknowledge that the energy mix in one country will affect others , and that is why we need targets on cutting CO2 emissions by 30 % by 2020 .
We are insistent on binding sectoral targets of 25 % in renewable energies .
That means no less than a revolution in the way that many Member States produce their energy .
We spend pitiful amounts on research and development and we have to work towards a truly common European energy policy in external affairs .
I would like to thank the other political parties , in particular Mr Reul , Mrs Ek , Mr Turmes and Mr Seppänen for their contributions and their support in this debate .

I hope , Commissioner , you will take on some of our ideas and we look forward to receiving your ideas on the strategic energy review in the new year .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , I am grateful for the opportunity to debate the biomass action plan and biofuels together with the Green Paper , because all the measures for the promotion of biomass and biofuels at least meet the Green Paper 's objectives - competitiveness , sustainability and security of supply - even if not completely .
That is important , because even today 50 % of all renewable energies - around 4 % of Europe 's total energy requirement - are produced by biomass .
I am grateful to the Commissioner .
2006 was the year of plans , I hope 2007 will be the year of political implementation .
We look forward to the proposals you intend to present on 10 January for translating these action programmes and green papers into action , because we are convinced that we cannot omit any measure that will help to improve the European Union 's security of supply .
At present , biomass is a sleeping giant .
There is tremendous potential - only 1.6 out of a potential 97.4 million hectares are being used for energy crops in the European Union today .
We produce 90 % of biomass ourselves and import 10 % .
But we see that major producer countries like Brazil and recently - for two years now - also the US are pursuing a deliberate strategy for the production of biofuels from their own cultivation .
I think it is phenomenal that in a space of only two years the US has managed to go from virtually zero to 19 million tonnes of biofuels .
That ought to be an incentive for us , too , so far as we are able , including in the context of alternative use .
No one wants to make it more difficult to produce high-quality food by going all out for energy , through excessive subsidies , for example .
We must keep the two in balance .
But there are opportunities .
That is why the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , which was the lead committee , adopted my draft report to a very large extent .
It is rare to end with a unanimous vote .
That is why we have so far as possible incorporated the concerns of individual groups in this report .
It is nevertheless not over long , it has 81 paragraphs .
It shows that we here in the European Parliament are very much agreed on the further use of biomass .
The Commission 's action plan describes the support measures and the priority areas correctly .
We have no criticism of the action plan , but we have brought a number of aspects into our opinion which I believe will be adopted by a great majority at noon today , and we would ask you and your colleagues , Commissioner , to include these points raised by Parliament in your implementation strategy .
It is important in relation to both blocks that we use every potential that biomass has to offer - a lot is still going unused , from wood to fast growing plants - that at the second level we also ensure that modern technologies are used - second-generation biofuels , for example - and that on the other hand we work to see that everything is done firstly to ensure that the use of biofuels is technologically neutral and secondly that use is made of the existing development potential .
Two weeks ago , I was talking to a prominent representative of the European motor industry , who told me : irrespective of the compulsory admixture of biofuels and the targets of 5.75 % by 2012 , if we get the green light , if the regulatory conditions are right and the technical standards are adapted , if we are given freedom of action , then we are ready to join with the industry in investing billions and not just to aim for a 5.57 % target .
The European motor industry believes it is feasible to reach 15 % within 10 years if the investment is secure .
That is our approach , to do everything we can .
I would like to expressly thank everyone who has worked on this .
I would like to thank the other committees .
187 amendments were tabled and 122 amendments in the opinions , it was a good debate with all colleagues .
Now we still have a couple of separate votes , the report still has to be tidied up in the vote .
But over all we can be satisfied , thank you very much !
I hope the Commission will take from Parliament its instructions for further action .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , I drafted the report for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on assistance to third countries in nuclear safety and security .
This regulation would mean additional assistance granted for other purposes and is necessary for the sake of an appropriate legal basis .
Assistance cannot be granted for improved nuclear safety and security in third countries without the legal basis established under this Regulation , which is Article 203 of the Euratom Treaty .
Thereafter , the EU can , for example , continue its work to improve nuclear safety and security in the old TACIS countries even after the TACIS programme has been discontinued .
Commissioner , it is the opinion of the Committee , not just the rapporteur but the Committee , that the EU should not provide assistance for the construction of new nuclear power stations , but only to improve the safety and security of the existing and functioning ones and other nuclear plants .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance tabled Amendment 27 to the text adopted by the Committee regarding this .
The intention is good , but the wording does not make the matter any clearer ; instead , it introduces a problem of interpretation .
When they say that nuclear plants eligible for assistance should be operating on the date of entry into force of the Regulation , it remains unclear whether plants that exist and are in working order but on that precise day are being serviced or are otherwise out of action can then receive assistance .
It is not appropriate to exclude such plants from assistance , and so I , for my own part , cannot sanction this amendment .
To my mind , Parliament 's purpose in this matter is clearly expressed in other Articles .
This assistance should not just be given to improve safety and security at existing plants , nor should it be used for building new plants .
We should remember that responsibility for nuclear safety always lies with the plant itself and that EU aid to improve the safety and security of nuclear plants is only complementary aid .
It will help with the transfer of the special skills of the EU , its Member States or the International Atomic Energy Agency to nuclear plants in third countries , but there are not any economic preconditions for its use in eligible countries .
Finally , I wish to table an oral amendment to the report and correct the sum budgeted in the Committee 's Amendment 25 and in the multiannual financial framework to EUR 524 million .
I wish to thank everyone for their excellent levels of cooperation .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - Madam President , with one minute of speaking time I can only make two points .
First , biofuels are indeed very important , but they have to be produced in the most efficient way .
Biofuel production in tropical countries is much more efficient than in Europe .
Instead of benefiting fully from that , we seem to be ready to put a levy on such imports .
If we can import oil and gas from Saudi Arabia without levies , why are there levies on biofuels ?
Apart from the efficiency argument , we are also depriving the low-income countries of much-needed income .
Secondly , emissions in China and India are expanding very rapidly .
That is why , in its opinion , the Committee on Development has suggested that our Union should establish a proactive strategy of technology cooperation with these countries , offering financial support to cover some of the extra costs for the most efficient technologies possible .
Amendment 5 suggests replacing ' financial ' with ' technical ' .
We must be more ambitious than that , otherwise emissions from these countries will overwhelm us in the future .
Therefore , I urge colleagues to vote against Amendment 5 .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( FR ) Madam President , I shall start by thanking Mr Langen for his willingness to listen and for the wisdom and courage he has shown in his report .
The Committee on International Trade , having observed how far behind the European Union is in both the consumption and production of biofuels , has proposed that we increase imports , which is quite natural , but also that we focus more closely on European industrial production , with the dual aim of achieving energy independence for the EU and of providing outlets for agricultural crops such as sugar-producing plants .
The costs of producing ethanol are EUR 25 per hectolitre in Brazil , EUR 35 in the United States and EUR 45 in the European Union : that is why we are suggesting that it would be advisable to set , for a specified period , an acceptable level of penetration of bioethanol imports into the EU that can be reconciled with the gradual development of Community production , in line with the European sustainable development strategy .
Madam President , in our experience , liberalisation of the energy sector has always resulted in higher prices and worse service .
Within the EU , liberalisation and the separation of energy producers and distributors have resulted in under-investment in production plants and electricity transport networks .
It is this policy that was responsible for the blackouts in November 2006 , and it will inevitably result in huge problems in the coming years .
Under these circumstances , we must as a matter of urgency accelerate investment in research in all fields , including nuclear technology , so that we can meet the challenges of the post-oil era and combat greenhouse gases .
It is imperative that we end the requirement for separation of energy producers and energy transport networks and that we halt all further attempts to liberalise the energy sector .
That is why I would advocate creating a European energy agency to coordinate the Member States ' energy policies and their efforts in terms of research and development .
This body would head an economic interest group at EU level , which would involve all electricity production and distribution companies and would ensure access for all to reasonably priced energy .
Energy is not a commodity like any other : it is a common asset for humanity .
Madam President , as with other new regulations , the task of the Committee on Budgets in the case of the Regulation on Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance has been to ensure that the provisions thereof conform with the provisions of the new interinstitutional agreement that came into force in May this year .
That is the essence of my opinion .
It was made easier by the fact that the rapporteur , Mr Seppänen , is a member of the Committee on Budgets .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , the comments of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs are naturally of a structural nature .
We have seven points to make .
Firstly , we want an energy-policy approach that ensures energy is affordable .
Secondly , we support an integrated energy-policy approach that takes equal account of the objectives of security of energy supply , security of competition and care of the environment .
Thirdly , dependence on energy imports leaves no room for ideological blinkers .
We want a non-discriminatory energy mix .
Fourthly , we believe the completion of the internal market is central to security of supply and affordable energy prices .
Fifthly , investment in networks and capacities and investment in CO2 or energies that produce little CO2 must be facilitated and accelerated .
Sixthly , we support the Commission in acting consistently against anti-competitive behaviour to ensure that competition is fair .
Seventhly , we do not want to encumber our energy policy with unnecessary bureaucracy .
New European agencies and authorities are at present just as unnecessary as new internal market rules .
The existing machinery needs to be used more efficiently and existing European law must be fully transposed into national law .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food safety . - ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the rationalisation of the use of energy , like the penetration of renewable sources in the Union 's energy mix , is a universal demand for the Union .
The Union therefore needs to take all the measures needed in order to implement the demand for a common European energy policy .
This demand is expressed through the report by Mrs Morgan , whom I would like to congratulate .
It is important that we understand that the Union could save up to 20 % of its current energy consumption .
This is therefore an exploitable source of energy within the Union .
This saving could be achieved from the strict application of the Union 's existing legal framework .
We have the necessary tools at our disposal today , by which I mean the Structural Funds .
For the next programming period from 2007 to 2013 , an environmentally-friendly policy needs to be added to the European Regional Development Fund .
Madam President , I am speaking in my capacity as the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on Mr Seppänen 's report .
My committee is , broadly speaking , delighted with the report drafted by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
I would like to use the minute available to me to emphasise the following specific points : first of all , the support that the Community should provide for the drafting , under the aegis of the AIEA , of a code of conduct for the international monitoring system for nuclear incidents ; secondly , the vital importance of the ' polluter-pays ' principle in forcing third countries and operators to accept their responsibilities ; and , thirdly , funding for cleaning up old nuclear sites , on the express condition that a high degree of safety can be guaranteed for lower costs and within a reasonable period .
On the other hand , it is regrettable that our amendments on the changes to the legal basis , the taking into account of independent audits by the European Court of Auditors and budgetary rigour with regard to consultation , to name but a few , were not accepted .
I am also delighted , on a personal level , that the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy accepted my amendment to recital 13 , pointing out that the Member States have sovereignty to make their own choices in the field of nuclear power .
What works for Austria will not necessarily work for Finland or Belgium .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - Madam President , I welcome the two Commission communications on the biomass action plan and on the EU strategy for biofuels .
Clearly , there is an urgent need to increase the demand for bioenergy in order to combat climate change and greenhouse gas emissions , to reduce oil dependency and to enhance technology and economic development within the European Union .
The question is , how do we do that ?
I consider that increasing demand in bioenergy would be achieved by prioritising research , development and demonstration of bioenergy and biofuels - particularly regarding second-generation and most efficient products - by promoting the creation of transparent and open markets and the removal of market barriers and through information campaigns involving producers , suppliers and consumers .
It is paramount for the future of bioenergy increase that this increase should not jeopardise European or third countries ' ability to achieve environmental priorities , such as halting the loss of biodiversity , protecting forests , preventing soil degradation and achieving the good ecological status of its water body .
I welcome the Langen report 's inclusion of the Environment Committee 's request that the Commission introduce a mandatory and comprehensive certification system .
Coordination within Commission departments and Member State government departments encompassing an integrated approach is key .
I would urge the Commission to monitor progress and to formulate a cohesive policy involving all actors in the process of production and supply of biomass and biofuels .
In addition , it is crucial that Member States are allowed the necessary discretion and flexibility to decide for themselves their own goals and political measures , while reaching broad Community targets .
Bioenergy production should always comply with good agricultural practice and should not significantly affect domestic food production within the European Union and in third countries , and incentives should not be intended as indirect subsidies but should be limited to that which provides the highest efficiency , as well as environmental and climate benefits .
However , increased bioenergy production would provide a very positive boost to the farming community , and I believe investment in small-scale biofuel projects within the primary agricultural sector would be extremely beneficial .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to encourage public procurement of clean and efficient vehicles , including using high biofuel blends .
I call on Member States to encourage the development of national bioenergy action plans and welcome my own Government 's move towards encouraging bioenergy production and incentives in the transport sector , as evidenced in last week 's budget in my country .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has unanimously adopted an opinion on the Langen report emphasising the need to make choices that stabilise investments over the medium to long term and that provide certainty to investors and also to producers and consumers .
I would like this opinion to be fully taken into account .
Greater clarity is also needed in the definition of second-generation biofuels , in relation to the environmental consequences that may arise from their use and production .
Talking about biomass deriving from waste is not the same thing as talking about by-products from forestry or other sources .
It is also necessary to be clear on the many previous directives which have accompanied the policy of support for biofuels , since there are some inconsistencies which should be put right ; in particular , the existing directive on the quality of fuels for mixing with petrol should be reviewed .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( FI ) Madam President , it is true that emissions from traffic are one of the fastest growing types of emission in our society at the present time , and it makes us wonder how we can actually implement the principles of sustainable development , and how we might find solutions in transport that are more environmentally friendly , so that we could take better account of the environmental demands set for it in transport on land , at sea and in the air .
An enormous problem has been that at present we have not sufficiently invested in or provided financial assistance for environmentally friendly modes of transport .
A good example of this is biodiesel , or hybrid cars , which have been awaiting financial assistance but have not received it , and have therefore remained a very marginal phenomenon .
Taxation is also a way to steer us in the direction of more sustainable development , but the Member States have not been willing to set off along that path .
Support is now needed for this : tax concessions and clear policies that relate to the fact that the environment and sustainable development are a real priority for us and not just the subject of speeches on major occasions .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to commend Mrs Morgan on her work , including the negotiated compromise , which reflects the views of the various political groupings among the Committee membership as well as experience gained in the field .
As draftsman of the opinion of Committee on Regional Development , I firmly believe that when it comes to drawing up Europe 's energy policy we must work , above all , on the basis of the subsidiarity principle , because concrete decisions on the energy mix and preferences in the area of renewable energy sources or nuclear energy must always be taken at Member State level , so that the geographical , climatic and economic conditions of a particular region can be taken into account .
We should also be aware that the cheapest energy is that which we do not have to produce at all .
The path we must follow is therefore that of energy saving .
In this context , there is great potential particularly in cities , which account for more than 70 % of energy consumed , and this is why the Commission must initiate genuine dialogue with cities in particular , but also with autonomous entities and their associations .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Langen on his balanced report .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture on this report , I am pleased to be able to highlight a few points briefly .
Bioenergy will be of central importance in the energy mix of the future .
In many areas it can and will make an important contribution to the security of energy supply and to reducing our dependence on foreign imports , to climate protection and to employment and the economy in Europe 's rural areas .
The Committee on Agriculture considers the introduction of an EU certification system to be particularly important .
On the one hand , we must avoid additional administrative burdens for European producers by drawing on existing rules such as cross compliance .
At the same time , biofuels imported from third countries should also be certified according to strict ecological criteria to ensure a positive environmental balance .
In promoting biofuels , priority should not be given to research into second-generation biofuels when allocating the available resources .
There is still a considerable need for research into first-generation fuels .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the start of this debate we had the situation of January 2006 , as Mrs Morgan pointed out .
It has become clear that Europe is tremendously energy-dependent .
In the year 2000 , Europe 's energy dependency was 50 % , in 2030 it will be around 70 % .
This means that security of supply is assuming a new , dramatic importance .
It also means that foreign policy needs to be refocused and new conclusions drawn in the matter of securing and using our own energy resources .
Finally , it also means that we need to rethink the issue of fine-tuning these three objectives of security of supply , sustainability and competitiveness .
I do not believe we need only to put forward new ideas and concepts ; as Mr Langen has already said , we need to try gradually to change reality .
We must put more value on the question of implementation and change .
What use are all the proposals if in reality hardly anything changes ?
I am therefore very glad that with this report , we have contributed rather more realistic ways of looking at things .
We cannot demand reliability of investors and we cannot demand that undertakings invest more if we do not also offer reliability in the long term on the political side .
Constantly new proposals and constantly new institutions will not get us any further .
It also means , for example , that we should stop and think first when it comes to ownership unbundling .
Let us implement stage 1 before starting stage 2 , because I have my doubts as to whether the expropriation or nationalisation of networks is the right solution .
The answer to the problem will not be a single solution but variety .
Energy efficiency yes , renewable energies yes , but we must also recognise that these offer only limited solutions to our problem .
There is no changing that .
If we want to reduce CO2 , we must also invest more in nuclear power .
We do not want any subject to be taboo here ; we want openness , variety , diversity , flexibility and realism .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) As co-rapporteur , I would like to add my voice to welcome Mr Seppänen 's report on increasing the safety of nuclear reactors operating in third countries .
Europe has always played a leading role globally in the field of nuclear safety , and this programme will continue to assist us in this area over the next seven years .
The safety of nuclear energy depends for the most part on human factors .
The planning , construction , operation , maintenance , supervision , transportation and decommissioning of nuclear reactors are undeniably human responsibilities , for which requisite staffing and appropriate expertise and equipment are necessary .
This programme , destined for the Republics of the former Soviet Union , which are the European Union 's immediate neighbours to the east , is therefore particularly important from the perspective of our own energy supply and safety as well .
At the same time , it will help European - and among them Hungarian - companies , researchers and universities which have the requisite nuclear safety , significant tradition and relevant experience to gain access to promising external markets .
I ask the committee charged with making decisions regarding the programme , and the European Commission , which is responsible for carrying it out , to do so as effectively as possible .
Please allow me to take this opportunity as well to congratulate the other two rapporteurs , and especially to mention the point made in Eluned Morgan 's report , namely that it is abundantly clear that energy should not be primarily about the industries of the energy sector , but about the people whom they affect , that is to say , the consumers .
The key element in European energy strategy is to ensure that Europe 's residents enjoy appropriate living conditions and to guarantee a supply of secure , affordable energy that is indispensable if we are to remain competitive .
I wish especially to congratulate the authors of the report for having succeeded in establishing harmony among the added value of the internal market , global challenges and the subsidiarity of Member States .
I offer my congratulations to the rapporteurs on this day and I hope , Commissioner , that you will have the opportunity to implement all this in the coming year .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur and my colleagues for their cooperation .
A prosperous , competitive and sustainable future for Europe will require a major shift in energy policy .
Today we have problems with production , distribution , consumers ' rights as well as global warming , stability and security .
The challenge and urgent development of a new European energy policy is an opportunity for European citizens , European industry and the environment .
Therefore I welcome an ambitious energy agenda from the Commission next year .
I underline the importance of the message from Parliament today .
I therefore ask my colleagues to support the outcome of the vote in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , where we succeeded in combining an enforced market solution , enhancing market entry for new players , more transparency and consumers ' rights to information , with a clear political signal on long-term international and binding targets on renewable energy and CO2 reduction .
Moreover , I should like to emphasise the importance of including the distributor and consumer aspects to the current production concentration and to stress that existing technologies such as combined heat and power , trigeneration and district heating must be used to a much larger extent , reducing and making more efficient the energy we use .
Energy policy should not be considered as an isolated issue .
It is vital to develop FP7 as well as the reform of the CAP in line with the needs of an increased indigenous European energy production .
Parliament will support current structures of cooperation between Member States and the Commission 's firm conviction to further develop them . However , we are not in favour of new agencies causing a financial , as well as a bureaucratic , burden on the Union .
I should like to express my strong support for Commissioner Kroes ' ambition to make sure competition legislation is not violated , in order to avoid abuse of market power .
Experiences are like stars : you see them first towards sunset .
The EU has the possibility to seize the opportunity to greatly improve the energy market , solve environmental problems and create new jobs .
Let us take that opportunity .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Morgan and Mrs Ek for a political line that combines environment with competition .
This is the way forward .
( DE ) Madam President , Europe stands at a crossroads .
We have an energy and transport policy for a handful of big companies .
That means a green light for petrol-guzzling heavy vehicles , coal-fired power stations that damage the climate , hazardous technology , atomic power , unfair competition and the continuation of the profiteering we have on the market today .
That is the policy that the Commission - that is , Commissioner Verheugen with the active support of Mr Barroso - wants to put through against Commissioners with relevant expertise like Mr Piebalgs , Mrs Kroes or Mr Dimas .


There is also , however , an energy and transport policy for Europe 's citizens and for thousands of small businessmen and tradesmen .
Such a policy would involve massive investment to modernise European buildings , creating thousands of new jobs , reducing Europe 's energy dependence , including for gas , and getting improved standards for mass consumer goods like cars , refrigerators , flat screens and houses .
It is also very important that the existing directive on the promotion of renewable energy sources should continue in force , since it is so successful it is a thorn in the flesh of E.ON and EDF .
You have promised us a new directive on heating and cooling in January , Commissioner .
That directive must come , then the citizens will act accordingly .
We also need more competition .
We only have this one planet .
We should not abandon it to the short-term profit interests of a few large companies and their political accomplices .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I participated in the Nairobi climate conference , which produced some significant statements and commitments .
First and foremost , it has now been decided that Kyoto will continue to exist after 2012 .
In addition , channels of action have been opened up which go much further than trading in emissions quotas and which , instead , point the way to proactive , positive measures .
There will be two funds , one for technological adaptation and the other for renewable and clean energy .
Finally , the issues of technology transfer and combating deforestation were discussed .
Kofi Annan is right in saying that such approaches require stronger political leadership , and it is Europe that must express this political will , partly through the submission by the individual nations of serious , properly documented plans for reducing emissions , in line with the Kyoto targets and based on substantial progress in energy conservation and renewable sources of energy .
The European Parliament could , through its own Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , take on the role of providing encouragement and an impetus in that direction , not least through collaboration with the national parliaments .
What is needed is positive direction , which requires active political support and policies focused on cooperation and innovation instead of the purely commercial logic of privatisations and liberalisations , which all too often work in favour of speculative interests and not the public good .
Recently , there has been sparring on the nuclear issue : safety is best served by not using nuclear power , but avoiding it and holding back from it on the grounds that it does not benefit our future .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Morgan for drawing up this report .
The Green Book provides a very good basis for drawing up a cohesive energy strategy for Europe , and in the broader context , for the whole world .
It is a problem of fundamental importance , involving not only the supply of fuels , be they in solid , liquid or gas form , or of generating electricity , without which the whole world would grind to a halt , or simply of heating and air conditioning , but also of protecting the environment and averting harmful climate change .
Energy clearly also has a political dimension , as the widely known cases of shutting off gas supplies have shown .
Bearing in mind that time is limited , I would like to point out just a few problems .
Trading in greenhouse gas emissions is a worldwide problem and requires global solutions .
The European Union has to get the ball rolling on this .
Any mistakes could result in irreparable damage to the whole of the earth 's atmosphere .
Innovation in energy policy involves both searching for new , renewable and clean sources of energy and radical rationalisation of its consumption .
In my view , we waste some twenty-five percent of all energy through inefficient equipment or through poorly thought-out transmission or organisational solutions .
I hope the Intelligent Energy Programme of the seventh framework programme will go some way to addressing this problem .
Road , rail , air and sea transport are in need of a new type of logistics where concern for the future takes priority over immediate financial interests or convenience .
I would like to ask , how many people drove to work unaccompanied today ?
Energy security requires the establishment of back-up networks .
Otherwise we will experience a domino effect .
Examples from as recently as November show the fragility of current systems .
The European Union must observe the principles of solidarity and joint action in relation to energy suppliers .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , it is well known that if someone 's only tool is a hammer , he gradually begins to see every problem as a nail .
The reason for this is obvious : a hammer 's only real use is for banging nails in , so he has to imagine all problems as nails .
However , most of the problems we encounter in life are not nails so , with that attitude , most things go wrong .
A hammer cannot be used for making Venetian vases or convincing a political opponent .
What , however , the majority in this House have , is a hammer , namely the European Union .
Most of you want to believe or , rather , want to make others believe that the problems that happen to come to the fore at any particular time should , or must , be solved with the aid of the EU .
In actual fact , such problems are rare , the exceptions including nuclear safety , radiation protection and the problems associated with nuclear material in the EU and its vicinity .
Mr Seppänen is on the right track and should receive our support , but Mrs Morgan , who is threatening to bureaucratise energy policy to such a degree that , even in the short term , a million people will be needed to implement it , is on the wrong track .
Adjustments in the light of rising energy prices are best made at national level .
It is through countries and companies competing to find effective solutions to energy issues that creativity can flourish , not through imposing more bureaucracy on half a billion people living in economies quite different from each other .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to add two comments to this joint debate on energy .
The first is that the European Union has absolutely no competence over energy , so much so that the various reports all stress that the Member States still have exclusive powers to make their own energy choices .
On top of that , Mrs Morgan has included a specific reference to maximum subsidiarity .
Everything in these reports , though , contradicts these statements , with their prescriptivism and demands .
The second is that the Europe of Brussels has already shown what it is capable of , by usurping the right to run energy policy and liberalising the gas and electricity markets .
What has been the outcome of this ?
Higher prices for consumers , attacks on standardisation of tariffs and therefore on public service , blackouts , concerns regarding the maintenance , expansion and modernisation of the networks , and the list goes on .
We are currently watching the sector become increasingly concentrated , to the point that the much lauded competition that you bend our ears about is on the verge of becoming a monopolisation of the energy market by a handful of multinational companies .
The only difference is that these monopolies will be in the hands of private investors , and perhaps not even European ones , instead of the public sector .
Therefore , we are certainly in favour of energy security and energy efficiency , but it is up to the sovereign states to control these strategic matters .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have read in the Austrian media that the Temelin nuclear power station will soon have had its one hundredth emergency .
The Commission relies for information on the good will of the Member States ' authorities .
Nevertheless , my sincere thanks go to Commissioner Piebalgs for promising to send an official letter to enquire how dangerous the Temelin power plant actually is .
I also welcome Amendment 5 to the Seppänen report , which has to do with the International Atomic Energy Agency in the area of safeguards and safety of nuclear power plants .
The Community should in future draft a code of conduct for an international nuclear incident warning system under the aegis of the International Atomic Energy Agency .
The Seppänen report makes an excellent proposal there .
We need peer review by experts who are empowered to make inspections not only in the Member States but at European level so that if risks arise a nuclear power station can be taken off line , by court order if necessary .
We owe that to the safety and health of Europe 's citizens and population .
The Council must abandon the obstructive attitude it has taken in the past and agree to such a peer review group in the interests of safety .
We know that the safety regulations differ greatly , in the area of decommissioning and final storage in particular .
The result is a crass difference in costs and those with the laxest safeguards and safety measures and who do not bother about decommissioning and final storage will stand to gain .
We cannot have that .

I thank you for your support , Mr Piebalgs , and hope that the Commission will act resolutely in this matter .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , we support the reports and I congratulate the rapporteurs .
I would mention two matters .
We do not just have a problem with imports of energy , creating uncertainty , but also one with our own actions here in the Union .
Our spare energy capacity stands at 4.8 % and is falling every year , while before it was 15-20 % .
We have therefore drifted into crises as a result of our own actions .
Now we need to invest in new capacity , networks need to be built and improved , and we really must now ask governments to help .
We obviously also have to put a lot more effort into addressing the problem of energy consumption .
The other matter is that energy has become not just a political issue , but also a social one .
The poorer the consumer , the harder the situation is for him when energy prices are high , and this consumer should be at the centre of energy policy , just as it says in Mrs Morgan 's report .
I would also like to ask the Commission what it intends to do to improve social energy security .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , we all know that energy is the European Union 's lifeline .
Unfortunately , we only think about it occasionally , on Sundays .
I believe the EU as a whole is being very naive in the way it is dealing with the subject of energy .
Energy policy still consists of half-measures and the Member States are following different strategies .
The spring summit on energy was a failure , that has become clear .
The EU-Russia summit , that was important for us and had an energy component , collapsed because of Polish beef .
There are ideological disputes over atomic policy , these are things that are holding us up .
There are important regions of the world that could be key suppliers for us , such as Central Asia , but we have paid them little attention so far .
China , as has been mentioned several times in the debate , is building a large number of strategic alliances in the world in this very matter .
On the other hand , we are very highly dependent on oil and gas , we do not have sufficient interconnectors for a genuine European energy market , as we saw not long ago with this year 's blackout .
I think that is a very poor record over all .
We therefore very much welcome the fact that you are getting more action plans off the ground , Commissioner , that the German Council Presidency will be concentrating on energy and that countries such as Finland , for example , are taking a very non-ideological and nevertheless very successful approach to energy policy by investing very heavily in biomass and also in atomic power at the same time , because they have obviously recognised the signs of the times .
I also particularly welcome the fact , Commissioner , that with the biomass action plan you have made what will probably be a very important contribution to energy diversification , to reducing our dependence on other regions of the world and to the ' lisbonisation ' of our entire EU agenda .
I am thinking in particular of the agricultural plan here .
The plans are on the table .
Now it is up to the Member States to stick to those plans .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have some very different reports on the table about energy strategies .
In my opinion , the Morgan report and the Langen report really deal with a positive future and a paradigm change in the energy industry as it has existed up until now , while the Seppänen report is actually about clearing up waste and contamination .
As I fully agree with Mrs Morgan , I would like to concentrate on the Seppänen report now and say that I find what this report suggests to be completely unacceptable .
Nuclear safety is and remains more fiction than reality .
If we look back over the past year and review the greatest events that made us sit up and take notice , then it has to be said that the European Union in general really ought to be aware of this .
We have had a helpless argument with Iran , which is threatening to build the atom bomb .
We have been shaken by the nuclear test in North Korea and we can only say that the non-proliferation pact is a dead letter .
In the European Union we have the Forsmark atomic power plant in Sweden .
Sweden is a country that says it has the safest atomic power stations .
The Swedish supervisory authorities confront us with the fact that this reactor was only 18 minutes from runaway .
That emergency was not even discussed , let alone addressed , at European level .
We have taken on a great responsibility with clearing up the consequences of the Chernobyl reactor accident , but what do we find ?
Incompetence , corruption in connection with the Shelter Implementation Plan , and nobody really knows what is the way forward there .
We also have a polonium scandal .
Large quantities of polonium , a highly radioactive substance from the Russian nuclear cities , are misappropriated , transported all over Europe , and no one knows how it can have happened .
So do not tell me anything about nuclear safety ; it would be better to talk about nuclear insecurity .
( DE ) Mr President , the various reports in the field of energy are actually quite typical of this European Parliament .
There is a lot in them and a lot of it is right .
At the heart of it , however , these reports are problematical .
They talk repeatedly about the energy mix .
That means of course that they are still looking to atomic energy and atomic energy is and remains wrong and dangerous .
When will the various people in authority at last learn the lessons of Chernobyl and the recent near-accidents in Sweden ?
The only correct response is to get out of atomic energy immediately !
The EU is failing to encourage research , it is failing on energy efficiency and renewable energies .
It is a scandal that twice as much money , EUR 1.6 billion , is being spent on the arms research race in space as on a change of direction in energy .
The German foreign minister is always talking about ' energy foreign policy ' .
This shows that the EU has global political ambitions , at other people 's expense .
Instead of that , we need to get out of atomic energy immediately and invest massively in renewable energies , energy research instead of armaments research and cooperation in the field of energy foreign policy .
Mr President , there are over 100 clauses in this report on energy security , and nearly all of them call on the Commission to do something : to fix the carbon trading scheme , to foster investment in the European energy market , to encourage energy efficiency , to do more and more .
The Commission is going to be busy .
I want to question two assumptions about this ambitious programme .
First , it is assumed that the Commission somehow has the ability to address all these problems , as if it had a magic wand .
Second , it is assumed that the EU Member States can be persuaded to cooperate .
They will cooperate , as long as it is in their interest to do so , for instance , in selling surplus power - at a profit - to neighbours .
But when national energy security is at stake , all the Commission 's powers will not be enough , and nations will look after themselves .
Compare the ' cooperation ' over fishing that has brought several common species close to extinction .
My biggest worry , however , is that so much of what we are asking for , such as trying to meet impossible targets for carbon dioxide and renewables , pays little regard to the economic cost .
I fear that implementation of many of the recommendations in this report will be as economically damaging as the REACH Directive , which this Chamber triumphantly approved yesterday .
Mr President , you cannot have an open market in energy and a workable policy of energy-sharing without transparent competition .
The Commission 's Green Paper recognises this .
However , on the island of Ireland , as part of a wider British Isles and European project , the opportunities for a free and fair market are being stifled by the state domination of the Republic of Ireland 's market by the ESB .
Its near-monopoly of both generation and distribution must be broken , as it is keeping others out of the market and smothering competition .
I have to say that the Dublin Government has been most tardy in moving to break this monopoly .
I call today on the Commission to be more robust in demanding delivery of this necessary change .
With monopoly goes subsidised inefficiency and higher prices and so it would be for consumers in my constituency of Northern Ireland if we became a minority part of an energy market dominated by an unreformed ESB .
We cannot have that !
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , allow me a few short sentences to outline the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
The European Union is no longer a sanctuary .
Russia is using energy as a political weapon , the situation in the Middle East and the Gulf Region is unclear , and none of us knows what the political situation , and hence energy supply reliability , will be like in two or three years .
When we see how energy-hungry China has acquired energy sector rights in Darfur , has organised an African Summit , has gained entry into Nigeria and has concluded an energy deal with Iran worth in excess of USD 100 billion , we should be very worried about energy being supplied at tolerable prices , as this is decisive as regards the economic and social development of our continent , for jobs and much , much more .
For this reason , we must make particular efforts in these areas aimed at moving forwards , by diversifying our supply from all parts of the world , as well as through the internal networking of the energy networks within the European Union , so that individual countries cannot be penalised by third powers .
This would provide greater security .
However , it also demonstrates the importance of the Constitutional Treaty for establishing energy jurisdiction so that we are actually able to implement what we are talking about here today .
( ES ) Mr President , I shall begin with Mr Seppänen 's report .
The rapporteur has once again demonstrated his great experience in this field and his capacity for reaching consensus , by achieving a large majority in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
I believe that the result is excellent , and we must avoid veering away from it by adopting amendments that run counter to the spirit of the proposal .
With regard to the Morgan report , I would like to stress a curious fact , and that is that the contribution of nuclear energy has been completely ignored .
I believe that certain Members prefer not to deal with the issue , in the hope of avoiding a controversial debate , but we must be courageous and once and for all acknowledge , objectively and without reservations , the significant contribution that this source of energy makes to security of supply and combating climate change .
I would like you to listen carefully , Mrs Harms , to the words of the co-founder of Greenpeace , Patrick Moore , and I quote : ' Wind and solar power have their place , but because they are intermittent and unpredictable they simply cannot replace big baseload plants such as coal , nuclear and hydroelectric .
Natural gas , a fossil fuel , is too expensive already , and its price is too volatile to risk building big baseload plants .
Given that hydroelectric resources are built pretty much to capacity , nuclear is , by elimination , the only viable substitute for coal ' .
That seems to me to be an irrefutable argument .
I agree with you that Iran , with its nuclear enrichment programme , is a very serious threat to world security and stability , but the correct conclusion to be drawn from this is the opposite of what you propose , Mrs Harms .
The conclusion is that we must increase our energy independence .
In other words , precisely the opposite to what you are advocating .
We must stop looking at kilowatts in political terms .
We are not talking about right-wing kilowatts or left-wing kilowatts .
We are talking about sources that emit greenhouse gases and sources that do not .
Renewable sources of energy and nuclear energy must be seen as complementary and not as incompatible .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my thanks to the three rapporteurs for their fine work .
However , I hope the other rapporteurs will forgive me if I concentrate on the report of my colleague , Mrs Morgan .
Hers is an excellent report which demonstrates the productive cooperation between the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs .
I am assuming that here today in Parliament , we will send a very clear signal to the Commission , a signal which the Commission , in the interests of continuing the truly sound cooperation hitherto in the energy policy field , should not ignore when it presents its energy package in January .
Hence the report , for instance , is calling for a compulsory 25 % target for renewable energies by the year 2020 .
The Commission is obviously thoroughly open-minded when it comes to a binding , general target .
This is good , but not enough .
The Morgan report also calls for binding sectoral targets .
We have targets for electricity and biofuels .
However , we must set these targets beyond 2010 .
We have not had any negative experiences thus far .
In 2001 , we saw with the Electricity Directive , which contained clear targets , that we had achieved a new breakthrough in the Member States .
On the one hand , this should not be jeopardised .
On the other , however , you , Commissioner Piebalgs , declared in this House in February of this year that you would present a Directive concerned with heating and cooling this year .
We would be happy to give you until January .
This is not at all the point , however .
Both we here in Parliament and industry and commerce in this area , which has truly supported your words , are expecting presentation of a Directive , as stated in both the Langen and Morgan reports .
I call on the Commission to fulfil its obligations and take action accordingly .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I hope you will allow me to make a few comments on the various topics that we are discussing this morning .
In the report on nuclear safety and security assistance , the European Union gives itself the task of improving nuclear safety and security worldwide by proposing an instrument for cooperation with third countries .
The European Union 's responsibility is not to prevent the construction of new power stations or to demand that existing plants be shut down , decisions that fall within the sovereignty of the States , but to promote a culture of nuclear safety .
I therefore find the two amendments from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , which recommend more than the minimum , regrettable .
It is early intervention , before plants are put into operation , that will make it possible to lay down what safety measures need to be taken .
This morning , Parliament is also proposing an ambitious report on biomass and biofuels , which are important elements in energy independence for the EU and in the fight against climate change .
It will , however , be necessary to keep a close eye on the overall energy yield of biomass .
Finally , I would have liked to have seen a stronger message from Parliament with regard to the European Commission 's Green Paper , particularly in terms of the effort needed to reduce energy consumption in buildings and in transport .
To take another example , we have once again glossed over the debate on nuclear power .
We have to acknowledge that nuclear power is part of the energy mix , that it helps to combat climate change and , what is more , that our expertise in this field is recognised worldwide .
I would also remind you that we need to encourage the network managers to get together to draw up a European code , in order to control the safety of energy transport networks .
Finally , now that private consumers are going to be faced with the opening up of the energy market , it is high time to consider the role of the regulators and to adapt the directives on the internal market with a view to keeping prices under control .
Energy is an absolute necessity , and it is vital for European citizens , particularly the poorest , to have access to this universal service .
( EL ) Mr President , the Green Paper is being promoted within the framework of the anti-grassroots Lisbon Strategy and yet again donates more profit to Euro-unifying capital .
The European Union and the governments of the Member States , even those which demonstrate national protectionism , are privatising this strategic sector by sacrificing grassroots needs at the altar of private profit , of the profit of the large business groups and multinationals .
Liberalisation is bringing new profits to business and increasing prices at the consumer 's expense .
One example is the privatisation of CDF in France .
In the first quarter since privatisation , prices to consumers have risen by 15 % .
The same has happened in Greece and other countries .
The environmental protection which you cite is hypocritical .
In reality , you are trying to conceal the fact that liberalisation is being stepped up .
The energy supply must target a combined approach to grassroots needs , a reduction in energy dependency , the safeguarding of local security , environmental protection and , most importantly , the protection of energy as a social rather than a commercial commodity , and this is where our strategic difference and divergence lie : the Green Paper does not promote such needs .
On the contrary , it turns away from the consumer 's - by which I mean the worker 's - interests .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak on behalf of the new Italian Socialist Party .
Not only do I welcome both the Commission 's Green Paper and the report by Mrs Morgan on a sustainable European energy policy , but I also hope that this strategy will , as early as 2007 , become one of our Union 's priorities .
As I have , in fact , mentioned before , both yesterday in this Chamber and on other occasions , the EU 's capacity to implement an energy strategy - and one that is not just sustainable but also autonomous - and thus its independence from the power games and economic interests that are often at work behind the scenes in this sector is a decisive factor in meeting so many of the global challenges that await us in the near future , not only in terms of competitiveness , but also with regard to the political and strategic weight that the European Union wishes to have and could obtain .
More importantly than finalising strategic agreements with current and potential partners , it is therefore necessary to step up efforts on research and to allow the Member States - each according to its own characteristics and potential - to develop to the utmost the sustainable energy resources that they have .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by saying that I believe that we should support all three reports and extending my thanks to the three rapporteurs for their efforts .
Above all , I would like to congratulate Mr Piebalgs for his work .
Two and a half years into this term we are now talking about energy in a completely different way than previously .
Firstly , it is now clear that our problems in Europe are based on threats to our oil and gas supplies , which is why the initiatives of the Commissioner , the European Commission and the Council of Europe concerning intensive dialogue with the partners who supply our oil and gas are worthy of support .
We need a common foreign policy as regards energy supplies .
Energy supply routes are also important , not just the suppliers themselves . In fact , they are absolutely crucial .
Secondly , if we are to counteract the crisis in oil and gas supplies , we will have to rely on our own , European , sources of energy .
Over a period of two and a half years , the European Union has clearly acknowledged that energy savings and renewable sources of energy are a priority .
This is set out in all the documents , including those dealing with research and development of new technologies .
Biofuels are very important here , although some legislation is still needed .
Thirdly , the European Union is continuing with the EURATOM programme , which is the oldest Community programme and which has brought Europe a relatively safe and reliable source of energy through use of the atom .
This programme must be continued .
Renewable energy on its own will not be enough , although I support my colleagues who talk of the need for renewable energy .
Fourthly , after years of neglect , Europe has finally remembered that almost all countries have their own energy resources in the form of coal .
However , there can be no return to nineteenth and twentieth-century methods of coal consumption .
Completely new technologies are needed .
I would like to thank the Commissioner and all my colleagues for deciding to undertake such actions within the framework of the European Union .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteurs and pointing out that the problem of energy , which is the focus of our concerns today , will continue to be a problem over the coming years , probably to an even greater extent .
As the rapporteurs have said , I believe that the proposals in the Commission 's Green Paper are timely and necessary and that the work being done by Commissioner Piebalgs deserves to be highlighted .
Having said that , I simply wish to say that consumers must of course be placed at the centre of the energy policy , since we are talking about a public service that must be accessible to everybody , not just to those of interest to the market .
Over recent years , we have been prioritising the creation of the European market , but we have seen that that is not enough .
Many countries are showing great reticence when it comes to applying the legislation .
Just this week , the Commission has sent reasoned opinions to sixteen Member States .
I believe that we must ask ourselves why the market is not progressing and why there is not sufficient confidence and that the answer lies in the need for a common energy policy , and not just in the external field .
We need cooperation and solidarity amongst the Member States because , otherwise , it will be very difficult to achieve our objectives and meet the challenges facing us .
( SL ) We have one debate , but a number of very important topics .
Above all I would like to talk about the proposal for a common European energy policy .
Debates on energy have finally been made a high priority .
Of course , they deserve such prominence , since the well-being of mankind is directly dependent on the quality , sustainability and cost of energy as well as the impact of energy on the environment .
Europe faces problems in this sphere , and we will only be able to resolve them if we act with a common purpose .
For this reason I support the idea of a common European energy policy .
However , the question remains : how are we to bring it into being ?
In the proposal for the single energy market , the thing that most strikes me as being absent is the idea of the gradual harmonisation and standardisation of administrative bodies and the unification of their powers .
The European single market requires powerful national regulators , but we are also in need of a European regulator that will deal with cross-border problems .
Another important concern is the drawing up of an appropriate timetable .
In debates on energy , I should also like to see more emphasis on the transport sector .
Promoting public transport is a measure that can be successfully implemented now .
In addition , the streamlining of procedures with regard to the import of bio-fuels and their unification among Member States is a measure which we could implement over a relatively short time period .
The difficult energy situation and environmental problems are forcing us to assess the comparative advantages and drawbacks of individual energy sources , together with their impact on other sectors , such as the timber industry and agriculture .
In so doing , we must also carry out a realistic assessment of nuclear energy , which represents an important energy source in society , provided that it is used in combination with safe technology and within an appropriate safety culture .
Let us not confuse the peaceful use of nuclear energy with the abuses thereof .
Let us focus on institutional development which can prevent abuse .
It would be unwise , for instance , to renounce the use of nuclear energy , the chemical industry and medical research simply because of potential abuses .
It is for this very reason that Europe is earmarking some financial resources for the improvement of the safety of nuclear power stations in third countries .
Finally , in the field of energy we already have a large number of well-chosen objectives .
It is time that we internationalised some of them .
And it is also time that we ourselves began to work towards our set strategic objectives and implemented the legal requirements already adopted .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow draftsman for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety with regard to the strategy for biomass and biofuels , I would like to comment on two points in relation to this report .
Firstly , it is very important that priority be given to the principle of sustainability in all phases when producing biofuels .
In addition , however , we must also define standards in relation to cultivation and processing , in which connection the greenhouse gas balance during the entire production cycle must be the main criterion .
For my second point , I would like to mention the energy efficiency of biomass .
Here , the principal criterion must be how many kilowatt hours can be harvested per hectare per annum without neglecting sustainability .
As a result of the increased demand for fossil energy sources and the rapid price increases associated with this , it is important that the percentage share of renewable energy sources rises rapidly so as to dampen future price increases in fossil energy sources .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the serious electricity blackout that occurred on 4 November , initially in Germany , demonstrated - if there were any need to demonstrate it - that energy security is definitely a European concern and that it is at European level that we must find solutions .
It is to Europe that people are turning more and more to safeguard the balance between the supply of , and demand for , energy , which is increasingly subject to the volatility of suppliers and to the tensions resulting from the very unequal geographical distribution of resources .
Therefore , the Commission done the right thing in presenting us with this Green Paper , which we are examining today thanks to the report by our fellow Member , Mrs Morgan .
I congratulate her on her excellent work , and I am delighted that a broad consensus within the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy should have been reached on such an important and sensitive issue as this and , above all , that the powerful idea that the three objectives of security of supply , competitiveness and environmental sustainability are absolutely paramount objectives , should have been highlighted .
The same goes for the need to diversify the energy mix with the aid of the three pillars of fossil fuels , nuclear power and renewable energy sources .
Finally , many people recognise that , in the current state of research , the act of abandoning one of these pillars would cause problems and would compromise the achievement of the aforementioned objectives .
I should like to acknowledge the significance of this debate , which encourages us to be bold .
For the first time , we have been given the opportunity simultaneously to tackle the challenge of growth and the challenge of environmental protection , and this , in an increasingly worrying context due to the damage caused by greenhouse gas emissions .
As Mr Turmes said just now , we have only one planet .
I therefore particularly support the amendment which , taking account of serious environmental warning signs , proposes a global objective in terms of the percentage of non-carbon-generating energy sources .
To conclude , I will simply add , that , after the crisis caused by the failure of the referendums in France and the Netherlands , European integration must show the citizens that it is effective .
Energy policy gives us the opportunity to do that .
Let us hope the political will is equal to the task .
( NL ) Mr President , I should first of all like to congratulate Mrs Morgan on her courage and determination .
It would , in my view , be good to make three comments and not beat about the bush in doing so .
First of all , the climate issue deserves to be given top priority .
Secondly , the conclusion we have to come to today is that liberalisation has not been all that beneficial to consumers , that compliance with European rules leaves something to be desired and that the directive on tradable emissions needs to be amended in one or two areas .
Before we can ever talk about common energy policy , considerable improvements need to be made in the areas of compliance and implementation .
This is a task not only for the Commission , but also for us .
We will constantly need to question the Commission on the enforcement of European rules .
Thirdly , in the next few years , we will need to invest heavily in efficient , sustainable energy and innovative research .
We need to give subsidies for polluting energy short shrift , and direct as much as is needed of our funds to sustainable energy .
Billions are still being invested in polluting energy , especially coal and nuclear energy , and we really need to put a stop to this .
I should also like to give Mr Langen credit for his report on biofuels .
Europe needs to opt for compulsory blending of both petrol and diesel fuels .
Specific intervention is needed to guarantee that biofuels do not lead to the eradication of rainforests and a decline in biodiversity , or start competing with the food supply .
( ET ) Eluned Morgan 's report about the Commission 's Green Book on the Energy Strategy has , in the course of Parliament 's discussion of the topic , gone through numerous amendments from a slim draft report to a weighty report .
Most of the European Union 's energy issues are covered therein .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur for the hard work he has done .
I do , however , also have a critical comment .
Clause 66 , which contains the hope that Russia would sign the Energy Charter , is probably now obsolete , considering Mr Yastrzhembsky 's Tuesday statement .
On the far shore of this continent , in Sakhalin , Shell is withdrawing , and on the opposite shore , in the Baltic Sea , the harmonisation of issues related to the gas pipeline has reached a decisive stage .
Here I would like to highlight the positions under discussion in Sweden and those that emphasise national sovereignty .
I say this in order to underline the need for a common European energy policy , which is absent from the report and of critical importance in comparison with everything else .
Although it is the first point in the opinion by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , but it has not received adequate emphasis in the report .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Morgan and the other rapporteurs .
I would like to emphasise the need to support research and development in new cleaner energy technologies that can meet our needs and to support what that requires in terms of investment in R + D.
It is true that the Seventh Framework Programme provides for an investment of EUR 2 350 million , that , furthermore , the Seventh Euratom Framework Programme funds research into fusion energy , nuclear fission and protection against radiation and that the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme also provides for resources to fund innovation in energy .
Despite all of that , however , our investment in R + D in this field is still considerably lower than that of Japan or the United States , and most of it is dedicated to research into conventional energy sources . This demonstrates the clear imbalance between investment in R + D and the obligations stemming from a sustainable and ambitious energy policy such as the one we are debating today .
Ladies and gentlemen , this dysfunction must be corrected as a matter of urgency so that we can guarantee a genuine R + D strategy in the field of energy .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , after such a full and very rich debate it is very difficult and challenging to respond to the points that have been raised , because each of the three reports deserved a separate debate .
I shall try to emphasise the common rather than the divisive issues .
Firstly , it is very important that Parliament state clearly that there is a challenge to act now .
Actions to combat climate change should be taken now - there is no time left .
Security of supply and the competitiveness of the European economy are also urgent matters .
We should all like to see affordable prices for our industries and citizens .
We should also like to ensure that energy is produced and used in a sustainable way .
I think we agree on what should be done to achieve that .
We should provide for long-term perspectives for investment ; we should provide for the full use of market forces ; we should provide for diversification of energy sources and suppliers .
We know that we should focus strongly on energy efficiency .
We know that there is consensus for a focus on renewable energy , including heating and cooling .
We know that we should focus on research and development .
It is also important to realise that if we act alone , although it might be good for us , it will not be enough .
In order to do this we need the EU 's economies of scale and scope .
However , it is also clear that , to achieve that , we must have a common vision and present legislation based on debate that responds not only to this vision but also to the principles of better legislation .
We need a general consensus in Europe .
We need one voice and to take joint action .
For those reasons I really believe that , when the Commission adopts the package on 10 January 2007 , this will open the door , as Mr Langen said , to real action and real legislative proposals - good proposals not only in the legislative field but also in other areas .

I should like to thank Mrs Morgan , Mr Langen and Mr Seppänen for their excellent reports and the whole Parliament for this debate .
Unfortunately I have to finish on a sad note because last night I received the very sad news that my predecessor , Mrs Loyola de Palacio , has died .
I wish to pay tribute to her .
We will really miss her , because she was devoted not only to her energy remit but also to Europe .
She had very strong and clear views , which were not always shared by everyone .
We need spirits like hers .
I really believe that the best tribute we can pay her would be by taking very ambitious action towards creating a European energy policy and not being discouraged by legal hurdles .
In this way we will commemorate her in the best possible way .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 10.50 a.m. and resumed at 11.00 a.m. )


( PL ) I would like to express my support for Mr Langen 's report on biomass and biofuels .
At a time of increasing reliance on fuel and energy supplies from third countries and increasingly stringent standards for environmental emissions , renewable sources of energy are among the most important aspects of ensuring secure energy supplies .
Developing the use of renewable sources of energy will enable the EU to reduce its dependence on mineral fuels and oil imports and reduce greenhouse gas emissions , as well as encouraging the economic revival of rural areas by creating new jobs and exploiting unused agricultural land .
Unfortunately , in many Member States legal barriers such as a lack of promotional campaigns , the lack of a long-term fiscal policy relating to tax concessions for biocomponents of fuels , and the lack of opportunities to use additional funding for investment in the production of biodiesel and bioethanol are hampering the development of the biofuels market .
We should therefore consider simplifying procedures which promote the cultivation of crops that can be used as components in biofuels .
The further development of support mechanisms , including a system of excise benefits and concessions which take the real costs of creating biofuel components and biofuels into account , is an important element in creating conditions that will favour the development of the biofuels market .
- ( HU ) We are rapidly approaching the first anniversary of the gas price war between Russia and the Ukraine , which , along with minor distribution problems caused by a shortage of Russian natural gas reserves , awakened Europe to its energy dependence and the vulnerability of the security of its energy supply .
In the eleven months since those events , the institutions of the European Union have responded with the rapidity one may expect from them .
I shall sum up in three points the factors which , according to the parliamentary debates on the Green Paper published by the Commission in March , are of key importance in avoiding a similar situation in future :
1 .
We need a common European energy policy in order that we might speak with one voice at the international level to our suppliers , including Russia , which is openly using its position in the area of energy as a political tool .
2 .
In order that a common European energy policy might rest on a stable foundation , we need to create the necessary accompanying community legal framework as well .
The extension of the treaty establishing an Energy community to southeastern Europe must serve as a model to be followed by the EU 's neighbourhood policy .
3 .
Finally , I wish to emphasise that Europe needs to create new infrastructure as well as a new legal framework .
If we are to bring about the diversification that serves as the guarantee of a secure energy supply , we need to create new gas pipelines , gas storage facilities and LNG terminals as well as links .
The construction of the Nabucco gas pipeline would ensure diversification of both the sources of supply and the transit routes .
Alternative sources of energy must in future play a more significant part in the energy mix , and the role of nuclear energy also needs to be reassessed .
The energy dependence of European consumers is constantly growing .
It is our joint responsibility to ensure security of supply and thereby the security of our citizens .
- ( SK ) I would like to touch on the need to increase liberalisation of the energy market .
We must concede the fact that the Member States have formally complied with the relevant directives on the unbundling of energy generation , transmission and distribution , and that they are duly implementing these directives .
Nevertheless , no substantial changes have been observed on their energy markets .
There is still no competitive environment , and the incumbents largely retain their monopolistic position with respect to the unbundled operations in the energy chain .
The entry of new companies into the energy sector has frequently been blocked by protectionist efforts and excessive government regulation , with a negative impact on energy prices and spending on research and development .
I urge the Commission to keep up the pressure on the Member States to take more resolute measures to enhance the competitive environment , eliminate administrative barriers and thus facilitate the opening up of energy markets .
I would like to point out another important aspect , namely excessive government interference in regulators ' activities , particularly in the area of price regulation , which hinders energy sector liberalisation .
Several Member State governments are jeopardising the independence of their regulators by amending the relevant laws , to enable them to appoint ministerial officials with the obvious aim of bringing pressure to bear on price regulation .
It is therefore necessary for the Commission to accelerate harmonisation of the regulatory framework , including the possible establishment of a European regulator , which would effectively eliminate unreasonable interference in the independent status of national regulators .
I would like to congratulate my colleague Eluned Morgan on an excellent report which points the way towards a ' green ' energy policy for Europe .
I particularly support her call for a radical reform of the Emissions Trading Scheme to create a low carbon economy driven by a set target for a reduction of EU carbon emissions of 30 % by 2020 and 60-80 % by 2050 .
She is correct to call for enhanced R [ amp ] D on clean energy technologies and for a step-change in energy efficiency .
I hope when EU leaders meet next March to discuss energy policy they all have a copy of this report in front of them and that they take its recommendations seriously .
Tribute
Ladies and gentlemen , last night we received some sad news .
At the end of the day we heard that Loyola de Palacio , Vice-President of the European Commission , Minister in the Spanish Government , head of the People 's Party 's list in the 1999 elections , had died .
During the final months of her life , she faced her illness with a courage that should serve as an example to all of us .
Loyola de Palacio , who was responsible for relations with the European Parliament as Vice-President of the Commission and who was an MEP before that , was a forthright person , a determined and strong negotiator , who was always true to her values and the values of Europe .
A tireless worker , who dealt with the people around her in a straightforward and open way , it was easy to appreciate Loyola 's firmness and direct language , in her office and in the corridors of this House .
I can say this because I had many contacts with her .
I was a Minister in the Spanish Government , and she was the opposition whip .
We argued hard , but our arguments were always full of content and we related well as people .
Her death is sad news for all of us who knew her .
I would like to say that my feelings today go much further than the institutional and political .
Please believe me when I say that they are also personal .
I am sure that all of us who knew her mourn her death .
I am sure , moreover , that the Commission will wish to add to what I have said .

Mr President , on behalf of the President of our Commission , Mr Barroso , and on behalf of the Commission and of Mrs Grybauskaitė , who is here beside me , I should like to thank you for the tribute you have paid to Mrs de Palacio and to join Parliament in mourning her loss .
Like many Europeans , I was very saddened to hear of Mrs de Palacio 's sudden death .
All those who had the opportunity to know her admired her energy , her courage to the end , Mr President .
A woman of conviction , a committed European , Mrs de Palacio left her mark on the European Commission , of which she was vice-president between 1999 and 2004 .
In particular , she worked to promote European transport and European energy .
Responsible as she was for relations with the European Parliament , she was able to establish trusting , fruitful cooperation with the institution and with all the MEPs , for the benefit of the Union .
Right up to the end , she worked tirelessly to help Europe .
She continued to work in this way with me , coordinating the completion of the trans-European networks and their extension to neighbouring countries of the Union .
Like many of you , I have lost in Mrs de Palacio a friend from whom I could always seek good advice and unfailing support .
I thank Parliament for joining in this tribute .
( Applause )
Times of bereavement put our problems and differences into their proper perspective .
Let us observe a minute 's silence in memory of our colleague .
( Applause )
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
1 .
2007 , amended by the Council ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , as every year in this major exercise , there are a few technical corrections that need to be made at this stage .
I will be very brief .
I think the vote also will be as brief as I have known it .
Firstly , on Amendment 328 to line 22 02 02 ' Transition and institution-building assistance to potential candidate countries ' : this is accepted with + EUR 2 million for commitments and payments .
These EUR 2 million are taken from line 19 05 01 ' Cooperation with industrialised non-member countries ' .
As a result , Amendment 314 to line 19 05 01 is withdrawn .
Secondly , EUR 5 million in commitments and payments is added to line 16 02 02 : ' Multimedia actions ' .
Thirdly , EUR 400 000 in commitments and payments is added to line 15 04 47 : ' European Year for Intercultural Dialogue ' .

With regard to the amounts in reserve which are released : Amendment 302 to line 16 03 02 - ' Local actions ' - the reserve is lifted ; Amendment 251 on ' European Schools ' - line 26 01 50 23 ; lastly , Amendment 330 to 28 01 01 - ' Staff in active employment in the audit policy area ' .
As regards EPSO , that is Amendment 255 : it is replaced by an amendment to reduce the amounts in reserve to 25 % of the appropriations on the relevant budget lines .
Finally , to take account of a problem on pre-accession assistance which arose from the Council 's reading , and which we were not able to pick up quickly enough , we ask the Commission at the end of paragraph 25 of the resolution , ' to present a transfer request or amending budget during the course of 2007 if the amounts foreseen in the 2007 budget turn out to be insufficient ' .
This concerns budget line 05 05 01 01 .
I recommend that we vote on these particular elements which I have put forward as technical adjustments .
( Parliament accepted the technical amendments proposed by the rapporteur )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have brought the 2007 budget to second reading .
It is the first budget for the enlarged EU of 27 Member States .
At the same time , it is the first budget in the financial framework for 2007-2013 .
I am pleased to note that the consensus reached at the negotiations meeting between Parliament and the Council on 21 November 2006 , finalised at the tripartite meeting on 28 November , has now been incorporated in the 2007 budget .
I realise that there are small differences of opinion over interpretation regarding the classification of expenditure in the budget , and I would like to remind you that the Council reserves its rights regarding this .
The Council may approve the ceiling for the rise in expenditure proposed as a result of Parliament 's second reading .
I would now like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Janusz Lewandowski , and the rapporteurs , James Elles and Louis Grech , for the spirit of cooperation which pervaded the entire budgetary procedure .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , I would note that the 2007 budgetary procedure has been carried out in accordance with the Treaty and with the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 and that , pursuant to Article 13 of the Agreement between the Council and Parliament , explicit agreement on the maximum rate of increase of non-obligatory spending , as laid out in Parliament 's second reading , has been expressed .
The budgetary procedure can therefore be considered to have been successfully completed .
The budget is definitively approved .
( Having invited the President-in-Office of the Council , Ulla-Maj Wideroos , the representative of the Commission , Dalia Grybauskaite , the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Janusz Lewandowski , and the rapporteurs , James Elles and Louis Grech , to accompany him , the President of Parliament , together with the President-in-Office of the Council , signed the budget )
( Applause )
2 .
Draft general budget for 2007 , amended by the Council ( all sections ) ( vote )
3 .
Procedure for prior examination and consultation in respect of certain provisions concerning transport proposed in Member States ( codified version ) ( vote )
4 .
Elimination of controls at the frontiers of Member States ( road and inland waterway transport ) ( codified version ) ( vote )
5 .
Transmission of data subject to statistical confidentiality ( codified version ) ( vote )
6 .
Submission of nominal catch statistics by Member States fishing in the north-east Atlantic ( codified version ) ( vote )
7 .
Community criteria for the eradication and monitoring of certain animal diseases ( codified version ) ( vote )
8 .
Agreement between the EC and Paraguay on certain aspects of air services ( vote )
9 .
R [ amp ] D activities in the domain of intelligent manufacturing systems ( EU-Australia Agreement , Canada , Norway , Switzerland , Korea , Japan and the USA ) ( vote )
10 .
Direct support schemes under CAP ; the COM for sugars ; restructuring of the sugar industry ; owing to the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the EU ( vote )
11 .
Drugs prevention and information ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
12 .
Civil justice ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
13 .
European Refugee Fund ( 2008-2013 ) ( vote )
14 .
Double-hull or equivalent design requirements for single-hull oil tankers ( vote )
15 .
European Fund for the Integration of Third-country Nationals ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
16 .
Prevention , preparedness and consequence management of terrorism ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will be brief .
I deeply regret the decision to resort to urgent voting on the three framework programmes concerning the area of freedom , security and justice for the period from 2007 to 2013 .
While understanding the acute need to adopt the reports by the end of the year in order to allow the procedures for finance allocation to be started this coming 1 January , I believe that programmes of such importance at least deserved a debate in the Chamber .
Since I was not given the opportunity previously , I now take the opportunity to thank all those who worked together with me for over a year and a half : as well as my staff , I thank my colleagues for their work and the officials of the group and the secretariat for their efforts .
17 .
Numerical strength of the committees ( vote )
18 .
European Institute for Gender Equality ( vote )
19 .
Driving licences ( vote )
20 .
Amendment of Rule 81 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , Implementing provisions ( vote )
- Before the vote :

Mr President , this vote adapts our procedures to take full advantage of the new powers of the European Parliament in the context of the comitology procedure , new powers that were secured earlier this year through the interinstitutional agreement negotiated by Mr Daul and myself .
It means that , when we confer implementing powers on the Commission through the legislation we adopt under the codecision procedure , any subsequent implementing measures of a quasi-legislative nature can be vetoed by Parliament .
This is the most important increase in the powers of the European Parliament since the Treaty of Nice and probably the only significant increase during this legislature .
The new rule will facilitate our use of this new power .
21 .
Amendment of the Rules of Procedure ( committees , quaestors ) ( vote )
22 .
Creation of the External Borders Fund ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to inform this House that during the tripartite talks on the border fund we were assured by the Commission and the Council that firearms do not qualify for purchase using this fund .
It will not therefore be possible to use the fund to buy firearms .
I therefore appeal to this House to adopt the compromise amendment referred to in the text as the LIBE Commission proposal .
23 .
Creation of the European Return Fund ( 2008-2013 ) ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to an outstanding controversy , which is the requirement announced since the beginning of this Parliament making the establishment of a Return Fund conditional on the need to adopt a returns directive by the end of next year .
It is essential for this House to link the Return Fund with a Return Directive , but it has not succeeded in doing so .
I would therefore like to inform the Council that it is possible that if a Returns Directive is not adopted , Parliament may make use of its budgetary entitlements and suspend payments to the Return Fund in the 2008 budget .
That is why this matter is so important .
I therefore call upon this House to vote in favour of the Return Fund , because previously the Council threatened us with a veto of the Integration Fund .
I therefore urge you to vote together in this matter .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council will continue its work , during which it will be in close contact with the European Parliament to ensure that consensus is reached soon on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally remaining third country nationals .
The Council would point out that agreement on this proposal is one of the priorities that the Council and the Commission set in the action plan on the implementation of the Hague Programme established to strengthen freedom , security and justice in the European Union .
The Council will do all it can to promote the achievement of this objective and remind everyone of the European Parliament 's role in any agreement on this proposal .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission will continue to encourage the Council in all appropriate fora to make progress on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third country nationals and to intensify negotiations with the European Parliament on this proposal , with a view to reaching an agreement by the end of 2007 .
The Commission recalls that agreement on this proposal is one of the priorities set out in the Council and Commission 's action plan implementing the Hague Programme on strengthening freedom , security and justice in the European Union .
The European Commission is open to discussions on improvements to the proposal .
In doing so , the Commission will , however , remain committed to maintaining the dual objective of the directive : to be an efficient instrument of return policy and , at the same time , an efficient protection instrument for the third country nationals involved .
Moreover , the Commission will propose to include the implementation of legislation in the field of return , in particular this directive , as one of the priorities for the strategic guidelines , for the intervention of the Return Fund in the period 2008-13 .
24 .
Medicinal products for paediatric use ( vote )
25 .
European Small Claims Procedure ( vote )
- Before the vote on block 1 :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I applied to speak for two minutes but will not need that long .
All the same , I would like to emphasise several points in particular regarding the introduction of the European Small Claims Procedure .
First of all , it is important that in case of doubt , the law is interpreted in the German language version since this was generally the working language of the European Parliament as well as being used exclusively by the Council and Commission for orientation purposes in the many trilogues .
Furthermore , it is important that the Member States utilise all the opportunities afforded by this procedure and therefore use the possibilities offered by modern means of communication .
Member States should authorise and promote telephone , e-mail and video conferencing as means of communication .
A further important simplification is that form D must be translated by one person who is authorised to do translations in one of the Member States .
This expressly precludes expensive authentications and the need for certification , for instance , by a notary .
I wish to emphasise that with regard to all decisions made by the Court within the Small Claims Procedure , it should always be remembered that the procedure is economical , quick , simple and citizen-friendly .
Anything which constitutes an obstacle to this is therefore inconsistent with the aim of this Regulation .
I therefore call on all my fellow Members to give their approval to this new and citizen-friendly civil law procedure which is the same across the whole of Europe .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
26 .
Fundamental rights and citizenship ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
27 .
Criminal justice ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
28 .
Preventing and fighting crime ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
29 .
Development of the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) ( vote )
30 .
Development of the second generation Schengen information System ( SIS II ) ( vote )
31 .
Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 25 :
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , when the subject was being debated the sum of money proposed in this amendment was out of date and the correct sum in the multiannual financial framework is EUR 524 million .
I suggest that it should be corrected for this amendment .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
32 .
Visas for crossing Member States ' external borders ( vote )
33 .
Sakharov Prize ( vote )
- After the vote :
Mr President , I received this information too late to add it to the resolution .
Mr Gao Zhisheng , a distinguished human rights attorney in Beijing who was arrested in August , has been tried secretly this week and imprisoned .
I am sure the House would wish to express its regret at that news , part of a continued crackdown on human rights activists in China .
( Applause )
34 .
Data protection within the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters ( vote )
35 .
A European strategy for sustainable , competitive and secure energy ( vote )
Before the vote on Amendment 10 :
Mr President , in this amendment , one phrase was deleted from the original text which I believe is important - it is supported by the Socialists and the Liberals - and which reads as follows : ' strengthening laws with regard to competition policies ' .
We should add that .
It then makes more sense to vote for the whole paragraph .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
36 .
Biomass and Biofuels ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 76 :
( DE ) Mr President , we would like to propose a brief amendment at this point , namely in the middle of the paragraph , ' as part of the energy package for 2007 ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
Explanations of vote
in writing . ( SV ) We would again offer our fundamental perspective on the EU 's budget .
The June List believes that the EU 's budget should be limited to 1 % of the Member States ' average GNI .
We have therefore chosen to vote against all the increases proposed by the European Parliament , at the same time as the June List has welcomed the few savings proposed in the form of amendments by either the Committee on Budgets or individual Members .
There are quite a few unfortunate budget headings , but the June List particularly regrets the large amount of aid for the EU 's agricultural policy , Cohesion Fund and fishing industry , as well as the budget headings under which various forms of information campaign are to be subsidised .
The June List also believes that Parliament 's constant commuting between Strasbourg and Brussels must cease and that the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions should be closed down .
On 23 October 2006 , the EU 's Court of Auditors observed for the thirteenth year in a row that it could not guarantee that more than a small part of the EU 's budget had been used correctly or for the purposes intended .
How can this madness continue whereby , year after year , financial resources are appropriated , only a small portion of which can be guaranteed to be used for the purposes for which they were intended ?
in writing . We cannot support this budget for a number of reasons .
First of all , out of protest against the fact that a few months ago the Court of Auditors once again did not approve the EU 's accounts .
Because the EU cannot successfully combat fraud and inefficiency , it should not increase its budget .
Secondly , we believe this budget makes the wrong political choices , such as too large a focus on industrial agriculture and foreign policy and military projects , and not enough on environment and social projects .
Finally , this budget does not adequately change some policies which are simply wasteful , such as mass subsidising of destruction of wine and continuing subsidies for growing tobacco .
( LT ) Mr President , I voted for the 2007 European Union budget .
European Parliament budget rapporteur James Elles , a United Kingdom representative , undoubtedly has his own vision for the formation of the European Union budget and allocation of its funds .
I believe that it is largely because of his efforts that the 2007 budget is innovative and based on the ' value for money ' principle .
I am pleased that a compromise was reached with respect to the financing of European Union common foreign and security policy , the application of the flexibility instrument , defence of the European Union 's outer perimeter , and financing of the life-long education programmes .
I am happy that we will begin the first year of the new financial perspective with a confirmed European Union budget in place .
The Danish Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament - Mr Rasmussen , Mrs Thomsen , Mrs Schaldemose , Mr Jørgensen and Mr Christensen - have voted against Amendment 1 , tabled by Mr Tomczak and Mr Bonde of the Independence and Democracy Group .
It is this delegation 's view that the amendment is incompatible with the regulations currently in force , for which reason we have felt obliged to vote against it .
The delegation wishes , nonetheless , to stress its support for a gradual general reduction in EU agricultural aid without the possibility of differential treatment for different Member States .
The Danish Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament - Mr Rasmussen , Mrs Thomsen , Mrs Schaldemose , Mr Jørgensen and Mr Christensen - have voted against Amendment 2 , tabled by Mr Tomczak and Mr Bonde of the Independence and Democracy Group .
It is this delegation 's view that the amendment is incompatible with the statutes currently in force , for which reason we have felt obliged to vote against it .
Nonetheless , it is the view of the delegation of Danish Members of the PSE Group that there is a need for a reform of the rules governing travel expenses so that , in future , they are paid out in amounts corresponding to costs actually incurred .
In this regard , the delegation would make reference to its work on the new statutes for the work of the European Parliament , which will enter into force in 2009 .
In this context , the delegation is pleased that with the new statutes will come new rules under which , from 2009 onwards , travel expenses will be covered in amounts corresponding to costs actually incurred .
One might say , with regard to the budget proposal for 2007 , that history is repeating itself , but , given what has happened before , the significance of this budget is more worrying than that .
After it ' criticised ' the budgetary ceiling proposed by the Commission and the Council , Parliament has just endorsed a budget in which the appropriations for payments amount to 0.99 % of Community GNI , below the figure of around 1.06 % agreed just a year ago in the financial perspective for 2007 - a cut of some EUR 8 billion .
Given that 2007 is the first year of the 27-Member State EU , a year that will set the bar for future budgets , Parliament has adopted a budget that falls well short of the funding needed for effective economic and social cohesion , a budget whose priorities are far from being an adequate response to this issue . Quite the opposite , in fact .
The reduction in the so-called financial ' compensation ' to Portugal is testimony to this .
It is a budget that is aimed - to cite just a few examples - at supporting the implementation of the neoliberal policies contained in the Lisbon Strategy , such as the liberalisation of the labour market and the internal market and the financing of major capital ; at promoting the scrapping of many fishing vessels ; at gradually destroying family farming ; and at promoting the militarisation of the European Union and interventionism on the part of the EU .
Hence our rejection .
The Danish Liberal Party 's MEPs have voted against Amendments 1 and 2 , tabled by Mr Tomczak and Mr Bonde of the Independence and Democracy Group .
The Danish Liberal Party believes in reforming agricultural aid , but does not believe that this is the way to achieve such a reform , nor that the report on the annual budget is the place to state one 's desire for proposals to that effect .
Mr Bonde 's proposal may be regarded as poorly thought through .
The Danish Liberal Party also believes in reforming travel allowances , so that reasonable and necessary travel expenses are refunded .
This , however , has already been decided under the new Statute for Members , which will be implemented as of 2009 .
Mr Bonde 's proposal is contrary to the statute currently in force and may therefore be regarded as poorly thought through .
in writing . I congratulate the rapporteur on putting together a package which found a large majority across the House .
In 22 years as a Member , this is the shortest budget vote I can recall .
I regret that Parliament has agreed a number of reductions in order to stay within budgetary limits .
In particular I think it very unfortunate that we have reduced the budget for ' aid for trade ' .
This is a vital budget line to assist developing countries connect with the global trading system .
in writing . ( DA ) It is deeply unjust for there to be discrimination against the new Member States by means of not granting them the same aid as is given to the old Member States .
I have nevertheless voted in favour of the transitional arrangements , as failure to adopt these could lead to Bulgaria and Romania receiving nothing .
In general , I am opposed to agricultural aid , which I believe should be phased out .
I would therefore rather have seen a reduction in aid to the old Member States so that the same conditions applied all round .
Such a reduction would start from the top , with a EUR 40 000 ceiling per legal entity , as I proposed in my amendment to the budget .
in writing . ( SV ) These reports are permeated by a host of populist proposals attacking one of the most basic principles of a state governed by law : the right of self-determination in connection with criminal law .
It is recommended , for example , that there be a genuine European judge and genuine European criminal law .
The purpose of these proposals is unambiguous .
There is a desire to construct an EU superstate , and the proposals constitute a decisive step in that direction .
That is wholly unacceptable .
The June List champions the sovereignty of the nation state with regard to legal issues .
EU cooperation must be limited to obtaining an efficient internal market and dealing with cross-border environmental issues .
The EU must definitely not have a harmonised legal system .
We have accordingly voted against these reports in today 's vote .
in writing . - ( FR ) I feel that Mr Langen 's report on a strategy for biomass and biofuels successfully describes all of the advantages and disadvantages of using renewable energy sources .
However , I should like to point out a few amendments tabled within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that have not been accepted .
Firstly , while renewables can help reduce the European Union 's energy dependence , we must also take a broader look at our energy consumption and , thus , at our lifestyles and production methods so that we consume better but , above all , so that we consume less .
Next , we should not launch into an intensive and high productivity-focused process for manufacturing renewable energy sources , as this would have harmful environmental , economic and social consequences and would not fall within the European sustainable development strategy .
The main function of agriculture must remain food production .
Forest resources must be exploited in moderation .
Cogeneration must be the rule where biomass production is concerned .
Finally , we must organise and improve the channels for supplying , distributing and marketing agricultural and forestry raw materials and energy produced at local market level by preventing excessive journey times .
The extent of illegal immigration in the EU cannot blind us to the relevant issue of refugees , and in particular political refugees .
The right to asylum is , first and foremost , a fundamental value in any society that seeks to protect democracy , dignity and human rights .
It is also evidence of a spirit of solidarity in that community .
Consequently , because we should take the lead in protecting human dignity and because , when it comes to values , mere words are insufficient , those escaping persecution , torture , war and human rights violations must know that here in Europe they will be properly welcomed when it is possible for us to welcome them , and in order for us to be fully equipped for the task , this fund is necessary and most desirable .
in writing . Mr President , I am delighted to support the establishment of this fund for refugees .
Too often we see refugees being ignored and at the end of Member State priorities , and it is only right that where Member States fall down the Union should step in to ensure our standards are maintained .
This report takes us closer to a coherent system and I am pleased to support it .
in writing . I support the measures on double-hulling that should help diminish maritime pollution from oil tankers , which are particularly important for the Yorkshire coast and the Humber estuary .

The group of the Greek Communist Party in the European Parliament voted for the proposal to amend Article 4 , paragraph 3 of Regulation ( ΕC ) No 417 / 2002 , both during approval in the Committee on Transport and Tourism on 22 November 2006 and in plenary in the European Parliament on 14 December 2006 , so that heavy grades of oil are only carried in double-hull tankers .
The Greek Communist Party is fighting consistently together with seamen and workers in general against the anti-grassroots policy of the ΕU and the governments of the Member States and against shipowners and capital for strict measures to be taken to strengthen safety rules for tankers and for all classes of ships in general , in order to protect human life at sea and the environment .
Maritime safety is extremely important to the EU , because of accidents such as that of the Prestige and the socio-economic and environmental consequences of such accidents and because of the need to prevent further tragedies , which undermine the sustainability of our seas and territories .
The measures put forward in the Le Rachinel report are a vital step towards ensuring that Community provisions are clear , consistent and stable .
The oil tanker sector , for example , requires an extremely stable and clear Community legal and judicial framework , without which the effectiveness and transparency of economic and trade relations in the marine sector cannot be guaranteed and maintained .
Accordingly , although in practice the Member States already observe and apply the ban on single-hull oil tankers , which transport heavy oil products , entering Community ports , this proposed amendment to the regulation will act as much-needed clarification and confirmation of the text .
Following thorough analysis of the socio-economic impact of this measure , it is clear that it is a sensible measure and that we must continue to bring Community measures into line with the objective of ensuring maximum marine safety for our vessels , our ports and our territories .
in writing . Mr President , this package on double hull oil tankers has been a long time coming , though I am pleased to support it today .
We saw in Scotland the disaster that the wreck of the Braer inflicted upon the Shetland Islands and we must do all we can to ensure the safety of our European marine environment and our coastlines .
The EU must impose high standards on these international operators , and this report takes us some of the way there .
in writing . - ( FR ) As it is designed , this fund is going to help finance the accelerated communitisation of European societies .
We are talking here about a kind of crazy ' urban policy ' at Member State level .
In my country , we have already experienced the consequences of these policies , which are focused on absolute respect for the cultural differences of immigrant populations .
These policies inject substantial , non-refundable sums into measures aimed at people who do not want to integrate , but who claim their right to social , economic and political rights that should be reserved for nationals .
The consequences of this are ghettoisation , inter-ethnic clashes , anti-French riots , the destruction of public amenities - sometimes resulting in deaths - and the rise in power of Islamism .
However , since the sums allocated to each Member State will be commensurate with the number of immigrants it receives , this fund may in the end prove useful : it will enable us at last to know the real immigration figures .
For , constantly massaged as they are , the official figures fluctuate between 17 and 40 million non-EU nationals living on EU soil .
Thus , in becoming aware of the scale of the problem , the people of Europe might just be able to wake up to it before it is too late !
One of the most important issues in immigration policy is that of integration .
The capacity to integrate immigrants and the capacity of immigrants to integrate is the major factor - or at least one of the major factors - in overcoming potential conflict and tension between different communities , which is a highly topical issue .
As I have said on a number of occasions , the first thing to note when it comes to immigration is that the host country stands to gain a great deal from welcoming men and women who have gone through terrible ordeals in search of a better life .
These are people who enrich our communities .
Acknowledging that this is the case , however , does not mean that we must overlook the other side of the coin , namely the difficulties involved in integration .
In the attempt to address this question , this Fund can play an extremely relevant role , in financing programmes aimed at facilitating and promoting integration .
Everything will , of course , depend on the political vision underpinning the way in which it is used .
This , however , is above all an issue that falls under the competence of the Member States .
The committee report on the programme to finance Prevention , Preparedness and Consequence Management of Terrorism goes even further than the Commission proposal for a decision , by adding to the objectives of the programme the protection of critical infrastructures and ' continuity of public action ' .
In other words , it brings it under the EU 's revised action programme on terrorism , which focuses on the prevention of ' violent radicalisation ' and the protection of critical infrastructures in the Member States of the ΕU .
On the basis of this programme , ideological perceptions , positions and stands which challenge the ' holy of holies ' of capitalist barbarity and the exploitation of its political systems come within the definition of ' terrorism ' , while customary action which the mass grassroots movement has acquired the right to take , such as the symbolic takeover of buildings or roads , which they may consider jeopardises ' critical infrastructures ' or the unimpeded functioning of public services can potentially be classified as ' terrorist action ' .
The programmes and measures by European capital and its political mouthpieces against the rights and freedoms of the peoples and action by grassroots movements accurately illustrate their fear .
They are not as omnipotent as they say .
Only the peoples are unvanquished when they decide to claim and impose their rights in return .
( SK ) The principles of non-discrimination and gender equality are democratic cornerstones of the European Union .
It is therefore natural that the European Union should be striving to establish institutional mechanisms , such as the European Institute for Gender Equality , in order to promote gender equality more effectively .
Therefore , I have voted in favour of this report in the second reading as well .
We welcome the Commission 's decision to establish the Institute for Gender Equality in a new Member State , as the new Member Sates are particularly lagging behind in terms of gender equality compared with the old fifteen states .
I am truly delighted by the December Council decision to establish the Institute in Lithuania .
I must admit that I feel a little disappointed that Slovakia , a country ranking fairly low in terms of gender equality statistics , failed to win over the Council despite the advantage of her central geographic location .
I am convinced that , through our interventions and the active promotion of Slovakia in the European Parliament , fellow MEPs Mrs Záborská , Mrs Bauer , Mrs Belohorská and myself contributed substantially towards efforts aimed at establishing the Institute in Bratislava .
This is something that women 's organisations have for a long time been calling for ; Parliament has supported it , but achieving it has been an arduous process .
Finally , following the Commission 's proposal to set up a European Institute for Gender Equality , Parliament adopted its position at first reading on 14 March 2006 , with the adoption of 50 amendments to the Commission 's proposal , which was published on 8 March 2006 .
In the interim , the Council adopted its common position on 21 September 2006 , incorporating 35 amendments tabled by Parliament .
Given the need to get the Institute up and running in 2007 , amendments were negotiated with a view to reaching a rapid agreement at second reading .
This was the compromise to which we gave our agreement , which includes 13 amendments to the common position .
Among its provisions , this agreement provides for removing the Bureau proposed in the common position and for reintroducing the Experts ' Forum , a consultation forum made up of experts in the area of gender equality , and this is something that both the Commission and Parliament want .
The Council has rethought its position and agreed to the replacement of the Bureau by an Experts ' Forum made up of one representative from each Member State , two members appointed by Parliament and three representatives from the social partners .
I wish to congratulate Mrs Gröner and Mrs Sartori on their timely report on the Recommendation for a second reading on the Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Institute for Gender Equality , to which I lend my full support . I particularly welcome the idea of replacing the Bureau with an Experts ' Forum , as part of the structure of the Institute .
The objective of getting the Institute up and running as quickly as possible , in 2007 , which is shared by all of the institutions , meant that they worked together towards achieving this objective .
The speed and manner in which the entire process has been conducted is worthy of praise .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report on the establishment of a European Institute for Gender Equality .
The Commission 's feasibility study concluded that there is a clear role for such an Institute .
The proposed agency would be small , with a staff of 10 or so .
The overall objective of the Institute will be to assist the Community institutions , in particular the Commission , and the authorities of the Member States in the fight against discrimination based on sex and the promotion of gender equality and to raise EU citizens ' awareness of gender equality .
in writing . Today I voted to reject the Council 's common position on the proposed package for a European Driving Licence system .
National transport issues are a matter for national governments and , accordingly , each Member State should be free to determine its own rules and criteria on drivers ' licences .
In no way does this over-bureaucratic and over-regulatory proposal appear to improve road safety records and therefore I consider it to be another unnecessary and unjustifiable piece of legislation .
in writing . ( SV ) Road safety is an extremely important cross-border issue .
The EU 's Directive on Driving Licences could , then , contribute practical added value .
As usual , however , the Commission and the European Parliament are attempting , in their zeal for regulation , to control the Member States ' rules in this area in detail .
We believe that the principles of subsidiarity and country of origin should be applied in full , something that does not happen in the current report when it comes , for example , to the detailed proposals on driving licence regulations governing motorcycles and mopeds .
We believe in the principle of mutual recognition and consequently have every confidence that the Member States are capable of taking wise and well-considered decisions .
Driving licence regulations can be harmonised without a detailed proposal for a directive like the current Directive on Driving Licences .
We have consequently voted in favour of Amendment 6 , which recommends that the common position be rejected on the grounds that it is excessively regulatory , without improving road safety .
in writing . ( DE ) I have voted in favour of the adoption of the European Driving Licence System since this overhaul represents significant progress as far as I am concerned .
The new Driving Licences Directive entails greater security and less criminality in dealings with driving licences , since the possibility of so-called driving licence tourism is substantially reduced .
The establishment of a database of traffic offenders who have had their driving licences taken away in their home countries is particularly important in this connection .
As a result , drunk drivers can be clearly prevented from simply undertaking new driver training abroad .
However , I sense that the 26 year period during which all driving licences which are valid today have to be withdrawn from service , is overly long .
in writing . I voted in favour of the Grosch report , which aims to recast the Driving Licences Directive to have all rules on driving licences in one document and thus make them more transparent and accessible to the citizen .
If these proposals find their way into law they should end the practice of driving licence tourism , where an individual banned in one Member State obtains a licence in another Member State .
I know many motorcyclists are concerned about the minimum age of 24 years for access to more powerful machines .
I hope they will find the compromise of allowing them access at an earlier age if they have sufficient experience acceptable , as that keeps safety at the top of our concerns .
in writing . I welcome this directive which will replace over 110 different driving licence models currently in circulation throughout the EU .
I believe that this new single EU-wide credit card format will also go a long way in combating driving licence tourism .
The net effect of this will be that Member States like Ireland can refuse to issue a driving licence to an applicant whose permit was restricted , suspended or withdrawn in another Member State .
I also support the targeted road safety aspect to this report , with a theory test for mopeds becoming compulsory from 2013 .
Also , the principle of " progressive access " will mean that riders must accumulate experience on smaller motorcycles before moving up to larger engines .
I have always maintained that on certain issues exchange of best practice and standard setting at EU level can often reap positive results .
In this respect I believe that EU standard setting on the basic qualifications and retraining programmes for driving examiners is a positive development .
in writing . - ( FR ) In 2032 , our grandchildren will all have the same driving licence : one licence for all Europeans , in the form of a credit card , a ' made in the USA ' driving licence .
This is evidence of heightened security , and a tangible sign where European identification is concerned .
I regret the fact that it has taken 26 years to achieve harmonisation ; that being said , the very first licences will be distributed as from 2012 .
About time too !
There are 110 different types of driving licence in the European Union today .
This creates confusion that benefits the most dishonest among us , and makes the roads more dangerous than they need to be .
Harmonising national laws means fighting against ' driving licence tourism ' , that is , against the opportunity for European citizens who have been stripped of their driving licences in their countries following a serious offence to obtain another licence elsewhere in the Union .
The rules on training examiners will also be harmonised .
This will guarantee the quality of training throughout Europe .
in writing . Mr President , I support this report with a few reservations , namely that I am not convinced that the certification of drivers should be dealt with on an EU level , provided there is suitable recognition of standards from other EU members .
I am sceptical of concerns that have been expressed by the anti-European right that this package would introduce ID cards by the back door , but I do have some sympathy with the idea that this package is answering a need not in fact felt on the ground .
in writing . My colleague Richard Corbett is undoubtedly Parliament 's leading expert on constitutional matters .
I welcome this latest report which amends the rules of procedure to bring them in line with the new agreement on comitology .
While this can be seen as a technical matter it is in fact highly political because the way we adapt our rules directly impacts on our ability to influence EU legislation .
Richard has always been adept at maximising Parliament 's influence .
Mr President , you will have noticed that this report , this change to our rules , was adopted by a majority of only seven votes .
It was very close .
I think that is indicative of the feeling of this Chamber that this is a change that was not strictly necessary to our rules , but one that has been brought in on a temporary basis - there is a sunset clause and it expires at the end of this legislature - to help with the particularly difficult situation that we have now .
I think the lesson of this close vote is that any attempt at the end of this legislature to prolong the life of having a fourth Vice-President for each committee and a sixth Quaestor would be doomed to failure , and I would advise against it .
in writing . I voted against the Leinen report on amending the Rules of Procedure to increase the number of committee vice-chairmen from three to four and the number of Quaestors from five to six .
I think it is frankly ludicrous to have four vice-chairs per committee .
There is no obvious role for a fourth vice-chair and this increase is simply political expediency to ensure that group leaders have enough jobs to hand round to keep key supporters happy .
As for the increase in Quaestors , this may be marginally more justified but I think it dangerous to have an even number of Quaestors .
The decision to set up a Fund for the Union 's external borders is a timely one .
Whilst it is true that the borders of each Member State fall exclusively under the competence of national sovereignty , it is also true that these borders are at the same time the external borders of the EU . There is therefore a duality that needs to be recognised and addressed accordingly .
At a time of increased risk - be it the terrorist threat , illegal immigration or economic crime - the need to strengthen our borders is paramount , although this must not , let me state clearly , lead to high walls being erected around Europe or a fortress-continent being built .
This is about sharing part of a burden the cost of which arises , in part , from belonging to the EU .
It is the right thing to do .
We hope , most importantly , that it will work efficiently .
in writing . - ( FR ) On reading the title of the report , I thought that the European Union was proposing financially to help the Member States repatriate to their countries of origin illegal immigrants that are subject to an expulsion measure , or even to help them along , when their legislation provides for aid to resettle legal immigrants in their own countries .
We believe that the EU does not and should not have competence in the field of immigration .
Indeed , such a proposal could have been explained by the consequences for every European country of disastrous regularisation policies pursued by a few countries , such as Spain and France , which attract illegal immigrants like moths to a flame .
It is also a question of funding not only the repatriation of illegal immigrants , but also cash incentives and other aid for reintegration , employment and goodness knows what else , for the purpose , and I quote , of the ' personal development ' of the repatriated immigrant !
This is , in a way , a bonus for acting illegally , and an encouragement to start over again .
The European Return Fund is yet another step towards promoting the anti-immigration policy of the ΕU .
It forms part of the broader funding programme entitled ' Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows ' , which is confined to providing economic support for ' Fortress Europe ' by stepping up controls and ' rapid response forces ' at the external borders of the ΕU , basically abolishing asylum and protection for refugees and further repressing economic migration .
The European Return Fund is designed to reinforce the mechanisms of forced repatriation of ' illegal ' immigrants to their countries of origin ; in other words , it is basically a fund for supporting mass deportations of economic migrants and refugees , thereby concealing the hypocritical nature of the pronouncements by the ΕU about the social integration of immigrants .
ΕU migration policy moves solely within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy , from the point of view of increasing the profitability of European capital .
Within the framework of this policy , the reactionary institutional framework of the Member States and of the EU is taking shape , keeping millions of immigrants throughout the EU in an illegal or quasi-illegal regime , in order to hold them hostage to the harshest exploitation of capital , with poorly paid , insecure work with no fundamental employment rights and exclusion from access to basic social and political rights .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report , which is an adaptation to the new comitology procedure .
Even though this is a technical report I wish to stress my backing for the content , which ensures that medicines and other products for children are tailored to their needs and not simply variations ( i.e. lower doses ) of adult medicines .
in writing . I warmly welcome this report , which sets out to establish a European procedure for small claims .
It is intended to simplify and speed up litigation concerning small claims ( up to EUR 2000 ) and reduce the costs for litigants .
The fact that it is easier in some countries for creditors to pursue claims creates a distortion in the single market , so I welcome this attempt to create a level playing field .
in writing . I fully support the objectives of this report on preventing and fighting crime .
The specific programme ' Prevention and fight against crime 2007-2013 ' is a welcome attempt to contribute to a high level of security for citizens by preventing and combating crime , organised or otherwise , in particular terrorism , trafficking in persons and offences against children , illicit drug trafficking and illicit arms trafficking , corruption and fraud .
Clearly all these activities have a cross-border aspect to them and therefore EU coordination can bring real added value to domestic law enforcement efforts .
in writing . - ( FR ) A proposal has been made to change the ' SIS ' Schengen Information System which , although described as a success , will be unable to function with more than 18 Member States .
According to the pro-Europeans , ' SIS II ' ought therefore to become a highly technologically advanced system and to enable the new Member States , too , to apply the Schengen acquis in full by abolishing the controls at the internal borders with their neighbours .
Conceived at the beginning from the universally appealing angle of cooperation among Member States , in particular of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters , one might wonder today about the risks of the federalist and totalitarian excesses to which such a tool might give rise .
This potential European big brother actually possesses the most extensive database on people , with more than 15 million entries containing information , including people 's surnames and first names , physical characteristics and lost , stolen or embezzled banknotes .
Besides the fact that such a concentration of information could constitute a threat to people 's privacy and freedom of thought , it is justifiable to fear SIS II going beyond its principal task of police and judicial cooperation and one day becoming the self-proclaimed informer of the pro-European and pro-globalisation system .
( SK ) I am satisfied with the outcome of the vote on nuclear safety regulation .
Nuclear energy is an important component in securing a stable and clean electric power supply for the world .
After the accidents at the Three Mile Island and Chernobyl nuclear power plants , the Community 's attention has been focused on the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union .
The assistance provided to them has contributed substantially towards increasing the safety of nuclear plants in these countries .
The Slovak Republic has also received extensive assistance towards increasing the safety of the Jaslovské Bohunice and Mochovce nuclear power plants , and therefore they now enjoy the same safety levels as similar nuclear plants in Western European countries .
It would also be desirable for the Community to provide aid for nuclear facilities that are being constructed , operated and decommissioned , as well as to promote safety and security in handling radioactive waste and spent fuel .
The draft regulation is in line with the interests of the European Union , as well as the goals and mission of Euratom .
By enhancing the safety of nuclear facilities beyond the EU borders it will contribute to protecting the health of EU citizens as well as making an important contribution to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons .
in writing . I voted in favour of the report which deals with assistance and cooperation in the area of nuclear safety between the Community and third countries , mainly states in Eastern Europe and Central Asia .
It aims at establishing an Instrument for Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance .
The Chernobyl accident in 1986 highlighted the global importance of nuclear safety .
In order to create the conditions of safety necessary to eliminate hazards to life and health the EU should be able to support nuclear safety in third countries .
This report strikes the right balance by allowing the EU to promote the use of safer technologies and methods while not relieving third countries of their duty to ensure that nuclear plants on their territory operate safely and environmentally responsibly .
in writing .
I supported the Commission 's proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 listing third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders of Member States and those whose nationals are exempt from the requirement , but we must have exemption for persons who are not nationals of any country , who reside in a Member State and who are holders of an alien 's passport , a non-citizen 's passport or another travel document issued by that Member State .
in writing . Although we fully support democracy and we condemn human rights abuses , we do not recognise the European Union 's moral or political authority to make pronouncements in this area .
The Greek Communist Party neither recognises nor participates in the proceedings for the so-called Sakharov prize , which is supposed to be given for freedom of thought , but which in practice serves the political and ideological objectives of the ΕU .
The EP considers ' freedom of thought ' to be primarily in those who espouse and serve imperialism ; that is why it mainly rewards ' personalities ' or ' organisations ' which promote imperialist barbarity .
Such a prize was given to the Cuban counter-revolutionaries and , in 2006 , to Milinkievic , the Belarusian chosen by the USA , ΝΑΤΟ and the ΕU , who gained a ' surprising ' 6 % in the last elections , supported by a package of several million euros from the ΕU .
We consider the resolution , which is provocative interference in Cuba 's internal affairs , to be unacceptable in its decision to send a delegation from Parliament to Cuba , thereby ignoring the government of the country which has popular support and is fighting heroically against the embargo and the undermining actions of imperialism .
We express our solidarity with Cuba , which defends and builds socialism , despite the rabid attempts of the imperialists to overturn it .
The political groups in the European Parliament , including the majority of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , have huge political responsibilities , in that they are trying to create preconditions for the justification of the overt or covert war which has been unleashed against the Cuban revolution .
Defending it is the duty not only of the communists but also of every progressive person .
Sakharov Prize winners are men and women whose lives have been devoted , always at great personal sacrifice , to the cause of freedom of expression , democracy , freedom and human rights .
It comes as no surprise , therefore , that some of these men and women are prevented from receiving the prize by the repressive regimes in their countries .
Unsurprising it may be , but that does not mean we should turn a blind eye to the problem .
I therefore welcome Parliament 's decision to keep up the pressure on these regimes by taking the decision to create a mechanism for monitoring cases in which the winners have been prevented from receiving their deserved prize or from returning to the European Parliament , as in the cases of Oswaldo Payá , of Aung San Suu Kyi , who is still under house arrest in Myanmar , and of the Women in White , who were winners in 2005 and who were prevented by Fidel Castro 's regime in Cuba from receiving the prize .
By stopping the winners from receiving their deserved prize , these regimes are proving that the award was deserved . It is therefore necessary to keep up the fight for the most basic freedoms in both Myanmar and Cuba ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it gives me no pleasure to say that the ALDE Group voted the wrong way on amendment 1 , by the PPE-DE Group , to the Roure report .
We should have voted against this amendment and it was a sheer mistake on the voting list .
I accept that , technically , the amendment went through and there is nothing we can do about that , but I would say that , politically , the vote does not represent the will of the House , which was expressed in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on Monday evening , when a similar amendment was wholeheartedly rejected .
Nothing can be done about that , but the position of the ALDE Group remains that we will not agree to the VIS Regulation unless and until we have an adequate framework decision on data protection , and we are utterly committed to everything that Mrs Roure , as rapporteur , is doing to seek to promote that decision on data protection .
We wholeheartedly support her , and the fact that we did not express it on this occasion is a technical - I could use a ruder word - mistake for which , I am afraid , a number of us probably bear responsibility .
We will try to ensure that no such mistake ever happens again , but the way we voted did not represent our actual position on amendment 1 .
We must guarantee the protection of personal data and prevent them from being used inappropriately .
Every individual has the right to his or her identity and privacy .
Increased cooperation between the judicial and police bodies in fighting transnational crime has led to the transfer of more and more personal data .
We have been campaigning to ensure that this exchange of information upholds fundamental rights such as respect for privacy and the protection of personal data and reinforces mutual confidence between the competent police and judicial authorities .
We want to see a framework decision that comes into line with what is laid down for the first pillar .
It makes no sense for the Union to have a high level of personal data protection under the first pillar and to make completely different laws in respect of the third pillar .
The important thing is to guarantee a high level of protection , while taking account of the particular characteristics of police and judicial work .
This issue has been dragged from Presidency to Presidency , and the Council has regrettably shown little inclination to take a decision .
The Council must understand that this framework decision is linked to various proposals currently on Parliament 's table , such as the Visa Information System , but that these proposals must not become hostages to the adoption of the framework decision .
in writing . The EPP-ED Group is keen that the Council not only adopts a Framework Decision on Data Protection which takes due account of the opinion of the European Parliament , but that it does so soon , as it undertook to do at the time of the adoption of both the SIS II package and the EU-PNR agreement .
We believe strongly that a strong Framework Decision will greatly facilitate the adoption of the VIS package .
However , while we consider it highly desirable that a Framework Decision be adopted soon , we agree with the statement of the rapporteur that the adoption of the Decision cannot be construed as a sine qua non for future work .
The EPP-ED Group will do everything in its power to prove responsible and loyal partners in the legislative process .
in writing . - ( EL ) The proposal for a recommendation formulates the basic refusal of the European Parliament to protect fundamental human rights even to the minimum .
Whereas the political forces of capital have previously voted in favour of the Schengen Agreement and its updated version , the SIS II information system , whereas they accept the VIS visa information system , which legalises the collection , processing and exchange of personal data relating even to the political , ideological , philosophical , religious and other views of every citizen of the ΕU and the introduction of biometric data and DNA-related data , now they are pretending to be worried because the Council is moving towards a decision which will not safeguard a ' high level of protection ' for personal data .
Having accepted the facility to transmit personal data to the police authorities and secret services in third countries , such as under the agreement between the ΕU and the USA on the transmission of the personal data of Europeans flying to the USA ( PNR ) , having agreed to the facility to transmit personal data even to private individuals , they are now calling on the Council to safeguard protection for personal data , having taken account , however , of the ' peculiar nature of the work of the police and judicial authorities ' .
The hypocritical recommendations of the European Parliament cannot conceal its full alignment with the policy to legalise the monitoring of and the holding of files on European citizens .
in writing . - ( FR ) I would like to congratulate Mrs Morgan for the initiative she has taken in drawing up a report on the Green Paper presented by the Commission on a European strategy for sustainable , competitive and secure energy .
Indeed , today we have to respond to some big questions about the future of Europe : how can we can guarantee a secure energy supply at prices that are predictable and affordable , particularly for the poorest citizens ?
How can we reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and on a few producer countries at a global level ?
However , I have had to abstain from the final vote because I think that the proposed complete separation of the ownership of energy networks will not allow us to respond to these questions in a decent way , particularly questions about the security of investments and supply .
As Vice-President of the EU-Central Asia Delegation , I am concerned about the call to increase energy supplies from Central Asian producers such as Kazakhstan , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan .
These countries are in fact zones where there is little respect for democracy or for the rule of law , and I think , like President Borrell , that one does not exchange petrol , gas or electricity for human rights .
This report that has been adopted is unfortunately entirely in line with the Commission 's proposal , spelling out what it means by the ' European energy strategy ' , namely liberalisation , control over sources of supply and threatening people 's sovereignty .
Working on the premise that the ' market ' will solve the problem of energy supply and consumption , the report seeks to hide the increasingly obvious fact that the ' market ' has worked in the interests of the few , who have obtained fabulous profits , and not in the interests of the consumers , who face ever higher energy bills and ever more frequent blackouts .
The ' market ' is put forward as a solution to the lack of a genuine policy aimed at overcoming energy dependency on fossil fuels and excessive energy consumption .
We also find it unacceptable that the solution to issues of pollution is a system of emissions trading , given that this does not help reduce ' greenhouse gases ' .
All it does is boost the profits of those in a position to earn them , thereby exacerbating inequality as regards development .
Furthermore , the path of a common external energy policy is a fresh threat to the sovereignty of those Member States that are most dependent , ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . ( PT ) The Green Paper on ' A European Strategy for Sustainable , Competitive and Secure Energy ' forms the basis of the European Energy Efficiency Action Plan , to be submitted at the beginning of 2007 , a highly important document that will play a key role in combating climate change , environmental pollution and the abuse of natural resources , and in safeguarding energy supplies .
This report puts forward crystal-clear objectives : 20 % of the energy produced in the EU to be from renewable energy sources by 2020 and 50 % by 2040 ; and a 30 % reduction in European carbon emissions by 2020 and a reduction of at least 60 % by 2050 .
It also highlights the target set by the Green Paper on energy efficiency to reduce European consumption by 20 % by 2020 .
As regards renewable energy , the report proposes that investment be made principally in marine resources - waves , tides and the enormous potential of offshore wind power installations - and solar energy .
It also calls on the Commission to carry out an impartial analysis of the potential benefits and shortcomings of nuclear power and nuclear power plants ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . ( FR ) I am voting against this report which , under the pretext of sustainable development and energy security , proposes a new stage of liberalisation and competition in a sector in which public services should , on the contrary , be consolidated .
The report asserts the necessity of increasing the separation between actors responsible for the marketing of energy and the owners and managers of energy networks .
What is more , it insists on imposing a difference in the ownership of these two areas .
Clearly , this is a challenge to the existence of public enterprises responsible for the entirety of public service functions .
I cannot validate such a policy of privatisation and total competition : it will lead to an increase in energy prices , it does not ensure the reduction of energy consumption , nor does it ensure the development of renewable energy sources , and it increases inequalities between regions and citizens .
in writing . I voted in favour of the Morgan report on European energy strategy .
I am convinced it points the right way forward for a sustainable , competitive and secure energy policy for Europe and one that the Heads of Government would do well to take careful note of when they meet in March to discuss the future of EU energy policy .
My one disappointment is that the Parliament was not stronger on the need to ' unbundle ' energy ownership to avoid conflicts of interest and to create a more level playing field for energy competition .
in writing . In this report there are a number of points we do not agree with , particularly in relation to nuclear power and liberalisation .
However , we have decided to vote in favour as there are a lot of positive elements in the report , particularly its emphasis on renewable energy , which is clean , cost-effective and secure .
We also agree that there should be an emphasis on fuel poverty .
in writing . In voting for this report I voted to put consumers at the centre of energy policy alongside an effective approach to dealing with harmful emissions such as CO2 .
The effectiveness of a sensible Carbon Tax Trading Scheme depends upon internationalising the market .
Furthermore , strong targets for 2020-2050 for reduction of CO2 emissions as pronounced in this report are the only reasonable way ahead .
However , tidying up the ETS in both methodology and targets is something the EU must crucially put into action to remain a world leader in both working for a cleaner environment as well as sustaining a pan-European energy policy .
There is a danger that unless action is taken now then both our environment and our energy security will be under threat .
in writing . Mr President , I wholeheartedly congratulate our rapporteur Ms Morgan on this report , and am grateful that she has taken so many amendments which specifically answer Scottish concerns .
The Union 's energy markets are increasingly interlinked and interdependent , and it is right that an EU framework be created to ensure that our consumers benefit from our common market .
From a Scottish perspective , we have a particular stake in the energy debate given our massive energy resources and even greater energy potential .
That potential is currently being held back by the shortsightedness of the UK Government , and this report will help us , from the EU side , to hold them to account .
in writing . - ( FR ) I would like to congratulate my colleague Mrs Morgan on her own-initiative report on the European strategy for sustainable , competitive and secure energy .
This report contains notable advances on the social level , particularly in terms of facilitating access to energy for the poorest citizens , as well as on the environmental level .
However , I have abstained from the final vote because I regret the total separation of ownership in the gas sector .
Because of the specific features of this strategic sector , I think that a more flexible separation would have made it easier to ensure the security of supply and investments .
In spite of its inadequacies and even some points to which we object , there are some positive aspects in this report , inter alia in the area of protecting alternative and renewable energy sources .
However , we would stress the fact that biofuels cannot , on a sustainable basis , resolve the major problems of energy dependency , as they are of only local technical interest and have a limited impact .
Most importantly , the production of biomass and biofuels should not replace the main function of agriculture , which is food production .
I wish to highlight the devastating effects of the production of various oilseeds in developing world countries , for example the destruction of vast areas of forest , and oilseeds are the raw material for producing biofuels in Europe .
We therefore do not go along with the excessive emphasis placed on promoting energy crops for obtaining biofuels , given that such crops use scarce production factors like water and soil , as well as various fertilisers .
We therefore feel that the best thing would be for the Community to support the production of biomass and of biofuels obtained from various organic waste sources , such as forest residues , solid and urban waste , edible oils and waste resulting from the treatment of waste water .
in writing . ( FR ) Whatever hopes we place in biomass and biofuels , they cannot be more than a partial solution to our countries ' problems of energy dependency and to the search for clean and renewable energy production .
This is , firstly , because the entire arable and forest areas of Europe , and even the planet , would not be enough to satisfy our needs , and because we do not want to replace one dependency by another more serious one , related to foodstuffs ; and , secondly , because the current state of global carbon is not necessarily as positive as some would like us to believe .
It is true that we should profit from the potential of these energy sources , but not to the detriment of food production , not to the detriment of biodiversity and of the existence of the forests , nor to that of other uses for these products in the wood sector or other sectors , or even to the progress that we can hope for from research into the new hydrogen motors .
We should start , moreover , by getting rid of the absurd regulations which mean that in my country , in France , a community or a farmer may be sentenced to heavy fines for using biofuels in public transport or in a tractor , in violation of nonsensical fiscal rules .
in writing . Mr President , I congratulate our rapporteur for negotiating this complex area .
Biomass and biofuels are of massive global potential , yet the growth of this sector must at all times be managed sensitively .
I am sure I am not alone in receiving correspondence from many constituents worried that an unforeseen consequence of this policy could be the decimation of tropical rainforest to make way for biofuel monocultivation .
I believe this report , as amended , takes due account of these concerns and am happy to support it today .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.00 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Fiji
The next item on the agenda is the debate on the situation in Fiji .
author . - ( LT ) The situation in Fiji is very tense after yet another coup d 'état .
I believe that the European Parliament should react firmly .
Four revolutions over twenty years - that is really too many , and it promises nothing good for the people or the country .
This frightens off overseas investment , sharply reduces the flow of tourists , and stops financial aid .
The European Union allotted large sums of money to raise the educational standard and political sophistication of all ethnic groups , but unfortunately it has not been enough .
Thus far , the revolution has not claimed human victims .
The legal government welcomes acts of peaceful resistance .
Its position is supported by influential church representatives and the Great Council of Chiefs .
The situation is controlled by the army and censorship has been introduced .
The arrests and questioning of opposition representatives indicate that the situation may still become more acute .
The EU and our allies in this region should give a clear signal that the use of force will not be tolerated and that avoiding bloodshed is essential .
I invite my colleagues to condemn the use of force in Fiji , not to recognise the usurpers of power , and to support the opposition 's invitation to the people of the country to oppose the revolution through peaceful demonstrations .
It is important to organise democratic elections in Fiji that meet the international standards as soon as possible , which are based on an equality principle between people despite their ethnic origin , and return to efforts of observing principles of legal superiority and democracy .
author . - Mr President , yet again we are confronted with a coup d 'état in Fiji .
Fiji has now suffered four coups d 'état in the last ten years and the latest one is based on the most unbelievable logic of Commander Bainimarama , who says that he took action to have a coup because the democratically elected government of Fiji was going to pardon the previous coup leaders .
The logic of this beggars belief but , whatever internal differences there may be between the Fijian leaders , it should not damage the fragile democracy of this Pacific island state .
The European Union , together with Australia and New Zealand , spent a considerable amount of money and resources to ensure that a fair and free election took place in Fiji in May 2006 .
The Government of the Prime Minister came in with a considerable majority .
It is a unique constitution , under which the ethnic element - ethnic Indians and indigenous Fijians - shares power .
All that has been put at risk by the commander of the army taking the law into his own hands .
No commander of any army has the right to take any law into his own hands and subvert the course of democracy .
Therefore , I ask Parliament and my colleagues to send a strong signal that we will stop non-humanitarian aid .
We will tell the European population who want to go on holiday in a country like Fiji that they should not until democracy is restored .
We must send a signal to the Fijians that we are in complete solidarity with them on this very important issue of freedom , democracy and justice .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , the military coup in Fiji has brought a country which is undergoing a tragic development to the attention of worldwide public opinion .
The economic situation in Fiji has also been worsened as a result of the EU 's policy regarding sugar .
In the meantime , according to German radio , credit transfers from Iraq for the Fijian economy are no longer conceivable .
These ensure the survival of entire families and rural communities and , in the meantime , more money is arriving in Fiji from Iraq than is being generated by the local sugar industry .
How has this situation come about ?
In Iraq , there are very many mercenaries from Fiji who make their money there and then return as individuals , some of whom have been heavily traumatised .
The military , which has become independent after a fashion , has played a role .
The talk is always of how the conflict in Fiji runs along ethnic lines .
Whilst , superficially , it may perhaps be considered an ethnic conflict , essentially , it is a question of power .
Which chieftains have a say ?
Moreover , this conflict between the various clans is happening as we speak .
This coup d 'état essentially points to the fact that conditions there are unstable .
It is also to do with the fact that the conflict is a post-colonial one .
Here is a brief recap : since 1879 , the British colonial administration has been bringing Indians from the subcontinent to work in Fiji , primarily in the cotton and sugar cane industries .
Consequently , this is one of the prevailing conflicts between the various ethnic groups .
When the EU now talks about condemning this military coup d 'état , something I wish to emphasise , we must also concede at the same time that the EU has made a not insignificant contribution to the causes of the conflict in Fiji .
We should also bear this in mind .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I too believe that we must condemn this coup d 'etat , the fourth in twenty years , in a country , a former British colony , that is actually one of the richest and most developed in the South Pacific and that is among those with the most tourism .
Commodore Frank Bainamarama , commander of the Fijian army , deposed the elected prime minister and took power in a blatantly illegal manner .
He said that he was taking over President Ratu Josefa Iloilo 's and Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase 's powers on a transitional basis with the intention of restoring them in the future , without stipulating when elections would take place .
The situation is clearly complicated , uncertain and worrying .
The Secretary-General of the United Nations himself said this clearly a little while ago : he condemned the military coup .
I believe that that is precisely what we in this House must do .
We must not just condemn the coup , but we must also make an explicit appeal for the release of the prisoners and hostages and demand the restoration of order and the rule of law , which had made it possible for elections to take place in a normal and acceptable fashion within a democratic context .
In addition to that , however , we must also acknowledge the European Union 's responsibility .
We have a very strong instrument available to us : the Cotonou Agreement .
It is possible for us to use this framework - suspending non-humanitarian aid to Fiji - to apply pressure and achieve a political change in the region , provided that we bear in mind that this must not be to the detriment of humanitarian aid and certain educational projects that are already under way .
I would also like to support the proposed amendment presented by Mr Pflüger , which demands that these measures also help to ensure that the indigenous population of Fiji is not forced to flee and to ensure that any dialogue in the region includes all of the communities currently living in the country .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , the international community must unequivocally condemn the military coup in Fiji .
We cannot pass over the military coup and overthrow of a democratically elected government in silence .
The European Union must answer the question of what measures it should apply to bring democracy and the rule of law back to the country .
This is the fourth military coup Fiji has seen in the last 20 years .
Seizure of power by the Army , which controls the government and the administration , and the suspension of a number of articles of the constitution will holdback the country 's development .
It is hurting ordinary citizens and undermining Fiji 's image as one of the most developed countries in the region and a destination for thousands of holidaymakers from all over the world .
I appeal to the Commission and Council to do everything in their power to overcome the present political crisis and restore democracy in Fiji .
The overthrow of the democratically elected government by the armed forces must be decisively condemned , and everything possible must be done to restore lasting principles of respect for human rights and the rule of law to this country .
I also ask that we consider imposing a travel ban to the countries of the European Union on the members of the army responsible for the military coup in Fiji and for the suspension of all aid other than humanitarian aid .
The international community needs to send out a clear signal that political and economic relations with the West will only be restored if the legal , democratically elected government in Fiji is returned to power .
author . - ( HU ) Last May , Fiji held parliamentary elections .
The European Union sent an observation mission to these elections .
The great honour of leading this election observer mission fell to me .
I can assure you , in full awareness of my responsibility , that the elections were free and fair , in line with international standards , and faithfully reflected the will of Fiji 's electorate .
The only factor that already then cast a shadow on the electoral efforts was the unconstitutional , or anti-constitutional , declarations made by Commodore Bainimarama .
He was already threatening a coup d 'état at the time , and I myself spoke with him and very firmly drew his attention to the fact that he was thereby seeking to undermine the credibility of democracy .
In September , when I was next in Fiji , the situation seemed to have stabilised .
The two largest parties had formed a coalition in accordance with the constitution , or that conformed to the constitution , under the leadership of Prime Minister Qarase , and it seemed generally that the mood and tensions had calmed down .
It is most regrettable that on 5 December , the army transferred power to the military and overthrew the democratic government ; it is impeding freedom of the press , has expelled people from the country and has detained protesters .
The country is now seeing the development of a visibly forceful yet peaceful , non-violent protest , which is extending to ever wider circles .
It is regrettable that the leadership of the second largest opposition party , the Labour party , does not distance itself unambiguously from the coup .
We must consistently demand that the army immediately and unconditionally return power to the democratically elected government , and we must use the available instruments , namely sanctions , to make it clear that what is currently happening in Fiji is entirely unacceptable to us .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , my home province of Bavaria has maintained close ties with Fiji for decades .
The Hanns-Seidel Foundation has been supporting democratic-related projects there for many years and a former Member of this House , the sadly now deceased Minister of State , Mr Fritz Pirkl , supported the cause of democracy in Fiji more than almost anyone else .
It is therefore truly distressing to see that barely six months after the democratic elections in May , such a brutal military coup d 'état has taken place , a coup d 'état which we are unable to condemn with sufficient force .
Nevertheless , we must be clear on one point , however . The overwhelming majority of the parliament elected in May , as well as all the major democratic forces , with the deplorable exceptions indicated by my fellow Member , Mr Szent-Iványi , are on the side of democracy there .
Likewise church groups , the different religions , the National Council of Chiefs , that is , representatives of the traditional structures , are quite clearly on the side of the democratically-elected Prime Minister .
We , as the European Union , must use all of our authority to restore freedom and rule of law in Fiji .
Therefore , no leniency whatsoever should be shown towards these tyrants and dictators .
That is why funds , right down to humanitarian aid , must be frozen .
However , we must also exert all the political pressure at our disposal to restore democracy and freedom on this beautiful group of islands immediately .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , today the European Parliament is condemning the military coup in Fiji by the military junta on 5 December .
The coup was in breach of the constitution , contrary to the rule of law , and against the democratic system developing in Fiji .
The latest elections there , held in May this year , were approved by EU observers as being properly conducted .
The coup d 'etat is seriously undermining the Fijian economy , primarily in the tourist sector .
We should act promptly now , in particular by suspending non-humanitarian aid to Fiji under Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement , and by imposing an EU travel ban on members of the junta , their families and their staff .
We must do everything we can to help democracy and civil society to deal with the current military coup d 'état and restore democracy .
Mr President , regarding the coup d 'état in Fiji there are three points we should consider .
Firstly , we should condemn the coup , as we are doing in our declaration .
Secondly , we need to consider whether the toppled democratic government was acting fairly with respect to the aboriginal minority , which supported the coup : the fact that it was a democratically-elected government does not necessarily mean that it was honest , fair and just .
Thirdly , we should consider supporting the initiative of the Polish premier , who said that the European Union needs to set up its own armed forces which could where necessary intervene on behalf of victims of injustice , and where , as in Fiji , a coup d 'état has taken place .
Let us therefore analyse the causes of this coup before issuing our final opinion .
In the meantime , we will in our resolution rightly condemn the coup and demand the restoration of democracy .
( DE ) Mr President , when I was in Fiji last year with my fellow Member , Mrs Carlotti , and two colleagues from the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , on the day of our departure , the headline in the largest daily newspaper read coincidentally : ' Army : No more coups ' .
Unfortunately , barely two years later , events are repeating themselves for the fourth time in 20 years .
This country has inherited a highly sensitive composition of peoples since colonial times , with Fijian natives just about outnumbering a very strong Indian minority , but with the latter dominating economically speaking .
For our part , we must make it perfectly clear that the balancing of interests between these groups can only be achieved by means of a thorough interethnic dialogue and not through the military .
Consequently , by putting a stop to financial assistance which would not benefit the people but which would simply make the work of the government easier , by placing travel bans on the rebels , and by supporting countermeasures undertaken by the Pacific Forum countries , we must make it clear to the military that they should return to their barracks immediately .
I do not believe that in this particular case , as mentioned by my fellow Member Mr Pflüger , the sugar market regime has brought about this coup d 'état .
What I mean is that , irrespective of the reform of the sugar market regime , the distribution of property in this country is very problematic because those parties who are engaged in the sugar trade , that is , Indians , have only rented the land from the original inhabitants and this leads to problems time and again if this involves extending leases .
I do not believe that EU policy has contributed to this coup d 'état through the sugar market regime .
I wanted to clarify this again here .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission agrees with Parliament .
The military takeover in Fiji is indeed a matter of great concern to us all .
Commissioner Michel has strongly condemned this seizure of power ; it was also condemned by the Finnish Presidency and the European Union on 11 December 2006 .
The takeover has been condemned by Fiji 's ACP partners in the Pacific and by Australia , New Zealand and the United States .
These condemnations are more than mere words .
They result in international isolation , which will have serious consequences for Fiji . It has already been suspended from the Commonwealth and cannot remain in the chair of the Pacific Forum .
The military takeover is a clear violation of Article 9 of the Cotonou Agreement and the essential parts of it concerning human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
It means there will have to be consultations pursuant to Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement , which may lead to appropriate measures being taken to rectify the situation , including as a last resort suspension of development cooperation .
The European Union wishes to continue the dialogue with Fiji 's legitimate authorities to find a consensus and encourage Fiji 's return to democratic governance under the constitution .
The Commission is preparing a proposal for the opening of consultations under Article 96 .
The military takeover will damage the Fijian economy .
The islands ' most important economic sector is tourism : it will now suffer as a result of the instability and the security situation .
The interest rate has been raised , growth rates will suffer , the investment climate will deteriorate .
What has happened in Fiji is so serious that our continued cooperation is now at risk : much will depend on how the military behave in the next few days and weeks , in particular on how quickly they facilitate the return to democracy and the rule of law .
Mr President , I would like to thank the honourable Members who have spoken ; I believe they are in agreement and show that everyone in the European Community is united on this .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place today at 17.00 .
2 .
Implication of the UN forces in sexual abuses in Liberia and in Haiti
The next item on the agenda is the debate on the implication of the UN forces in sexual abuses in Liberia and in Haiti .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , why are we talking about the United Nations ?
Because the European Union is the main donor of the funds that make it possible for that wonderful invention to operate .
I have here with me Nirj Deva , who is a fierce advocate of the necessary role that the United Nations must play in the world .
A hundred thousand people are working for the United Nations to maintain peace in the world and practically every single one of them does their work very well , but there have been accusations of , and complaints about , crimes of sexual abuse , child prostitution and paedophilia .
There have been accusations in the Republic of Congo , in Kosovo and now in Liberia and in Haiti , the country from which I have just returned .
Since 1994 , amongst the one hundred thousand personnel deployed as peace-keeping forces , more than three hundred cases of sexual crimes against children , against people with few resources , have been investigated .
As a result of the three hundred and nineteen cases investigated , one hundred and seventy-nine soldiers have been found guilty .
If we are going to maintain peace and if we need the Member States of the United Nations to send personnel , we must do everything we can to ensure that they are going to maintain peace and not to indulge in sexual tourism paid for essentially with Europeans ' money .
This Resolution is therefore intended to praise the role of the United Nations , but also to state that we need the Member States responsible for peace-keeping forces and soldiers to behave in a civil manner that respects human rights .
We must therefore prevent any more rapes of women and children , we must prevent paedophilia and we must stop European money being used , via the United Nations , for the purposes of committing sexual crimes .
author . - ( PT ) It has been well documented that there have been complaints of children being subject to rape and forced into prostitution by UN peacekeeping forces in Haiti and Liberia . This follows on from other similar scandals , including paedophilia perpetrated by UN personnel in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the trafficking of human beings in Kosovo .
These are deeply shocking acts , which we condemn , and we would like measures to be put in place to prevent such acts from happening again .
We are in denial about the fact that these acts of sexual abuse and exploitation and other forms of criminal behaviour committed by UN staff , which violate human rights and which run counter to , and are a betrayal of , the UN 's humanitarian and peacekeeping mission take place .
As the resolution to which we put our name stresses , we know that action has been taken in the form of inquiries and disciplinary measures .
As recent cases show , however , the troops ' countries of origin too must take action to prevent any repetition and to ensure that the outstanding work of the majority is not tainted .
We also call on the UN to take steps to protect vulnerable people such as women , children and refugees in areas in which its troops are operating .
We call on the Commission and the Member States , moreover , also to support initiatives aimed at safeguarding the rights of women in conflict or post-conflict zones and to take economic and social measures to make these women less vulnerable to sexual exploitation .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , in the last century the gravest cause for concern were aggressive superpowers such as Germany under Hitler or the Soviet Union .
Unfortunately , these problems did not end with the turn of the century .
In the 21st century we are still encountering violence and inhuman , humiliating treatment of others .
This is particularly regrettable when the organisations whose duty it is to help nations which have been oppressed and suffered injustices send in peacekeeping personnel who , instead of bringing help , bring more suffering and humiliation .
Such is the situation in Liberia and Haiti at the moment .
Instead of maintaining security , peace and respect for individual rights the peacekeepers have been engaging in the disgraceful practice of sexually abusing women and young girls .
There have even been cases of children being raped and forced into prostitution .
Any kind of sexual abuse and other forms of criminality that are blatant violations and betrayals of peacekeeping and humanitarian missions by UN personnel , and which are infringements of human rights , must be condemned categorically .
The people in question have suffered enough already .
They waited hopefully for salvation , but what did they get instead ?
The same story all over again , except this time round the perpetrators were those who they expected to help them .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , giving the UN the greatest possible support is a strategic priority within the European Union 's foreign policy .
Our Parliament has reiterated this , with particular acknowledgement of actions in the field of conflict prevention and peace missions .
This support was expressed once again by Parliament 's delegation that visited New York a few weeks ago and that held talks with the Secretary-General and the people in charge of peace-keeping operations .
What we have said is consistent with the House 's decision to award the Sakharov Prize to Kofi Annan , for the work that had been done in the very field that we are dealing with here .
The Resolution that we are to approve should therefore be seen within the context of the solidarity that the European Union is expressing with the UN 's difficult work in this field .
It is regrettable and extremely unfortunate for the organisation itself that certain personnel acting in the name of the United Nations have behaved in a criminal fashion , carrying out proven sexual assaults on women and children in countries in which they were carrying out missions .
That kind of behaviour tarnishes the image of the UN , which also faces great pressure from certain people in the world who , taking a unilateralist view of international relations , adopt the opposite view to us and would prefer to see the UN 's role greatly restricted .
While we are condemning this behaviour , therefore , we are also acknowledging that they are exceptional cases and expressing our satisfaction at the fact that it has been the UN itself that has brought them to light .
We must also urge the United Nations to take the greatest possible care in its selection and training of people taking part in these missions , either as agents of the UN or as participants from the Member States or associated NGOs .
For the UN and for those of us who identify with it , it is essential to clear up any doubts over the view we take of the behaviour being condemned , and we all have the responsibility of ensuring that the guilty people do not go unpunished .
( ES ) Mr President , while it is unacceptable that anyone should exploit or abuse women and children , taking advantage of their defencelessness and vulnerability , as we are seeing on a daily basis in Afghanistan or - as has already been mentioned - in the recent cases of Sudan or the Republic of Congo , it is absolutely unforgivable that those responsible for that abuse should also be responsible for protecting the women and children concerned .
This is particularly serious if , to make matters worse , it is United Nations personnel , whose stated role , as has been pointed out , is to protect not just these people 's lives and dignity , but also peace as a concept .
The constant cases of sexual violence , therefore , such as those committed in Haiti or in Liberia by United Nations staff and particularly by soldiers , civilian personnel and police , must not under any circumstances be ignored or go unpunished .
They must be appropriately condemned and penalties applied .
In this regard , it is extremely worrying that the staff expelled from the organisation for having engaged in sexual exploitation or abuse are rarely prosecuted in their countries .
The governments of those countries therefore have a responsibility , and it is therefore also necessary that impunity in relation to incidents of this kind should not be accepted under any circumstances .
That requires that we move towards the adoption of an international treaty which , being of a binding nature and involving penalties , can clearly detect , and take action in relation to , practices of this kind when they take place .
Any kind of flexibility in this regard would be entirely unacceptable .
I believe it necessary , firstly , for the fundamental and classic principle of zero tolerance to be properly applied , as the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Kofi Annan , has said on several occasions .
Secondly , the issue must also be tackled from the point of view of the vulnerability suffered by women in post-war conflict situations .
It is therefore important that aid programmes should prioritise the empowerment of women so that they themselves can defend themselves in these situations and be less vulnerable than they are at the moment .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the UN is an organisation which enjoys a high degree of credibility worldwide on the subject of maintaining peace .
It is extremely important that this good reputation is preserved .
If all we receive is shocking reports of rape and sexual abuse , we must also assume , unfortunately , that a high number of incidents have gone unreported , also in view of the fact that reports are circulating of a culture of silence within the UN missions themselves .
I am convinced that only a strategy of zero tolerance will succeed .
This means that the commanders on site must be able to send the persons in question home immediately , in which connection the country responsible for sending the individual in question is under an obligation to prosecute said party at home under criminal and disciplinary law .
For the individual soldiers , many of whom are from developing countries , such deployment is also of financial interest .
If it gets about that examples are actually to be made by sending people home , meaning that money is no longer paid , this would presumably be the most effective way of reducing such incidents in future .
However , it must also be made clear that superiors who tolerate such conduct will no longer be available for deployments of this nature in future .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the references to the sexual abuse of children in Haiti and Liberia by UN personnel is just the most recent in a long list of similar scandals .
These human rights violations contrast starkly with the humanitarian task of the United Nations to preserve peace .
In many parts of the world , UN troops assist in overseeing the transitions from dictatorships to democracies and transformation processes .
Time and again , however , individual UN soldiers have committed serious misdemeanours , damaging the reputation of the peacekeepers .
Since troop training and discipline is ultimately also the responsibility of the Member States , we call on those countries which provide UN contingents to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the parties accused .
We call on the United Nations to create a working environment in which the culture of silence does not stand a chance , for this is inconsistent with the zero tolerance policy of the United Nations .
It should not be the case that sexual abuse goes unreported for fear of reprisals .
Reference has also already been made today to the importance of strengthening the role of women .
In connection with this , I would like to appeal to the Council , the Commission and also to the UN , that Resolution 1325 , which was adopted by the UN Security Council in 2000 , be implemented in practice .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , there is now ample evidence that a number of United Nations peacekeepers have , in recent years , been involved in hideous crimes against the vulnerable civilian populations they are supposed to protect .
These crimes include such abominable acts as rape and sexual exploitation of children .
In considering the subject , there are three aspects that are extremely worrisome and disconcerting .
First , it is almost certain that the reported and investigated cases are only the tip of the iceberg .
Some claim that , for every case investigated , there are ten that will never come to light .
Second , in most instances a cover-up operation is put in motion , not just by the criminals involved , but also by their superiors in command - the comradeship-in-arms of soldiers becoming the conspiracy and concealment of criminals .
In any event , carrying out a proper investigation under the circumstances involved is not just difficult , but , in most cases , it is impossible .
Of relevance here is the fact that jurisdiction over UN soldiers lies with the country of origin of the individuals involved .
Such a jurisdiction process is strewn with procedural and legal problems and , in effect , provides UN soldiers with immunity from prosecution .
Third , in most cases investigated and found to be substantiated , the guilty get away with minimal punishment .
Ordinarily , a paedophiliac rapist would get life imprisonment in most countries , but a UN paedophiliac rapist would probably merely be disciplined , or would just be excluded from again being hired by UN missions .
This shameful , despicable and abhorrent criminal activity by UN personnel cannot go unpunished , and neither can the ultimate political responsibility of the UN hierarchy be swept under the carpet .
The outgoing UN Secretary-General , Mr Kofi Annan , has a lot of explaining to do in this respect .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the present debate on breaches of human rights is particularly shocking and repulsive as it relates to human trafficking and sexual abuse against children in Liberia , Haiti , Congo and elsewhere by the staff of humanitarian missions who are supposed to provide help and care to the victims of starvation and armed conflict and ensure their security , protection and nourishment .
Exploitation , sexual abuse , forced prostitution and trading in starving children show what degradation and moral depths people can sink to when they are driven by their urges and ignore moral principles .
Even if only a handful of individuals are guilty of such vile and shocking practices , it is the others , the thousands of dedicated mission personnel , who bear the burden of suspicion , and this leads to a loss of hope .
That is why we cannot remain silent and must demand that the guilty be punished , and that the personnel of humanitarian missions be carefully selected and screened .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to highlight three issues .
Firstly , the shock and horror that resulted form the reports of UN forces being implicated in sexual abuse in Liberia and Haiti make it clear that these questions must be fully cleared up by the structures of the UN , and that the individuals guilty of these crimes must be brought to justice and punished .
The second point is what Miguel Angel Martínez has already spoken about , which is the role of UN peacekeeping forces in the modern world , and the importance which the European Union attaches to these forces .
The third point is the need for special training for UN peacekeeping forces in human rights , which should include an element of gender relations .
I would also like to underline that there should be a proportionate participation by women in UN peacekeeping missions .
These actions could in future become a guarantee that crimes of this type are never repeated .
Mr President , after East Timor , Somalia , Kosovo and Congo , can we really see what is happening in Haiti and Liberia as exceptional ?
Wherever the UN goes it seems that sexual abuse occurs against the civilians they are supposed to protect .
Kofi Annan has been the Secretary-General of the UN and its peacekeeping forces for many years while this abuse by UN personnel , for whom he bears responsibility , has been taking place .
He has done nothing about it .
Instead , he allows it to be covered up , as an internal UN report on sexual abuse in East Timor demonstrates .
Though sexual abuse has been a problem there since the arrival of the UN in 1999 , not one UN staff contractor or soldier has been brought to justice , even when it involved East Timorese children .
The Pope and the Vatican are held responsible for sexual abuse by priests , so why does the same principle not apply to Kofi Annan and the UN ?
Mr Annan will retire soon to great honours and a generous pension .
I hope his successor will take sexual abuse seriously .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it goes without saying that the Commission shares Parliament 's indignation and concern at this unacceptable and intolerable behaviour by soldiers engaged in peacekeeping operations .
As such , of course , this question is not strictly speaking within the Commission 's competence .
It is , however , obvious that the exploitation and sexual abuse of which some of the Blue Berets have been guilty can only be of very serious concern to us .
These incidents have not only sapped the confidence of the local populations , who are already traumatised and impoverished , but they are also in breach of the obligation of care incumbent on all peacekeeping personnel .
The Commission therefore fully supports the measures taken by the UN as part of its policy of zero tolerance towards such acts of exploitation and sexual abuse .
Obviously , the Commission joins the European Parliament in encouraging the UN to quickly take the severest action in this matter .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place presently , following this afternoon 's debates .
3 .
Myanmar ( Burma )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions concerning Burma .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , 10 December 2006 was International Human Rights Day .
In many countries , this was not a holiday but a day for mourning .
This is the case in Burma , for instance , where brutal attacks , killings and slave labour are the order of the day .
Hundreds of thousands of people have been driven away or have fled in the face of rioting .
For the first time in 18 years , there were changes in the government with a change of personnel in the armed forces .
However , the Junta chief , General Than Shwe , remained , along with his deputy , Maung Aye .
The EU established that gross human rights violations are still taking place .
Just recently , Burmese people were forced to construct police stations and buildings for the military against their will .
Workers had to walk like human tracker dogs through minefields .
This perfidious slave labour should not be tolerated .
The International Red Cross also experienced a worsening of the situation .
It was prohibited from carrying out further work .
It had to withdraw from its regional offices , leaving the population without medical supplies .
Essentially , aid for the Burmese people must come from outside , but this aid must reach the people directly , without falling into the hands of the powers that be .
In Burma , around 30 % of the children are malnourished whilst at the same time , the country is the second largest opium producer .
Many thousands are political prisoners and the Sakharov prize winner , Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , has been under house arrest for the last 16 years .
Large ethnic groups have been oppressed and any opposition nipped in the bud .
We call on China and other countries to finally discontinue aid for the military Junta and to participate in international measures designed to bring about positive changes in Burma .
Action taken by the ASEAN countries against those in power is an important and necessary step .
Burma needs a road map to democracy in order to institutionalise human rights and to adopt a convention which introduces steps for the introduction of democracy .
Commissioner , the EU must become much more active and perhaps even impose sanctions to bring the violence to an end .

author . - ( NL ) Mr President , countries governed by leaders whose power is derived , not from their electorate , but from their machinery of violence can be extremely attractive to foreign investors , who capitalise on low wages , bad working conditions and a population that has no scope for protesting .
Moreover , free movements that want to protect nature and the environment from short-sighted decisions aimed at increasing short-term industrial profits have no means of functioning there .
If their main goal is to keep the costs of their companies down and to derive benefit from this within the international market , then Burma has for many years been the right place for them to be , and it was international support from the likes of them that enabled the military regime to weather domestic protests in its early years .
Since a number of major companies withdrew from Burma under pressure from protests in their home lands , things have been quiet ; the regime accepts the low standard of living and the criticism from outside as inevitable , without making any changes .
Election results are still ignored ; the leader of the opposition is still in jail , and minority peoples are oppressed and driven away , as they have always been .
International aid organisations are being sabotaged .
This regime cannot even attract a political following for itself and now serves no purpose other than its own preservation .
This regime in Burma will be able to survive unnecessarily long if its neighbouring countries do not isolate it , if the arms supplies are not stopped and if the European Union does not emphatically demand that economic sanctions be adhered to .
Since the resolution supports the measures which my group has been demanding for years , we are happy to support it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I spoke here on the situation in Burma a little over a year ago .
Even then , the words repression , ruling military junta and disregard for human rights occurred frequently in what I had to say .
Sadly , the situation has not changed .
Burma is still making no effort to get power exercised more democratically .
Moreover , the State Peace and Development Council ( SPDC ) has closed several International Red Cross offices , making that organisation 's humanitarian work impossible .
The authorities there are preventing non-governmental organisations from working properly , causing many of them to leave .
We are also unable to understand why India is providing military aid .
Does that country not proclaim itself to be the world 's largest democracy ?
It is utter nonsense and we condemn it .
India cannot be unaware that such military aid will be used to repress ethnic groups and political opponents .
I think the United Nations Security Council should take strong measures against Burma , condemning this illegitimate regime and calling for the restoration of democracy .
I would also like to underline my confidence in the positive influence the other ASEAN countries may have : in seeking greater integration they are in my opinion playing a not insignificant role in relation to human rights .
I wish that China and India would play a similar role in future so that the Burmese regime will move towards democracy .
author . - Mr President , Commissioner , in recent years Burma has regularly been on the EU 's human rights agenda .
For good reason , too , since the Burmese authorities continue to subject their citizens to gross human rights violations , including forced labour , persecution of political opponents and forced relocation .
A glaring example of the anachronistically deficient attitude exhibited by the profoundly irrational Burmese military regime is the fact that the National League for Democracy ( NLD ) leader , Nobel Peace Prize laureate and Sakharov Prize winner , Aung San Suu Kyi , has been under house arrest for the last ten years , despite an overwhelming international outcry .
While the Burmese population suffers exhaustively through malnutrition and disease , the Burmese Government has thought it wise to embark on persecution of Red Cross representatives across the country .
In considering how to make such a totalitarian governing body understand our resolve to protect the human rights of the Burmese people , we are of the opinion that targeted sanctions , focused on economic income revenue to the junta , must be implemented .
Furthermore , we call upon countries that continue to supply Burma with weapons to cease to do so .
Additionally , we expect the UN Security Council to adopt a binding strict resolution on Burma .
We hope that , eventually , the blinded military dictators of Burma will finally see the light of sense and democracy and hand over power to a civilian-elected government .
author . - Mr President , those of us active in these human rights debates will recognise the subject of this one with depressing familiarity .
The situation in Burma is getting worse not better , as colleagues have said , and I echo everything that has been said thus far .
In our view this motion could have been better .
However , there is one provision I would highlight and that is the paragraph recognising that the sanctions against the regime in force are not hitting the target and on occasion not being observed at all .
The Council must ensure that all our Member States are observing the sanctions we have agreed and , if not , name and shame those falling down .
We must put pressure on our international partners to put pressure on the Burmese Government itself .
Paragraph 9 states that we want to see the sanctions widened , but we must always target them against the specific individuals in the regime and avoid doing harm to the people of Burma , because the suffering of the people must be our main concern , not our distaste for the democratic standards of the regime itself .
That is where this motion really could be better .
We wanted to see an explicit recognition of the 8 December briefing by the International Crisis Group and I shall quote the opening line : ' With growing signs of a humanitarian crisis in-the-making in Myanmar , the international community needs to get beyond debates about the country 's highly repressive political system . '
Caught in the middle of the grand geopolitics along with the people of Burma are the NGOs active on the ground trying to ameliorate the situation for the citizens of that unhappy country .
We must in all our efforts remember that we must not undermine their independence , their efforts or ability to help the people .
The recent closure of five Red Cross centres , an organisation that prides itself on its impartiality and integrity , is a desperate act by the Burmese Government , but one that was carried out because of a suspicion that the NGOs are too close to western policy .
We must in all our actions on this ensure that we do not cut down their scope for manoeuvre .
Therefore , in welcoming and supporting this resolution , my Group would also sound a note of caution that the people on the ground trying to help those most affected by the situation must not have their freedom of movement curtailed by our actions .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , a brutal , totalitarian military dictatorship , corrupt rulers , the opium trade , expulsions ( at the moment , we have over half a million internal exiles ) and the suppression of many peoples , not least the Karen .
All this characterises the sad situation which has existed in Burma for more than 40 years .
There are , however , two new developments to which we must turn our attention .
Firstly , the ASEAN countries have finally decided on following a harder line , which we can only encourage and support .
At last , the ASEAN countries are fulfilling their obligations and starting to exert pressure on Burma .
Secondly , it is regrettable that Indians have allowed themselves to become more and more entangled in bad company with these military rulers .
We are appealing to the world 's largest democracy , namely India , to take its democratic responsibility seriously and , together with ASEAN and the European Union , to support democracy and rule of law in Burma and not become chums with one of the world 's most evil regimes .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , a year and a half has passed since the latest resolution of the European Parliament condemning the infringement of human rights in Myanmar .
Unfortunately nothing has changed since then .
The military regime that has ruled the country for forty years openly ignores the recommendations of the international community .
Opposition politicians are imprisoned and tortured .
Forced labour and the use of child soldiers are part of daily life .
The complete collapse of the education and health system is cause for concern .
The death rates for malaria , TB and AIDS is rocketing , while the regime bans the activities of non-governmental organisations and has closed the headquarters of the International Red Cross .
Also worthy of condemnation are the acts of aggression and forced displacement of ethnic minorities that have affected more than eighty thousand people this year alone .
If we do not provide financial assistance , pro-democracy and human rights organisations in Myanmar will be condemned to failure .
At the moment it seems that the only way to force the regime in Myanmar to introduce changes in favour of democracy are economic sanctions backed by a UN Security Council resolution .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , like the other European institutions and like your Parliament , the Commission is very concerned at the situation in Burma .
It is exactly 15 years since the European Parliament awarded Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi the Sakharov Prize .
We deplore the fact that the political process in that country has been completely paralysed since then .
It is true that , like other developing countries , the Burmese authorities are faced with considerable challenges - guaranteeing national unity , political stability , speeding up the country 's economic and social development - but that does not prevent the establishment of a legitimate civilian government .
The present government has said many times that the military authority would be replaced by a legitimate , elected regime based on the road map for Burma , but we are still at the stage of promises .
It is for all of us , observers and international backers , inconceivable that a transition to a legitimate and democratically elected regime should take place without dialogue .
Such a dialogue must bring together government and political players .
It must include Burma 's many ethnic minorities and bring an