Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 27 September 2007 .
Tribute

Ladies and gentlemen , I have the sad duty of informing you of the deaths of a fellow Member and a former fellow Member .
Our fellow Member Fausto Correia died yesterday morning .
He was born on 29 October 1951 in Coimbra and was only 55 years old .
He leaves a wife and three sons .
An illustrious career as a barrister , journalist and then a politician in Portugal followed after he finished law school at university in his home town of Coimbra .
He was for a long time a Member of the Portuguese Parliament as well as Minster of State under Prime Minister António Guterres .
He had been a Member of the European Parliament since 2004 .
Fausto Correia was and remains famous and well-loved in Portugal for his unremitting , life-long mission to establish democracy and his dedication to the core values of fraternity and neighbourliness .
Fausto Correia will be sorely missed by his family , his friends and by us , his fellow Members .
A book of condolences for messages of sympathy from Members and staff of the European Parliament will be open during this week 's sitting on Wednesday and Thursday at the front of the Chamber .
It is with great sadness that we learnt of the death of our former fellow Member Christian de la Malène , who was a Member of the European Parliament on two occasions - from 1959 to 1961 and from 1962 to 1994 .
Christian de la Malène , who was also a former Minister and Senator under President De Gaulle , died on 26 September at the age of 86 .
As a former Chairman of the Group of European Progressive Democrats and the Group of the European Renewal and Democratic Alliance , Christian de la Malène was a convinced European in heart and mind .
He dedicated his long life to a strong and democratic Europe , and a political community .
Christian de la Malène was a colleague and friend who will be remembered for his humanism and his political commitment .
On this note we wish to commemorate him in gratitude .
A moment 's silence , please , in remembrance of our deceased colleague .
( The assembly rose and observed one minute 's silence ) .
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , your Excellencies , ladies and gentlemen .
Today is not just the International Day against the Death Penalty .
The Council of Europe , with its 47 Member States , and with the support of the European Parliament and the European Commission , has also declared 10 October the European Day against the Death Penalty .
We are very happy that the nurses from Bulgaria and the doctors who escaped the death penalty in Libya a short time ago are with us on this day .
( Sustained applause )
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome very warmly on behalf of the entire House the nurses , Nasya Nenova , Kristiyana Valcheva , Snezhana Dimitrova , Valya Chervenyashka , Valya Siropulo , and the doctors , Ashraf Ahmed Gomma El Hagous and Zdravko Gueorguiev .
Since February 1999 they were forced to spend eight years in detention while awaiting trial in Libya , falsely accused of having deliberately infected hundreds of Libyan children with HIV .
We are opposed to the death penalty .
In the past we have therefore repeatedly called upon the Libyan authorities to release the Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctors .
The death penalty is a severe violation of human rights and first and foremost the right to life .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would therefore like to emphasise our unflinching commitment here to the campaign against the death penalty .
We set great store by it in relations with our neighbours and partners throughout the world .
We thank those states which have just recently abolished the death penalty , particularly Rwanda .
This example shows that even states whose citizens have suffered the most appalling crimes have dispensed with the death penalty as a means of justice .
Another opportunity for promoting the worldwide abolition of the death penalty is the Olympic Games , taking place in Beijing this coming year .
They provide an opportunity to break through the walls of silence , with which China surrounds the exercise of the death penalty .
The European Union has submitted a draft resolution on the death penalty to the United Nations General Assembly .
This initiative , praised on numerous occasions by the European Parliament , is an important step towards the abolition of the death penalty and we appeal in this respect to the Portuguese Presidency of the Council to promote this subject actively at the United Nations in New York .
The European Parliament has held many debates on this issue and only this year adopted three resolutions on the death penalty .
There has been such intensive consultation in the European Parliament on this subject as on no other issue .
We resolutely reject the death penalty , in whatever form and on whatever grounds .
The Member States of the European Union have , on the basis of our common values , succeeded in becoming a community without any death penalty .
The commitment to this is also enshrined in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Once the Charter becomes legally binding under the Reform Treaty , we will even be able to say that the death penalty has been abolished in the European Union at all levels .
I am happy and grateful that no Member State of the European Union has questioned the abolition of the death penalty in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights or has ever seriously contemplated re-introducing it .
The European Union , as a global player , is also thereby able to point to this extraordinary achievement in the area of human rights and defend it .
In remembrance of the victims , I would ask you now to observe a minute 's silence .
Today , on the European and International Day against the Death Penalty , we , the European Parliament , ask all those states that continue to carry out death sentences to follow our example and abolish the death penalty .
The European Union is ready and willing to offer you its help in doing so .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make an announcement and ask for your support .
As you know , our group had decided to hold an Enlarged Bureau meeting in Moscow to discuss the various problems connected with relations between Russia and the European Union with different Russian players - from the government as well as from the opposition .
Unfortunately we discovered that the Russian Government would not be issuing visas to our colleagues and this meeting was not therefore able to take place .
This happened a week after the Subcommittee on Human Rights wanted to hold a similar meeting in Moscow and had likewise not received any visas and therefore this meeting could not take place either .
We find it intolerable that a government described by some Heads of State as a flawless democracy does not allow us to organise a flawless democratic event there in Moscow .
We would ask Parliament to review this and you , Mr President , to support this with a written declaration both to the local ambassadors and to the Russian Government .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Mr Cohn-Bendit .
Out of a sense of conviction and duty I will respond to what you have requested .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
' Dys 'crimination and social exclusion affecting children with ' dys 'abilities ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Agenda : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Written declarations ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Preparation of the informal summit of heads of state and government ( Lisbon , 18 / 19 October 2007 )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the preparation of the informal summit of heads of state and government in Lisbon on 18 / 19 October 2007 .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , and Mr President , you will understand that , before I refer specifically to the item on the agenda which brought me here today , I should like , on behalf of the Portuguese Government and the Portuguese Presidency of the Council , to thank you for such a warm and friendly tribute - so well deserved in my opinion - which you paid upon the such unexpected and sad loss of my fellow countryman and Member of this Parliament , Dr Fausto Correia .

Portugal was shocked at the news because it was news on the loss of someone who was a truly good man and who was , for all of us , an example in the fight for human dignity and for the values we believe in : the values of the rule of law and respect for human rights .
He is certainly a great loss ; we should just try , if we can , to follow his example and I am sincerely grateful for the tribute this Parliament has paid to him , which the Portuguese Government of course reiterates .
( Applause )
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , last year I spoke to Parliament about what the Commission saw as the motor of progress in today 's European Union and we outlined the so-called ' twin-track ' approach - an activist policy agenda and an ambitious approach to the Treaty reform were goals that supported each other .
There was a lot of consensus in that debate , and I think there were three reasons for that .
First of all , it reflects a degree of maturity in the European Union , because Europe today touches on so many areas of people 's lives , and this has created expectations .
Retreating into a lowest-common-denominator Europe would be a big mistake .
Second , I think that the challenge of communicating Europe with and to our citizens demanded a fresh approach , with a more profound awareness of how Europe relates to their social needs , their economic aspirations and their underlying values .
Finally , this new approach was based not just on political instinct : it was grounded in the work launched by the Commission in its Plan ' D ' for Democracy , Dialogue and Debate , in which so many Members of this Parliament took such an active part .
The informal European Council next week will be the twin-track approach in action .
On the one hand , we should see the heads of state and government concluding the Intergovernmental Conference ( IGC ) and agreeing a new Reform Treaty . On the other , the Presidency has signalled its intention to deepen the debate on how Europe responds to globalisation .
So , to start with the Reform Treaty : we now have a text in front of us and this is a major achievement .
I want to pay tribute to the work of the Portuguese Presidency , as we have to the German presidency , for the way they have moved the process forward calmly and steadily , showing great commitment .
Like my colleague from the Presidency , I also want to pay tribute to Parliament for its constructive role in this last phase .

We have worked well together , and , thanks to Mr Brok , Mr Barón Crespo and Mr Duff , we have a better Treaty , in terms of its provisions on rights and citizenship .
We will also be giving the Charter of Fundamental Rights full status through a formal proclamation .
Remember how many said that an EU of 27 would never be able to agree a treaty text again .
We are on the verge of proving them wrong yet again .
The determination of all of us to reach agreement also points to a Europe with plenty of ideas for the future .
If we agree a deal next week , the agreement to stick closely to the mandate will have been vindicated .
We now have to carry this past the final hurdles .
I am sure that the heads of state and government will be fully aware that an atmosphere of recrimination and dispute at Lisbon would do nothing to help the process of ratification .
Of course , we would have liked to avoid opt-outs , but , if that was the price of making progress with an ambitious Reform Treaty , we have to accept it .
It is the nature of compromise and negotiation .
I would also like to thank Parliament for having responded rapidly and efficiently to the invitation of the European Council to come up with proposals for its future composition .
This is a difficult and sensitive issue for all of you , as it is for Member States , and I would emphasise the need for agreement by both Parliament and the Council .
One last word on the Treaty : political agreement by the European Council is an important step , but , as we all know , it is not the end of the story .
I hope we will be able to work together during the ratification process , seeing it as an opportunity to communicate , to explain and to listen about the European Union .
Where possible , we should coordinate , as the Commission proposed last week in a new paper entitled ' Communicating Europe in Partnership ' .
We also need a treaty that is as accessible and understandable as possible , with a consolidated text that should be made available as soon as possible after the conclusion of the IGC .
During this ratification process , leading up to the European Parliament elections in 2009 , the delivery of our policy agenda for Europeans will be equally important in setting the mood , and next week , thanks to the Presidency , we will have a debate on Europe and globalisation .
This is very timely : every year it becomes more and more clear that globalisation is central to the concerns of this generation of Europeans .
It touches every citizen in one way or another : the goods and services we buy , the television we watch , the energy we use and the work we do .
The European Union has been successfully developing a policy which recognises the fundamental link between economic success and social security .
But globalisation is not static , as this summer 's turbulence in the financial markets showed all too clearly .
We need to adapt constantly to changing circumstances .
Last week , as Mr Lobo Antunes has mentioned , the Commission adopted a paper for this debate that will also set the scene for proposals later this year on reviewing the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs .
It argues that Europe must shape up for globalisation in order to deal successfully with the pressure it puts on our economies , our institutions and our citizens , but also to seize the opportunities for greater prosperity , for lifting people out of poverty , for new markets for our products , for closer cooperation and for more sharing of values .
The paper also states very clearly that globalisation is not some irresistible external force of nature , with the EU as a passive bystander .
We can shape globalisation and shape it , to some extent , in our own image .
That is our task : to be confident enough about our values , our vision and the tools at our disposal to ensure that Europe succeeds in the age of globalisation .
It also rejects protectionism .
Yes to protecting our citizens , but no to protectionism that can only impoverish them .
It also serves notice on our partners : we will not be a soft touch ; we will defend the European interest .
That means a level playing field ; it means ensuring that openness is a two-way street ; it means making clear that we will not water down our high standards of health , safety , environmental and consumer protection .
The paper is equally uncompromising when it comes to our values .
We can prosper in the age of globalisation , but we will want to do it our own way .
Our growth will have to be sustainable .
We have set ambitious targets for cutting greenhouse gas emissions and using renewable energy sources , and we will meet them .
The meeting will provide an important opportunity to restate Europe 's leadership role in the run-up to Bali .
We will use our social models to spread the benefits of globalisation throughout our society .
They are among our biggest assets .
They will help our citizens to adapt and equip them for dealing successfully with rapid change .
The tripartite social summit just before the informal European Council will provide an excellent opportunity to set the scene .
It is clear that , today , the European Union offers a route for Europeans to make the most of globalisation , to provide a continental context that individual countries cannot match .
To deliver this European interest , we have a ready-made tool in the shape of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs .
Our economic analysis shows that the Lisbon Strategy is beginning to deliver .
The paper points to a number of policy areas that deserve even greater attention during the next three-year cycle up to 2010 : education and flexicurity , including more attention to active inclusion policies and adequate social protection ; a fifth freedom for ideas and researchers ; eco-innovation ; a small business act for Europe to help millions of small companies across the EU to grow and create more jobs .
None of this is easy , but it is achievable .
I know that this Parliament will remain intimately involved in following the progress of the Lisbon Strategy at both EU and national level .
Your views on the points sketched out here will be an essential input for the package , which we will adopt in December .
The informal European Council is an important rendezvous at an important time .
Let us use the opportunity to show Europeans that the European Union is looking ahead , shaping its policies to meet tomorrow 's challenges and equipping itself with the right tools .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Vice-President , fellow Members , we have here an example of good cooperation between two Council Presidencies : the German Council Presidency , which prepared a mandate that has now turned out to be extremely stable , far-reaching and radical as it has been implemented by the Portuguese Council Presidency .
The fact that after work by the legal experts , we are now faced with the situation in which the subjects are clear and definable and this success will perhaps continue this coming Monday at the meeting of the Foreign Ministers , shows that there is a really good chance here that the Reform Treaty will be in the bag on Thursday of next week .
The three representatives have decided to support this mandate .
Not because our dreams will come true with this mandate , but because it is the best that can be achieved as matters stand , with a view to attaining greater democracy and greater capacity to act . For an enlarged Union 's capacity to act and greater capacity to act in line with the new challenges we have in today 's world , from energy security , terrorism , foreign and security policy as a whole , globalisation , organised crime to climate change and much more .
This success is because we have improved decision-making opportunities in Council , new competences have been added in the energy security sector and in the area of legal and domestic policy , on which my colleagues will be speaking further , we have the solution of the third pillar .
Here the European Parliament - and this is the second gain - becomes a co-decision-maker on these issues , in order that in future , under this Treaty , the European Parliament will have equal power of co-decision in 95 % of cases of legislation , even in the area of agricultural policy and the budget as a whole .
It is often forgotten that all this is included in this package .
This means the democratic deficit which the European Union has had to date is crucially being closed .
That is substantial progress !
Other countries having difficulties have had opportunities to adjust imbalances within the scope of this mandate and in negotiations on the basis of an opt-out that has clear deadlines , as a result of which growth as a whole will not be constrained , but their opportunities stemming from common law and so on will be maintained .
Its ' red lines ' are consequently guaranteed , which should also facilitate the ratification process without referendum , if I have correctly understood the relevant undertakings or statements given during the negotiations .
As the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights becomes legally binding , this Union is becoming a community of values , even with the opt-out , which anyone may have .
However , this does not apply to European decisions , because European legislation is made collectively .
All that remains is the issue of application in individual Member States , in terms of the rights of the courts and citizens and we need to see that we are moving into new dimensions here too , with the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and the creation of a legal personality .
The European Union , however , needs to consider a few more items here .
Item 1 : Article 24 of the mandate - data protection in external relations - must in my view be re-formulated , or it must be specified by a declaration that general issues of data protection - such as passenger name records - are not affected .
There must be further clarification on this .
Data protection - citizens ' data should not be passed on without judicial review and parliamentary involvement .
I regard this as crucial .
( Applause )
The second item concerns transitional arrangements .
I would also like to ask the Council and the Commission for support and this is in the Commission 's interest .
When the Treaty enters into force on 1 January 2009 , it cannot be that in a ' light ' procedure the Foreign Minister , whom we are now no longer allowed to call this , so the High Representative , is appointed by Council .
We should like all this to be resolved in one package in 2009 , having due regard to the rights of the European Parliament .
The High Representative is also Vice-President of the Commission and must be subject to everything here .
There was also the Commission 's interest here : a future Commission President must have a voice in selecting the High Representative , who is Vice-President at the same time .
For this reason the High Representative cannot enter office until the European Parliament has elected the Commission President .
We must keep to this sequential order if democratic rights are not to be undermined here and power imbalances are not to occur .
We have to add a few more finishing touches here in the next few days .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Elmar Brok .
It would have indeed surprised me if you had taken nine minutes .
The next speaker is the representative in the Intergovernmental Conference , Enrique Barón Crespo .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the representatives of the European Parliament speak a variety of languages and we belong to different groups , but we are united in the same desire , to move the European Union forward by completing the Lisbon Treaty , a treaty that includes legislative codecision , the unique personality of the Union , progress in the communitarisation of internal and justice policy and external policy , and participation by national parliaments .
We want greater democracy and greater efficiency .
We regret the fact that there is not more transparency , but this is part of the methods of the Intergovernmental Conference .
I have to say that the lawyers - particularly those from Parliament - have enabled us to interpret the hieroglyphics that this exercise has become in a positive way .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council to confirm to Parliament something that I understand to be a very clear commitment .
The citizens , who were very unfairly relegated to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , have returned to the Treaty on European Union with the wording that it had had since the Maastricht Treaty .
We see this as fundamental , as representatives of the citizens .
I must acknowledge that , in an unusual gesture of political clarity , the President-in-Office of the Council himself told us that this was impossible , but it has been achieved : the first important achievement .
The second one is the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is the symbol of the identity of European citizens .
Now it is not a declaration - number 11 ; neither is it a protocol : it is ' the Charter ' , which we will vote on here next month , formally , with the Presidents of the three Community institutions , before starting the ratification process .
The Charter will be legally binding , and I say this because I believe that it is important for it to be recorded today , because I think that these are absolutely essential conditions for the European Parliament , sine qua non conditions for supporting this treaty .
There are also other elements on which we think progress can be made .
My fellow Member Elmar Brok mentioned the subject of data protection , which is a sensitive subject if ever there was one .
There are some other elements that are very important for us .
One of them is the dialogue between the social partners - which was unfairly relegated to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union - and another important matter that we believe we are helping with through our support for resolution of confidence problems is to provide security through a declaration , like the Ioannina Compromise , which already exists , but should not go any further .
We do not think it makes any sense in a Treaty on a Union that functions by majority , and qualified majority , to introduce elements of unanimity that would absolutely destroy the process .
I mentioned in Viana do Castelo , as the President will recall , that it makes sense having the atomic bomb if it is not used .
If it is used , it destroys everything .
And I think that this is an important warning .
Mr President , there is a point that is important to Parliament , and I think that I am speaking on behalf of the majority of Parliament , and the majority of the Member States , and very clearly on behalf of those that ratified the Constitutional Treaty , which we sacrificed in order to achieve unanimity , and on this occasion it is very important for us all to work together in mutual loyalty and solidarity in order to achieve ratification . If not , we would find ourselves in very difficult circumstances .
I think that we all need to remain faithful to the commitment that we have made .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
rapporteur . - Mr President , like my colleagues , I agree that a political agreement is probable at the IGC in Lisbon .
But the thing that concerns us still , of course , is the quality of the agreement .
I have to express concern , at the present stage of the IGC , that we are seeing the emergence of a self-service Europe propelled principally by the British demands for the opt-outs in the field of justice and interior affairs and fundamental rights .
Clearly there has to be a British domestic debate about why British citizens ought to be excluded from the benefits of integration inside all these important fields , but the British should also explain themselves more fully to the IGC .
What is it , precisely , that they are seeking to achieve with all these opt-outs ?
Can we be truly satisfied that the arrangements that are negotiated for the management of this pick-and-choose approach will stand up in practice and ensure that common policies in the field of freedom , security and justice will still enjoy proper commonality and the full resources and instruments to carry them out ?
Surely the UK and Polish opt-out on the Charter risks subverting the decision to make it binding for everyone else .
I hope that the IGC can be able to examine the question with sufficient care .
Would the Presidency press the British to support the proposal from the Parliament for an escape clause from their unfortunate protocol on the Charter ?
The same applies to Ioannina : the Presidency and the Commission should assure us this afternoon that they will not concede to the unreasonable demands to upgrade the Ioannina Clause from secondary to primary law .
Ioannina is the historical descendant of the Luxembourg Compromise ; the Luxembourg Compromise was a gentleman 's agreement and so it should remain when included alongside the Treaty as a decision of the Council .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I would like to thank Mrs Wallström and Mr Lobo Antunes for their speeches .

The period of reflection and debate to decide the future governance of the EU of 27 is coming to an end .
Have we gained in maturity ?
Are we ready to switch from discussion to action ?
In June , Mrs Merkel demonstrated a combination of courage , responsibility and political will .
Far from skirting around divisive subjects , we managed to reduce our differences .
The way was finally opened for the European Union to equip itself with the tools necessary to function more effectively .
Three months have gone by and the Portuguese Presidency has kept us on course .
If the roadmap fixed in June is respected to the end , until the European Council in Lisbon , the Portuguese Presidency will be able to secure agreement on the reform of our treaties .
Here I salute the determination of the Portuguese Presidency during the work of the Intergovernmental Conference .

For the European Parliament , and in the opinion of our fellow members Messrs Brok , Barón Crespo and Duff , whom I would like to thank most warmly , the assessment of the IGC is in line with expectations and the agenda set by the heads of state and government has , generally speaking , been respected .
Ladies and gentlemen , though we are prepared to make do with a balanced compromise , let us not forget that it is by default .
Personally , I think it is more worthwhile to highlight the reasons why we support the draft Treaty .
Firstly , we believe that only a united , strong and effective Europe can influence the affairs of a world which is moving so fast , changing , and becoming complex and unstable .
If we support the draft Treaty , it is also because an effective EU of 27 cannot build on the rules of the Treaty of Nice .
Furthermore , faced with the misgivings expressed by European citizens , we have demanded greater democracy and transparency .
We are in favour of a clear division of competences , in favour of increased participation by our fellow citizens in the process of building the EU and in favour of an active role and strong contribution by the national parliaments .
Treaty reform is the correct response to citizens ' expectations .
The revised Treaty is a means , not an end in itself .
The form it takes and its name are unimportant .
What counts is its substance and the progress it enshrines for European citizens .
We , the members of the PPE-DE Group , do not want a European superstate .
We only want effectiveness , democracy , transparency and respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
We are demanding effective European institutions capable of making decisions , and as long as national opt-outs are a frequent reality , it is up to us to limit their negative effects to prevent Europe from being paralysed .
Any attempts to block the EU 's decision-making process should be ruled out .
Citizens expect Europe to act where it can make a difference : on climate , energy , immigration , innovation , terrorism .
My hope and wish is that this Treaty will enable us to do that , and we will support it .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my sincere thanks to Parliament 's representatives at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Our fellow Members Enrique Barón Crespo , Elmar Brok and Andrew Duff have represented the interests of the European Parliament superbly .
For this I would like to express sincere thanks on behalf of our group .
( Applause )
We have rightly heard from our fellow Member , Mr Daul , that the Portuguese Presidency now has it in hand to bring to a close the necessary work following the abortive attempt at a European Constitution , namely submission of a reworked and revised Treaty , agreeing on the key elements of the reform imperatives among 27 countries in the EU , safeguarding the construction of a united Europe legally and politically at an Intergovernmental Conference now coming to an end , rounding things off at a summit in Lisbon and then bringing them into the intrinsically crucial phase , ratification of this revised Treaty in 27 Member States under the specific legal and constitutional conditions of each country .
I therefore specifically want to emphasise the fact that we can be optimistic about Lisbon .
If we differentiate between what has been achieved at the summit here in Brussels under the German Council Presidency as a mandate for the Intergovernmental Conference , and what was worked out at the Intergovernmental Conference , we can also assume , according to the reports from our representatives , that - with few exceptions - this is almost identical .
As the Social Democratic Group we say : this is how it must be !
As Socialists we cannot and will not accept amendments that date back to before the mandate agreed here in Brussels - this should be clearly stated .
But we assume that we have a draft on the table which corresponds to what was agreed here in June and for which we all commended Mrs Merkel .
When we send this draft on its way to Lisbon , it will be interesting .
The question will then be whether this Treaty will be ratified in 27 Member States and it will then depend on the Members of this House , and we will have a fight on our hands .
We will also have to fight for the construction of a united Europe to be accepted in all the Member States .
I would venture the thesis that a further collapse of this revised Treaty - just as the Constitution collapsed - will be the end of the European Union in its present form .
Anyone who does not want to tread the path of the anti-Europeans sitting here in this House , anyone who wants to follow the path of promoting Europe and its consolidation , is therefore called upon to fight for this Treaty .
I hope , Mr Daul , that all the Members of your group will also do this .
I have slight doubts about this .
I would also tell you what we must keep in mind in this House if the project collapses .
What happens if the European Union does not succeed in its further attempt to secure the revised Treaty ?
What lies ahead for the European Union ?
Europeans believe we are a large continent of 500 million inhabitants in 27 Member States , a large internal market .
We make up 8 % of the world 's population .
India has 1.1 billion inhabitants , China 1.3 billion , both these countries together representing one third of the world 's population .
If we want to remain competitive in the long-term , if we want to defend what we have achieved socially in Europe , if we want to stabilise the economic base , which is the prerequisite for social justice , then we have to be able to co-exist harmoniously throughout the world .
We can only hold our own throughout the world , however , if this Union is consistent - economically , socially and politically .
It needs this Reform Treaty to do this !
If the EU is broken down into its individual parts , if we follow the nationalists who tell the people we can achieve more on our own than together as 27 countries , then this continent will face bad times ahead !
I therefore hope that what is agreed in Lisbon survives ratification and so we will need to fight .
Anyone who wants peace in Europe , anyone who wants Europe as a factor for peace in the world , anyone who wants economic growth and more jobs and a fairer distribution of wealth in the Union , must strengthen this Reform Treaty , defend it and implement it .
Anyone who does not want this , anyone who focuses on renationalisation , should be told what François Mitterrand said in this House : nationalism is the opposite of European unity and nationalism in the long-run always means war .
Europe , however , is a concept that grew out of the wounds of war on this continent , and therefore European unity based on a reformed Treaty is the goal of all democrats and progressive powers on this continent .
Good luck , therefore , for the Intergovernmental Conference and for the summit !
But I wish you even more luck for ratification in the 27 Member States .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Prime Minister Sócrates must feel like England 's Henry V before the battle of Agincourt : hostile governments preparing for a fight , intent on weakening , even perhaps vetoing , treaty reform .
President-in-Office , your Prime Minister must hold firm to Europe 's red lines and he must deliver next week a treaty able to underpin a strong , responsive and effective Union .
So it is ' Once more unto the breach , dear friends , once more ' , for what should be the final battle in this constitutional war .
This Parliament will be your foot soldiers .
We know that failure to agree on treaty reform would be a tragedy of Shakespearean proportions .
Why ?
Because the status quo has not worked , does not work and never can work .
What Council unanimity means in practice is that essential legislation is either shelved or lowered to the level of the common denominator .
In an increasingly cut-throat , globalising world , where challenges like climate change , migration and terrorism demand radical responses , the lowest common denominator is just not good enough .
It may not be the Constitution but , for all its legalese , the Reform Treaty is a document which can quietly revolutionise Europe .
It develops democracy , putting codecision and qualified majority voting at the heart of decision-making . It favours subsidiarity , with a clearer division of competences , reinforcing the role of national parliaments and the Union 's single legal personality , and it helps transparency , extending the ordinary legislative procedure to cover freedom , security and justice - an area where laws which breach the spirit of a rights-respecting Union have been made behind closed doors for too long .
The draft text of your amending Treaty is not without its faults : the loss of Europe 's symbols is a blow to federalists , as is the fudge on voting systems wrought by the Poles .
But we can live with them , so long as the Ioannina Compromise is not anchored in the Treaty for all time .
One thing we cannot live without , however , is a definition of European citizenship in Article 8 of the Treaty of European Union , because citizenship is a symbol which , unlike a flag or an anthem , has a real life , real implications for over 450 million people .
Similarly , calling our Foreign Minister the ' High Representative ' is no grave cause for concern , but a High Representative who is merely a puppet of the Council certainly would be .
Parliament and the Commission must unite to ensure that the joint character of the external action service is respected in full , and that the Court of Justice oversees the use of personal data within the common foreign and security policy .
Finally , and perhaps most importantly , we cannot have two classes of citizen .
That goes entirely against the spirit of European integration and we must do our damnedest to ensure that British and Polish opt-outs are not preserved in perpetuity by demanding a clause allowing revocation without reconvening the IGC .
It is not only opt-outs we must guard against : it is also ' opt-ins ' .
If not properly formulated , they could allow governments first to water down , and then to wash their hands of , essential Community laws in justice and home affairs after five years of dialogue and debate .
If certain countries cannot accept reasonable compromise , our message should be this : they should start thinking about an amicable divorce from the Union and cease holding it hostage to their own vested interests , for the interests of Europe must take precedence over these .
( Applause )
So I urge the Council , the Commission and our own representatives , in Shakespeare 's words : ' Stiffen your sinews ... , Hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit to his full height ' in defence of our common interest .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , today we are facing the last leg of our work on treaty reform .
If the Lisbon summit is to end in success , we need political imagination .
Those who recognise treaty reform as a priority should ask themselves today especially : is it worth taking a firmer stance on Poland and the United Kingdom ; is it worth placing a question mark over the outcome of many years of negotiation ?
If we are to believe its advocates , the Charter of Fundamental Rights can only reinforce the binding provisions we already have .
But perhaps those who point to the essentially incalculable consequences of its provisions being used by the European Court of Justice are right .
I have similar concerns , and I therefore entirely understand the reservations expressed by the United Kingdom and Poland .
A major element of the compensation for the losses that Poland has decided to incur along with leaving the Nice system is the Ioannina mechanism and the permanent position of the Polish Advocate General at the European Court of Justice .
The undermining of these settlements is currently raising questions for us about sincerity of intent .
Like any other country , Poland has a right to expect better instruments to scrutinise the EU 's legislative process .
The absence of proper legitimation will , after all , bring defeat for the European project in the future .
Lack of scrutiny of the legislative process is not something dreamed up by Eurosceptics or warmongers , as the constantly somewhat agitated Martin Schulz would have it .
It is something that worries sincere Europeans .
The former President of the Federal Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe and former President of Germany Roman Herzog asked recently whether Germany was still a parliamentary democracy , considering how many regulations have come into being outside the Bundestag .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , just a few days away from the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference we are preparing for the usual night and day of horse-trading , as has always been the case , which will end up , as always , with a compromise tending towards the lowest common denominator .
A look at the various texts - those that we have managed to obtain via pseudo-secret channels , because here very little is done in public - reveals that they are very complicated to read and are certainly user-unfriendly .
The negotiators , however , as we very well know , are not at all interested in being user-friendly , in explaining or in involving their citizens in what ought to be an important time in their democratic lives .
On the contrary , back at the briefing stage we condemned the fact that the argument that 90 % of the text of the Constitutional Treaty has been incorporated into the reform treaty cannot conceal the reality of an obscure text , full of annotations and derogations that weaken the European Union , particularly with regard to foreign policy and clarity of law .
This has been a negotiation totally in the hands of the governments , conducted behind the backs of citizens and profiting from the fact that endless linguistic and bureaucratic theorising has prevailed over passion and democratic participation , which for good or for ill had been a feature of the Convention stage and also the referendum stage .
Three of our Members participated in the work of the Intergovernmental Conference and followed the work of the jurists , but it cannot be denied that they failed to improve the transparency of the process to any significant degree , and although perhaps they succeeded in reducing the damage done , they were not able to make any specific improvements because they did not have the opportunity .


So , Mr Schulz , Mr Brok , Mr Barón and Mr Duff , to be honest I do not see the logic behind it .
We ought to act in a considered manner , we ought to consider ourselves jointly responsible for this text and , although obviously I agree that we should try to ensure that the Member States ratify this text - although it now depends on what will happen in the final agreement - why should we go over the top ?
According to Mr Schulz , we are supposed to say , even here , among ourselves , that if this text is not adopted it will be a tragedy , because this text is fantastic , because this text here .... this text is horrible !
Anyone reading it can easily see that it is not what the citizens wanted .
Having said that , it is obvious that it is better than nothing .
Having said that , it is obvious that it is better - no Martin , calm down , because I am not saying that I want to reject it - I am merely saying that we ought to be responsible and credible in the eyes of the citizens and that even if this is not by any means a particularly adequate compromise , we will back it .
We cannot lie , though , and we cannot say that this is the best we could manage , because the governments have hijacked this constitutional process from us and have made it what it is today , and it certainly could be much better than it is .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I will not go over our group 's general assessment of the new draft Treaty again .
We oppose it , not through nationalism , Mr Schulz , which is something I despise as much as you do , but because none of the basic criticisms that characterised the debates on the old draft Constitutional Treaty - and I am not talking about the symbols of the EU , which we did not have a problem with , but the EU 's political thrust - have been taken into consideration .
I get the impression we will pay for this casual approach sooner or later .
Just now , I want to dwell on one specific article of the new draft , which we have already talked about : Article 24 of the Treaty on European Union .
There seems to be a broad consensus among us on challenging this , and that is a good thing .
It is , in fact , a sensitive issue : the protection of citizens with regard to the processing of personal data .
Now , the legislative procedure that would apply would not be the same depending on whether these data were being processed within the European Union or sent to a third country .
In the former case , Parliament would have full competence , but in the latter it would have no say at all .
This is a legal monstrosity and a serious denial of democracy .
In fact , it relates directly to the precedent set by the PNR case , where the Council agreed to send the US authorities confidential data on passengers travelling to the United States , despite complete opposition from the European Parliament .
The Council would like to continue with this situation , and is giving itself the means to do so .
This is unacceptable and Parliament should signal this clearly to the European Council .
I will simply add this : this dispute indirectly reveals several facts to which my group has constantly drawn attention .
The first is the little real impact the Charter of Fundamental Rights will have .
In fact , Article 8 of the Charter is devoted explicitly to the protection of personal data , yet this protection is cheerfully violated and will be violated in future too .
Next there is the almost indecipherable nature of some key passages of the treaties , only a very well-informed reading of which reveals this kind of trap .
Finally , there is the deliberate opacity of the work of the IGC , which is as far as it could be from a public , transparent drafting of a text whose purpose is to determine the life and future of the EU of 27 and half a billion citizens .
All this confirms our demand for democracy on two fronts , on the one hand for a major pluralist debate in each country on what is at stake in the treaties , and on the other for ratification by referendum .


on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , the EU published the new draft Treaty at 5 p.m. on Friday - thus satisfying itself that the media would not write about it at the weekend .
If the objective is to smuggle a treaty in , these are expert media relations - but what scheming , lousy behaviour .
At the last Strasbourg meeting of the Conference of Presidents , the President solemnly promised that all the political groups would have access to all the IGC documents .
We still have not received them .
Three groups have privileged access to the Intergovernmental Conference , whilst five groups are excluded .
This is discriminatory and in conflict with the principle of equality - again , scheming , lousy behaviour .
The new treaty contains 105 new powers for the EU - just like the Constitution .
The right of veto and representative government have been cut in 62 areas as against 61 in the Constitution .
What is new is that 255 pages of changes have now been inserted in 2 800 pages of treaty , making the text unreadable for everyone but nerds - again , what scheming , lousy behaviour .
The new EU constitution will run to 3 000 pages as against the rejected Constitution 's 560 .
This is what came of Sarkozy 's so-called mini-treaty .
Imagine going to the people with the issue of a practical mini-treaty and then serving up the rejected Constitution again , but now without a referendum - again , scheming , lousy behaviour .
There is not a single piece of legislation that can be adopted on the basis of the Constitution that cannot also be adopted on the basis of the new Treaty .
The two texts are identical in terms of legal obligations ; the difference is the name and the jettisoning of referendums - again , scheming , lousy behaviour .
What wimps !
Come forward with your plans and present them to the electorate .
Sign the petition for referendums at www.x09.eu.
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , besides the previous speaker 's reservations about the resemblance with a new Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe , which is being rammed down our throats in a completely undemocratic way , the European Presidency has evidently made it a kind of prime objective to achieve a breakthrough on a common European immigration policy .
The least that can be said in this regard is that such a policy at European level , decided in none-of-my-business cenacles by means of the particularly dubious Commission and Council decision-making with which we are sadly already familiar , would be completely undemocratic .
The immigration problem affects our citizens personally and their private sphere .
Besides , in my view , the transfer of decision-making in this area to European level with no real visibility to anyone is not only undemocratic but plain dangerous .
The Portuguese proposal to ' channel ' illegal immigration via legal immigration is too absurd for words .
Illegal immigration must be tackled by means of a ' tit for tat ' policy , a firm policy of tracing and expulsion , watertight external border controls , and also European detention and reception centres in the countries , or at least the continent , of origin .
As regards what has been described as the ' absolute necessity ' of legal immigration , I should like to point out that Europe already has approximately 20 to 25 million unemployed , among them millions of unemployed immigrants , with all this entails .
A new wave of legal immigration , with all the associated ' family reunifications ' , would only mean an exponential increase in the particularly serious problems of integration and assimilation .
If it is really only a matter of highly skilled workers - which I dispute - then we are organising a brain drain from the poor countries , which is absolutely scandalous ; or is it the intention to keep countries poor and underdeveloped - in which case the Council should just say so ?
( PL ) Mr President , what is it we are discussing today ?
A constitution for Europe .
We are discussing a document under a different name , with different wording , but with the same essential content as the constitution that has already been rejected .
This is an allegedly lower-ranking document , just so that it does not have to be put to referendums .
Here we have the EU 's political elites , among them members of this House , the European Commission and national governments , trying to deceive their own electorates and their peoples .
We are supposed to support a Reform Treaty which is in reality the European Constitution , the renamed European Constitution , which the voters in France and the Netherlands rejected in referendums , and a number of other countries failed to ratify within the prescribed time .
Let us recall the words of Angela Merkel , and I quote - use different terminology without changing the legal substance , for example with regard to the title of the treaty , the denomination of legal acts , and the Union 's minister of foreign affairs - end of quote .
That is exactly what has been done , and we are being called on to accept this deception .
We must not deceive ourselves and our voters .
( PT ) In my speech today , in my own name and on behalf of the Group I represent in this Parliament , I would like to express deep sadness at the passing of Fausto Correia .
He was a man of conviction , but a kind man , a very good man , a man of great solidarity .
He is sorely missed .
Secondly , I would like to say that the Portuguese Presidency has shown determination , and this should be stressed , in not allowing any modification of the objectives of the Treaty , as agreed by the Heads of State and Government .
We are sure it will stand its ground and that we will have a new Treaty before 20 October .
I will therefore say no more .
As regards the Lisbon Strategy , I must congratulate the Presidency and the Commission on having finally realised what we have been saying for ages : unless the Commission is awarded wider powers and responsibilities within the Lisbon Strategy than it was given in 2000 , the Lisbon Strategy will not bear fruit .
An appropriate line to take would be to strengthen the Commission 's role , making it the pivotal point of the Lisbon Strategy , and we are hopeful that such a fresh approach could eventually bear fruit .
Finally , the inclusion of globalisation in the debate at the forthcoming informal summit is a good sign , because the world in which we live today is about globalisation and we cannot imagine that the summits with Africa or Russia - and we hope they are a big success - or the debate on exchange rates for the Japanese yen or the US dollar do not come under the phenomenon which is globalisation .
It should be pointed out , as the Commissioner did , that it is important to have joint rules in international trade and the opening up of markets , as it is equally important to have reciprocity in our arrangements with other business and trading partners .
That is an important point and for that reason alone , even if that were the only reason , it would be sufficient to sing the praises of this Commission communication .
Mr Lobo Antunes , I wish you every success with the informal summit which will perhaps be one of the most important we have had in recent years in the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , fellow Members , I believe we should commend the Portuguese Presidency for the way in which the negotiations have been conducted : in a very dedicated and targeted manner .
I think it is good that you have adhered closely to June 's mandate , with a few exceptions , and staved off the many extra requests , starting with the European Central Bank 's request for an article on Austria 's desire to limit the number of students from other countries .
None of this is part of the new Treaty and I believe you are on the home stretch .
There is not a great deal now to stop us reaching a consensus on the new Treaty .
The opt-outs are sad .
They give the impression of dissension and inconsistency .
They fragment the EU and are it also takes time to make decisions in the third pillar .
They really are a downer and predominantly what the United Kingdom wanted .
Andrew Duff had talked about a self-serving mentality .
I hope it does not set a precedent .
I believe London 's fundamental requests have all been met .
I read with concern what was still being discussed yesterday in the House of Commons .
There is nothing more to be said on this .
It would be totally unacceptable to make even more demands now .
There will be discussion on Poland 's request to anchor Ioannina somehow , but the capacity for a blockade cannot be increased .
We do indeed want to increase the capacity to act .
This must remain an exceptional case .
It was a gentlemen 's agreement , and it should not become the rule .
I want us with the Commission and Council to be able to proclaim the Charter here in the Chamber with the three Institutions .
That would really be a good signal to send to the citizens .
I would also like see Mrs Wallström 's request back again in the Treaty , namely that the citizens are given a right to receive information .
Two thirds of people feel uninformed .
This would be a good addition to the Treaty .
President-in-Office of the Council , Parliament will do everything it can to ensure that the Treaty of Lisbon comes into being .
I thank our three representatives as well as the President who will take care of this at the summit in Lisbon .
Mr President , I note with great regret that citizens ' rights are clearly not at the heart of the new Treaty .
Unfortunately , the Charter of Fundamental Rights has been sacrificed to the Dutch Government 's fear of a referendum .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights must be legally binding in full and for all because the Charter of Fundamental Rights is the application in practice of our shared values .
So , what does an opt-out mean ?
Is it an opt-out from those shared values ?
Or , does it mean that Poland and the British Government simply pay lip-service to those values but then deny their citizens the means to enforce their rights ?
What does an opt-out mean ?
Are we not creating a dangerous precedent here ?
Let us ask ourselves , will future countries , future Member States , have the same right to an opt-out ?
If Turkey , a country that I very much want to join the European Union , asks for an opt-out from the Charter of Fundamental Rights , will it be granted the same right ?
The other issue is that , between the Constitution and the Treaty , an additional , lower standard of data protection has somehow been created - a lower standard that applies to the area of the common foreign and security policy .
I predict that in the future the Member States will try to circumvent data protection rules by labelling , for example , counter-terrorism measures as common foreign and security policy instead of police and justice cooperation .
Finally , I would ask the Commission and the Member States to consider , as soon as the Treaty has been signed , acting in the spirit of the new Treaty and involving the European Parliament as a full co-legislator on matters of justice and home affairs , and rapidly closing the democratic gap that we have been living with for so long .
( PL ) Mr President , Heads of State and Government are once again engaged in modifying the way the European Union functions by giving it a new treaty .
This concern for the peoples of Europe and their future is touching .
But we cannot have the decisions of an informal summit replacing the democratic path of referendums held in the individual states on whether to accept the treaty .
It would be a deceit practised on the peoples of Member States who have a right to decide independently on a matter of such importance .
The old constitutional treaty has been subjected to an operation which essentially consists in some slight modification to the text .
This enables the document as a whole to be presented , depending on current political needs , either as an entirely new document , or as the previous treaty with no fundamental changes .
I therefore wish to ask : how do the Council and the Commission define the document in question ?
Is this a new treaty , or is it a trimmed-down version of the old treaty , and will the process of ratifying it begin from scratch in all Member States ?
( DE ) Mr President , anyone who has seen how governments have been attacking the Constitution over the past year , making it unrecognisable and illegible and robbing it of its spirit and European charisma , must acknowledge that all this has nothing at all to do with what the citizens wanted - even those who said no in France and the Netherlands .
Anyone , however , who was able to observe the patience and time spent on what is now happening in the run-up to the Intergovernmental Conference must see that the governments have been attacking the structure of this Constitution like termites with their lawyers and state chancelleries .
Grain by grain , element by element , this Constitution has been dragged out .
I am really wondering why nobody is asking the governments what they are pushing here .
Is it really only their own power , is it really lack of awareness of people 's expectations or is it plain nationalism that we see rising again in Europe ?
The language !
Today a delegation of Members of the Austrian Parliament asked me : how am I to make your ' yes ' to this Constitution comprehensible to anybody ?
I cannot read it .
I cannot understand it any more .
I no longer know what the texts , references , footnotes and traps mean .
I believe that at the end of this Intergovernmental Conference a Europe is looming in which for the first time in history people will no longer be able to recognise the political order under which they are living .
And then you will lose a lot of supporters , even those who have fought for this Constitution for many years .
Fundamental rights !
Vice-President of the Commission , you invoke the spirit of compromise .
But why do you not invoke the nature of universal fundamental and human rights , which make it unthinkable for us to form a community of values in which a few states declare ' but I do not belong to this community of values ' .
How are we to counter a Mr Putin and tell him : we are a huge community of values in favour of universal human rights - except for a few of us .
This is such a gap in Europe 's credibility that we cannot invoke the spirit of compromise here !
This is a completely different spirit .
It is a great political demon that dominates here .
I do not believe that what is happening here at the moment will meet with the citizens ' approval , which we no longer intend to seek .
( PT ) Mr President , I would like to begin my speech by expressing my own sadness , as well as the sadness felt by my group , on the death of our fellow Member , Fausto Correia .
On the subject of reform of the Treaties , the Council Presidency only repeated that it very much hoped to reach a further stage , not the final stage , in the process of recovering the project set forth in the European Constitution .
That is , to take one more step in the process begun at the beginning of June under the leadership of the German Presidency to impose the content of a rejected Treaty by presenting it in another form , trying to move forward by default and against the express wish of the people , which is a real political fraud .
This Treaty is an attempt to pave the way for neo-liberal policies which run counter to social rights and advances gained , serving the interests of the large multinationals .
Federalism is being imposed under the domination of the major powers within a framework which grants legal personality to the Union , where the States are deprived of their powers and the European Union is regarded as a pillar of NATO ; that is in order to favour meddling and interventionism in accordance with the interests of the major powers .
It is a Treaty which aims to set up an economic , politico-military bloc with imperialist ambitions .
It is a Treaty which will not overcome the deep and irremediable contradictions of this European integration , but which will , on the contrary , tend to accentuate them .
We , for our part , shall continue to condemn the real objectives of this Treaty , to argue that it needs to be rejected and to demand a broad national debate and consultation of the Portuguese people in favour of a Europe of cooperation on progress and peace between sovereign States which have equal rights .
Finally I would like to express my support for the great demonstration promoted by the CGTP-IN to be held in Lisbon on 18 October next .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whether we rejoice or lament , everyone agrees that the Treaty to be signed in Lisbon is just a recycling of the European Constitution rejected by two referendums in 2005 .
As a report yesterday by the House of Commons pointed out , it has everything : the primacy of European law , even secondary law , over national law , even constitutional law ; legal personality for the EU , which will allow the Commission to represent the Member States on the international stage ; the Minister of Foreign Affairs under another name ; the largest transfer of competences in the entire history of European integration ; at least forty new subjects ; and the vast field of fundamental rights .
Within these walls , where the word ' democracy ' is constantly on our lips , I would like to try and appeal to the consciences of you all .
What genuine democracy could think it normal to bring into force a text that the people have rejected in a referendum ?
Why should the people be deprived of their right to express themselves on the new Treaty and on any fresh enlargements ?
What sort of political regime do you think you are building by subordinating our democracies a little further to a system characterised by no separation of powers , no political accountability on the part of governments and no representation of the people , except of a single European people ?
The Italian federalist Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa has already given the answer . I quote : ' Between the two poles of popular consensus and the leadership of a few governments , Europe has been created by a method that could be defined by the term " enlightened despotism ” ' .
He is right !
And the people 's no to their enlightened despotism has convinced federalists that they have to proceed once more under cover , because the only difference between the rejected Constitutional Treaty and the one that is coming is that the first one did not lie .
Mr President , on past performance , I suspect that the Council will be an occasion when British red lines will become pink smudges , later to be rubbed out entirely by the federalising European Court of Justice .
Opt-out , opt-in , shake it all about , the British Government will claim victory , others will publicly indulge them , knowing that any apparent concessions are really without any substance .
All this is to con the British public into believing that the Reform Treaty is actually materially different from the rejected Constitution , when patently it is not .
Now that Gordon Brown has bottled out of an election , the need for a British referendum is greater than ever .
No election means Labour 's 2005 manifesto commitment of a referendum must stand .
No referendum means no mandate for Mr Brown to proceed to ratification , and that is the bottom line upon which all democrats in the United Kingdom should unite .
Mr President , I want to thank the Council and Commission for their statements .
The Lisbon informal summit is going to be a crucial event , having had the publication of the draft Reform Treaty , which heads of state and government will focus on when they meet there .
But the IGC process has been rushed too much .
Indeed , the British Government says it has only had two days to consider the draft mandate .
The proposals are , of course , as has been said by other speakers , very much the same as those contained in the original constitutional text .
The British Prime Minister has a problem .
It is called trust - trust in what he says .
For the past few weeks , he has encouraged his Ministers to talk up prospects of an election in the UK and then , when the political going got rough , he backed down .
I think his European colleagues , fellow European leaders , should be very careful that whatever he says in Lisbon , he is likely to mean something completely different .
British Conservatives , of course , will continue to demand a referendum on the Treaty .
The vast majority of British people want one , including most of the Government 's own supporters .
If the Prime Minister continues to resist that pressure , despite a clear election manifesto pledge , then the British people will have further confirmation that he cannot be trusted .
The leader of my party said that this could well be a blatant breach of trust - one of the greatest and most blatant breaches of trust in modern politics .
I do also wish that Europe would concentrate more on the paths of globalisation , alleviating world poverty and tackling climate change .
These are the lessons that we should , by now , have learnt .
I hope that our Prime Minister will be straight with the British people on the issues that arise at Lisbon .
We want a successful Europe , but it must be a Europe that concentrates on the things that people really do support and understand .
( PT ) I would like to begin by thanking you , on behalf of the Portuguese socialist delegation , for all the expressions of sympathy on the death of my dear friend , Fausto Correia .
We are all - Portugal 's democracy , the Portuguese socialist party and this Parliament - the poorer for his passing .
With one week to go before the informal summit meeting , I want to be optimistic and believe that good sense will prevail . I want to be optimistic and believe that each of the 27 Member States will assume its political responsibilities towards the citizens of the respective countries , towards European citizens and towards the world .
I want to believe that on 19 October the European Council will conclude a political agreement and will approve the Reform Treaty , putting an end to this impasse which has existed for too long .
I am optimistic because we are all aware of the need to respond to the European citizens ' expectations and doubts and they are legitimately wondering about the global role played by the European Union and about the advantages it will bring for their future .
I want to be optimistic because we all know that the world is watching Europe and waiting for a positive sign .
We all know that the world needs a united and cohesive Europe .
We all know that the world does not stop and that Europe cannot remain imprisoned in its national egotisms .
We all know that it is necessary to overcome the impasse in order to channel our energies towards promoting economic development , creating jobs and combating climate change .
Those are priorities .
The lawyers have reached agreement on the drafting of the text for the Treaty plus its annexes .
Technical / legal difficulties , although complex , were resolved .
The IGC fulfilled the mandate entrusted to it by the Council .
The Portuguese Presidency did everything within its power to overcome the obstacles .
The European Parliament did its work both within the IGC and outside that Conference , where our colleagues Elmar Brok , Enrique Barón Crespo and Andrew Duff made an invaluable contribution .
That means that to date all have done their duty with a great sense of responsibility and within the time allowed .
It is now hoped that no artificial obstacles will be raised , dictated by short-term national political circumstances rather than by any objective reservations about the Treaty content .
No one would understand if those same Heads of State and Government who approved the IGC mandate were to go back on what they had already said .
That would be to their discredit .
We would then certainly be entering a crisis with unforeseeable consequences .
The text might not be the best , but it is an opportunity and is better than nothing .
Let me end by quoting what Jean Monnet said : ' I have always believed that Europe would be built through crises and that it would be the sum of their solutions ' .
Wise and prophetic words .
Let us hope that Europe is able to make history , to write another page in the story of the building of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , we have been fighting with some success for greater democracy and efficiency in the constitutional process - now in the process towards this Reform Treaty - but the discussion cannot really be about transparency .
We could have already read everything that the Council Presidency has presented here by way of a briefing to this House in the press .
A few more substantial statements by the Presidency would have been apt .
The fight for transparency must therefore continue !
Where this Parliament has been very heavily involved - for which I am extraordinarily grateful to our representatives - is in fighting for the greater rule of law .
Data protection in the common foreign and security policy , greater parliamentary participation , the abolition of the third pillar in favour of a common justice and home affairs policy , the legally binding nature of the Charter , these are all subjects which are important even for the Liberals in the centre and based on our common values .
With regard to the opt-outs , let me say the following .
A distinction can be made between those based on home affairs policy and those that concern foreign policy .
In home affairs policy they perhaps concern a legal culture , national traditions , and different notions of social values .
I can even understand , if not actually approve of , the fact that we are voting for an opt-out here .
What I cannot understand or approve of at all is the blockade by a few Member States , particularly the United Kingdom , in the area of common foreign and security policy .
Timothy Kirkhope has just said : we should be developing policy where the citizens support it .
The citizens support a credible common foreign and security policy .
It is an objective necessity in view of the challenges we are facing : combating terrorism , the crisis in the Middle East , fighting poverty , infectious diseases , and migration .
There is a range of challenges here which we can only meet together .
We are therefore wondering quite objectively ( and Martin Schulz has done so and I think he is completely right ) who will be deciding the world 's destiny in twenty or thirty years ' time ?
The United States , China , India and ... the United Kingdom ?
Nobody believes that !
Nor will Germany or France be doing so either .
We will either be doing this together or not at all !
We therefore need a European spirit and we need this Reform Treaty !
( PT ) If I might mention lack of transparency , the Charter of Fundamental Rights states that in Europe ' no one shall be condemned to the death penalty , or executed ' .
So far so good , but that is not the full picture .
The basis for interpretation of that article is the framework of the European Convention and that lays down some unacceptable exceptions .
For example , the States may reinstate the death penalty if there is an imminent danger of war .
What kind of a idea is that , ladies and gentlemen ?
That same source of law gives law enforcement officers licence to kill in the event of insurrection and even authorises , to quote once again ' preventive detention ' .
You will certainly remember Jean Charles de Menezes , killed in 2005 on the London Underground .
Was that an unfortunate mistake or a crime which would be licensed under the future Treaty ?
Today in Lisbon José Sócrates and Durão Barroso spoke against the death penalty .
What authority can there be for sponsoring a Treaty which now lets it in through the back door ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , other Members will confirm this in the debate to come , but I believe that it is right to stress - partly with a view to the upcoming Summit - that a European citizen is somebody who holds citizenship of a Member State under national law .
Thus , a citizen is anyone who benefits from the rights conferred upon him by such status , and especially the right to vote and to be elected as a Member of the European Parliament .
Who have we been working for , for years , when we talk about the right to free movement , to education , to health , to work , to dignity , if not the citizens who have democratically elected us ?
I consider it equally important to maintain mutual respect between the Member States : for decades a gentlemen 's agreement has enshrined the equal weight accorded to the three largest EU states after Germany .
On the linguistic front , this has already been infringed countless times .
Now , the Lamassoure-Severin proposal sets out to eliminate this parity in terms of political weight too .
If this is the underlying sentiment , then we should not be unduly surprised that it is so difficult to reach an agreement to define a future together .
The European Summit should thus reflect deeply upon the ideas of European citizenship and democratic legitimacy .
( CS ) I trust that during the upcoming Lisbon Summit the final agreement on the wording of the Reform Treaty will be reached .
Its signature and ratification will put an end to the institutional crisis caused by the referenda in France and the Netherlands .
The institutional reform is necessary , but is not in itself sufficient for the EU to succeed in the context of a more globalised world , and in relation to its citizens .
The institutional reform is an indispensable part of the solution ; it is not , however , in itself , the solution .
Once the Reform Treaty has entered into force , we will need to engage in the fundamental debate on the future direction of European integration .
Answers to Europe 's economic , social or security issues will be sought in a rigorous revision of existing policies .
The ultimate objective of the European project and related questions on the borders of the EU must take centre stage in these debates .
Referenda in France and the Netherlands and the complex negotiations on the wording of the Reform Treaty signal that the fundamental debate on the contents of the European project will be much more challenging than has been the case to date .
That is why it is so important to respond properly and without delay to President Sarkozy 's proposal to establish a so-called committee of wise men , which would provide the much-needed impetus and direction for this debate .
This body should have a clear mandate , but in no case be composed of representatives of Member State governments .
Rather it should be a select group of eminent scholars , outstanding entrepreneurs , former diplomats and politicians .
They should be personalities who inspire natural authority and respect , not officials with tasks delegated to them by their governments .
The objective of this committee should not be to replace public debate but rather function as a catalyst for debate and come up with concrete proposals on the future of European integration .
Mr President , through the Reform Treaty we will gain perhaps imperfect but necessary working tools , and it is up to us to use their full potential .
Europe 's citizens are expecting concrete , tangible results from the EU .
It is our job to fulfil these expectations .
( FR ) Mr President , the Intergovernmental Conference probably met in the deepest part of the Channel Tunnel to get away from public opinion .
The result , Mrs Wallström , is impossible to communicate to the ordinary citizen .
More than 300 amendments buried in 150 pages have transformed the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on its functioning .
As a bonus , there will be 53 declarations and 12 protocols .
In the wake of the symbols of the EU , such as the flag and anthem , other political achievements will also be whisked away .
Social dialogue will no longer be a horizontal obligation for the EU .
The social partners are asked not to bother themselves with economic policy , but only with social policy .
The Protocol on Services of General Interest indirectly enshrines the primacy of competition law over all services provided to citizens by municipalities or regions , however vaguely commercial they are .
National governments , like night watchmen , can only decide on non-economic services of general interest .
We are being lied to about the binding nature of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Protocol 7 says , I quote : ' for the avoidance of doubt , nothing in Title IV of the Charter creates justiciable rights applicable to Poland or the United Kingdom ' .
In plain language , the European Court of Justice cannot enforce the Charter .
I will skip all the opt-outs that make for a two-speed Europe as far as the euro zone , the Schengen agreement and the rules on justice and home affairs are concerned .
Article 24 is worthy of a totalitarian State , allowing as it does only the Council to set the rules on the protection of the personal data of our fellow citizens and to permit those data to be circulated freely to the United States .
Neither the Parliament nor even the Court of Justice will be able to protect fundamental freedoms .
George Orwell 's Big Brother is not far off !
Finally , we are being threatened with the inclusion of a permanent right of veto for governments , derived from the Ioannina compromise .
This is unacceptable , Mr President .
Personally , I am starting to rediscover some of the virtues of the Treaty of Nice .
( RO ) The Lisbon Summit will offer the European Union the opportunity to debate and perhaps decide on a subject of major importance for its future and role in the 21st century .
The context of the year 2007 , when the European Union comprises 27 countries and the international scene becomes ever more globalized , forces us to question the goals , priorities and the way in which the European Union operates .
It is unquestionable that the European Union 's actions in the 21st century should be based on two fundamental principles : democratic legitimacy and a close relationship with the European citizen , as well as an increased coherence and efficiency in its activity , including externally .
First of all , this means respect for and promotion of democratic values , the rights of our citizens , including minorities and , from this point of view , I welcome the explicit mention of this aspect in the proposed Treaty wording .
Secondly , the European Union cannot be only a strategic actor in today 's globalized world without focusing its foreign policy on solving disputes and encouraging international and intercultural dialogue , especially in the policy of promoting regional cooperation .
Last , but not least , we should not forget about the propelling force of any development , namely education and the position it should hold in the revised version of the Lisbon Strategy .
Without giving increased attention to the European education and research policy , we will not be able to speak of a reformed , competitive and strong Union .
I hope that the Lisbon Summit will also bring clear answers to the questions we have today .

( DE ) Mr President , my fellow Member Mr Goebbels said after his speech that despite his criticism , he would not die for Nice - which I very much hope he will not , and that he will live for a long time .
First and foremost Nice is not a treaty for which it would be worth dying !
I hope that this Treaty which we are getting will at least have a much higher added value than Nice .
I would like to take up where Mr Lambsdorff left off .
Our citizens want a strong European Union , not as an intrusion into daily life , but as an outward representation in order to be better able to represent our citizens .
I now think that this treaty , for all its weaknesses , still represents substantial progress .
It is a necessary , albeit insufficient , prerequisite for us to pursue an active foreign and security policy .
The Kosovo problem is , of course , preoccupying us .
We shall see whether there is the will generally to promote a common foreign and security policy .
Both the Portuguese and the Slovenian Presidencies are having to gear themselves up intensively for what we are doing , should no amicable solution be reached here .
However , it is important that we create the appropriate conditions in the long run .
I would like to bring up two things here : on the one hand , we do of course need a workable diplomatic service , which must be located at the Commission .
It makes no sense to place foreign policy with the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representatives if the diplomatic service then simply has to be organised elsewhere .
On the other hand - something several fellow Members like Enrique Barón Crespo and others have already pointed out - we must make clear that this Parliament has been involved from the outset in the appointment of the High Representative .
Finally , one further comment to the Vice-President of the Commission : you repeatedly point out how important the negotiation of this treaty is .
The matter will not be settled - as my colleague Mr Schulz has said - with the agreement which will hopefully be reached in the Council and not even with ratification , but our citizens must be convinced during and after ratification that this Treaty will help them by allowing their interests to be represented in this world .
( PL ) Mr President , a few reflections on Lisbon .
Recent events linked to the constitutional crisis have made the citizens of Europe aware that there is a need for reform and change .
The essence of a democratic system of decision-making is arrival at a consensus , through majority or unanimous support for some idea , where a frivolous veto is not issued by one partner in important matters .
We are discussing the question of numerical representation in decision-making in the forum of a united Europe , and through this we are touching on the principles for the functioning of a common organism .
This is why it is also important to heed the voice of the minority , which , because of its geographical situation , for example , or its historical experience and political situation , may often express a view of reality that is of relevance to Europe .
The living and dynamic organism that is Europe must not be closed off within a rigid and universal legislative framework introduced by the current Parliament or Commission for good .
A person or a national grouping has an unlimited behavioural repertoire , and life and the ongoing situation demand adaptation of regulations , though not of values , which should remain constant in relation to reality .
We must not underestimate the immediate eastern dimension of the economic , political and energy aspects .
It is not just the west that counts , or Brazil , and I feel that the current Presidency needs to be more flexible in this regard .
And another reflection : the expanded economic perspective which we are discussing and which will be the subject of discussions , should become an element of the so-called Lisbon Strategy , if we wish to catch up with the USA .
And lastly , Mr President : greater involvement of national parliaments elected by citizens will bring EU matters closer to the people .
What this really means is that more of the decisions on the shape , content and future of Europe should be taken by citizens , and not just by representatives of the government that happens to be in power .
Mr President , may I congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on the progress they have made towards securing consensus .
But , of course , we have heard from many colleagues today that there is considerable disappointment in this Parliament .
There are many who are disappointed at the loss of the idea of a constitution that would have replaced the current treaties and refounded our Union on a new legal base .
There are others who are disappointed at the numerous changes that have been secured and the special provisions and derogations for certain Member States .
Some of these changes are , of course , unfortunate .
But they are the price that has to be paid to secure agreement of all 27 countries capable of being ratified by all 27 countries .
That is the situation that we are faced with .
There is no way around the fact that this Treaty has to be acceptable to all Member States and ratified by all Member States .
Colleagues should not lose sight of the overall picture .
This Treaty , even in this form , contains many vital reforms .
We need those reforms ; the Union needs those reforms .
Anyone who wants a well-functioning and democratically accountable Union should support these reforms .
The alternative to the reformed Treaty is more of the same , but with years more wrangling on the institutions and the mechanics of the European Union .
I would rather secure the reformed Treaty and then move on with a greater capacity for the Union to address the real issues that citizens are interested in : climate change ; the performance of our economy ; overseas development aid ; the environment - all those things for which we need the Union , because alone and separately , we are not effective , but together we can do more .
Let us move on and get these institutional issues settled once and for all .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Lisbon brings us yet another important step closer and successfully brings to an end the aftermath of the meetings .
However , Lisbon still does not bring us to our goal .
The ratification process is still ahead of us and will demand everything of us , indeed , of us all .
We shall manage together or not at all to make the European Union more democratic , closer to its citizens , more transparent , more capable of action , inwardly and outwardly .
The Reform Treaty signifies a further step in the right direction .
Only if we do this together will we succeed in anchoring the Reform Treaty in the public consciousness as added value for the citizens of Europe , the European Union and Europe as a whole .
The only thing is that we have still not put egotism , nationalism , protectionism , the EU naysayers and the EU mendaciousness in their place with the Reform Treaty alone .
They are the cancer of commonality , the cancer of Europe 's future .
The opt-out method is inconsistent with a united Europe .
The opt-out method weakens the community of values .
It creates first and second-class citizens and I am wondering why the representatives of Poland and the United Kingdom want to thwart the European Union 's common foreign and security policy .
We want data protection to be controlled by law with parliamentary participation .
We want staffing decisions to be taken after the elections to the European Parliament .
We want the social partners and social dialogue to continue to be anchored and strengthened .
We want public relations work to be carried out on the added value of the Reform Treaty and the further extension of the European Parliament 's co-decision-making rights , because only by doing this will Europe become more democratic , closer to its citizens and more transparent .
Mr President , as far as the Treaty is concerned , the devil is not in the detail , he is in the ratification .
We should remember Denmark in 1992 , Ireland in 2001 , France and the Netherlands in 2005 , and even Sweden on the euro in 2003 .
Nowhere is safe from a no vote .
Obviously each Member State is in charge of its own ratification , whether through parliamentary channels or through a referendum , but is it really impossible to coordinate the whole thing ?
I think that bringing all the ratifications together would prevent an endless stream of national debates and would allow European public opinion to emerge more strongly .

I can suggest a date , Mr President : the first fortnight in May 2008 , because this is the fortnight that saw the end of the Second World War , and sees Europe Day on 9 May , and this year it will be the sixtieth anniversary of the Hague Congress , which set Europe in motion , chaired by Winston Churchill .
For us , the French , it is also the election of a great European , François Mitterrand , on 10 May .
It would help a little if the ratifications were coordinated .
After all , we have got rid of the symbols of the Treaty , but symbols can be put back in a calendar .
Why not write them into certain dates ?
Because regardless of what we think of the drafting of the treaty - and our fellow member Mr Goebbels was rather harsh about this - we must at all costs nevertheless ensure that this step in European history is taken .
So I put this suggestion to you : agree on this fortnight !
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , Madam President , just as it did seven years ago , the Portuguese Presidency faces some major tasks and major challenges .
I am convinced that the European Treaty will be adopted in a good atmosphere and with consent , providing a basis for effective and efficient management of the EU .
This is the most important matter today ; because only then can Europe gradually become a political power and have a positive impact on the fate of the world .
But economic power in the EU is always something essential , and today this is even more true than it was seven years ago .
We are faced with the challenges of globalisation and we wish to become , and I quote ' the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world , capable of sustainable economic growth , with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion ' . But today we know how difficult that is .
So a social Europe increasing employment and also battling against climate change , which it was not seven years ago , must be a Europe of a completely free market .
An open market , a market free of protectionism and monopolies .
We owe this to our citizens , if we wish to act on the principles of the Lisbon Strategy in the sphere of competition , innovation and progress .
Let us also remember that management of the Strategy 's guidelines from a free-market position has worked much better than management from Member State level .
And lastly , a third matter - our success depends to a large extent on relations with our neighbours .
I congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on the far-reaching rapprochement on the EU 's southern borders , but we should not for a minute forget the eastern dimension , especially as the results of fair and free elections in Ukraine have presented us with the chance of a democratic , free-market and pro-European stabilisation of the eastern border of the European Union .
Elections were held just two and a half weeks ago , and it is worth proclaiming this in the European Parliament .
( HU ) Mr President , as has emerged from the previous debate , there is a huge amount at stake with the current Reform Treaty , since the operability and credibility of the Union are at stake .
In any case , European citizens do not understand that we have been working on the Constitutional Treaty and institutional problems for years and that from this we , as the political elite , know very well that they are extremely important in the interests of reforming and renewing the Union ; at the same time it is a foreign , incomprehensible debate for us .
Ultimately we have to work on the real issues for European citizens , and I agree with Martin Schulz that there should be no more failures in the life of the Union .
There should be no more failures , because the 2004 enlargement was the first that was not prevented by radical reforms or radicalisation .
It is no longer surprising that the British are behaving as they are , and yet , as a representative of a new Member State , I am not pleased that my Polish fellow members are taking a political course that unfortunately does not serve European unity .
There is no alternative to the Reform Treaty .
It is vital in order for the European Parliament not to be a place for quibbling , but for the Commission and the Council to take it seriously .
It is also vital in order for us to make progress with matters such as the issue of national minorities , in which , finally , one of Europe 's great problems - we should look at the Western Balkans , or Ukraine and Russia - ( sentence unfinished ) .
Without the Reform Treaty , we will not be able to make any progress in this area either .
Mr President , there is no alternative to the Reform Treaty ; it is either the Reform Treaty or the death of the Union !
Thank you for your attention .
We have before us an important occasion to make a more efficient and democratic union out of the European Union .
The new treaty will offer the necessary tools so that the European Union will keep progressing after more citizens have now joined in its midst .
We have a unique opportunity , and together we must see that the necessary compromises that guarantee a better future for European citizens are now found .
Several people have mentioned Poland and England and their opt-outs .
Yes , it is important that everyone keeps national interests present , but it is more important that we keep European Union interests present because we all form of the European Union .
This applies not only for the Council , but also particularly for the European Parliament .
I do not agree that there should be a particular European Union for certain European citizens and a different European Union for certain European citizens in another country .
We must therefore use this opportunity that we will have in the coming days in Portugal to send a clear signal to our citizens that the European Union is not stagnated , and with the new treaty we will guarantee that we will continue to move forward .
We guarantee that after long and difficult years of continuous debate about the future of Europe , we would have found the way of agreement that will lead us to continue to attain more success .
A treaty that should ensure more transparency and as has been said more efficiency .
A Treaty that should help us strengthen the voice of every European citizen .
I note with pleasure that even my country , which I represent , will increase its strength in this Parliament .
The European Union is facing important challenges that we must face as soon as possible .
We must compete in this globalised world and therefore we should have the necessary targets to meet these challenges , challenges like climate change , immigration , how to create more work and better conditions for our workers .
We can meet these challenges only if we have a more efficient and transparent European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , I hope that the understanding that was reached in Berlin concerning the most important problems currently inherent in the Reform Treaty will culminate in a positive outcome during the forthcoming summit in Lisbon .
I also hope that the Polish government - bearing in mind that 80 % of the Polish people supports our membership of the European Union - will see its way to final acceptance of the draft treaty , and will thus demonstrate that it understands the slogan of ' a strong Poland in a strong Europe ' .
One of the most important achievements of this understanding will making the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding , and I am pleased that the President of the European Parliament , the President of the Commission and the Presidency are planning a ceremony of joint promulgation of the Charter during the plenary session of the European Parliament .
This is evidence of how important this document is , dealing as it does with such problems as dignity , freedom , equality , solidarity , citizens ' rights and the administration of justice .
Consequently I do not understand and do not support the stance of the Polish government , which wants an exemption from the duty under the provisions of Chapter IV of the Charter , entitled Solidarity , where Polish citizens are concerned .
This Chapter contains provisions that are particularly dear to the Polish and European left , relating to employee and union rights .
Any wise government should care about providing the citizens of its country with greater and more effective protection of employees ' rights , especially in a country like Poland , whose freedom was brought about by the workers ' uprising of the Polish Solidarność .
I therefore call on the Polish government to change its stance on this matter .
( PT ) The informal summit in Lisbon could bring to a close a troubled period in which Europe 's ambition crossed swords with crisis .
The new Reform Treaty will not have the power to restructure Europe ; that would take a European Constitution .
The new Treaty is an under-achievement compared with the lost Constitution ; it is a small leap in history , rather than a great leap ; it is all it can be , not all it should be .
But it does represent certain progress in terms of Europe adapting its institutions to the new geopolitical challenges and future debate .
We must recognise that the emotional element in the referendum restricted the purely rational element of political representation .
Public opinion was ill-prepared for a visionary and cosmopolitan approach , which brought us to a more timorous and closed process than the process in the Convention which paved the way for a Constitution .
That point should not be forgotten by those who sit round the table at the next meeting of the European Council .
The Council 's task is now to secure the unity needed for the Treaty in accordance with a principle of maximum limitation of exceptions ; to avoid , in the derogations from the Charter , hidden erosion due to opt-out clauses in the original gentlemen 's agreements ( such as the Ioannina compromise ) and to ensure that the Treaty is of a unitary rather than a fragmented order .
The Council 's other task is to stage-manage ratification of the Treaty ; that is essential in order to avoid a change of direction in the European trajectory so dear to all citizens .
It is time to accept that the legitimacy of Europe comes above all from the universal values it is upcoming , from the consistency of its democratic institutions , from the shared project to achieve global justice born precisely of excellence of reasoning .
That is the legitimacy of Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to join in congratulating the Portuguese Presidency in dealing with the process of reaching a compromise over the Union Treaty .
This was a very difficult process and really did require a huge effort to bring about an understanding .
This Treaty is not the treaty of our dreams , and it is not a treaty that illustrates the visions and dreams of Europeans today .
Nevertheless , it is what we have at the present time on the road between dreams and reality in the European Union .
I am convinced , and I hope , that this Treaty will be accepted by all European states .
Meanwhile , here in the European Parliament today , I must express my firm opposition to the declaration made by the government in Warsaw that it does not accept the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Non possumus , I am saying this non possumus in the European Parliament as a Solidarity activist from the period of military rule .
Poland pointed the way to freedom and democracy for all Europe , and today the Polish government has the audacity to state that it will not apply the Charter of Fundamental Rights in our country , in my homeland .
I protest against this , in the name of that part of the Polish population , men and women , who will never come to terms with Poland not being bound by the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
( EL ) Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on the determination , speed and proactiveness it has shown .
Thanks to it , we today have a text of the Reform Treaty , which is to be put forward to the Intergovernmental Conference in Lisbon .
I hope that the governments there will rise to the occasion and assume their responsibilities so that we can emerge from the deadlock we find ourselves in .
I would also like to assure the Portuguese Presidency that the overwhelming majority of this Parliament 's Members stands by its side and we expect a positive outcome on this issue .
First of all , we need agreement , then ratification by all the states .
I have heard various observations about the efforts being made for the further unification of Europe and I have been surprised by those who hide their anti-Europe philosophy by invoking the better in order to destroy the good .
Let them be honest : if they do not achieve better unification or integration of the EU , then let England , France , Germany , Poland face the challenges of globalisation alone .
Let them come to ensure peace when nationalistic rivalry leads us once again into crisis and perhaps to war .
We must understand that the vision of the EU cannot simply be swept under the carpet ; we must promote and realise it .
Our aim should be to maintain constant progress , so that all these states and peoples face a global future rather than a merely European future , on the basis of principles and values .
That is the vision that we must promote , and this European Parliament stands by your side , Prime Minister .
Mr President , it is very nice to have my name on the wall together with a Secretary of State and a Commissioner - it is a big moment !
I would like to make three points if you would allow me .
I have been involved in three intergovernmental conferences myself as a civil servant .
My view on intergovernmental conferences is that , for the past 25 years , we have either been preparing , negotiating or ratifying a new Treaty .
I do not know about you guys - Mr Corbett and the others - I , at least , am getting to the stage of IGC fatigue .
We need to get this over and done with .
There have been too many IGCs ; they have been constant .
I am not against change - quite the contrary - but at some stage we need to calm down , and I think , in two weeks , we will end up doing that .
My second observation is that , of course , I would have liked to have had a Constitution , but let us live with the reformed Treaty as it stands .
It is a great improvement on what we have .
Of course , we all have criticisms , not least on the opt-outs , not least on the question of whether it is simplified or actually more complicated .
We all have our qualms , but remember : it is very strong on foreign policy ; it gives us a legal personality ; it gives us fundamental rights - at least some of us - and it gives us more qualified majority voting .
Of course , there is always room for improvement at the end of the day , but this reformed Treaty is what we have .
So , to the UK and to Poland I say , ' Calm down and accept it ' .
The final point I have is that I really do believe that it is time to try to restore trust between the Member States .
We have been on a negative wave ever since the Nice negotiations , when the small were pitted against the big .
Now it is time , I think , to bury the axe and restore trust , the way in which we used to have it before Nice .
It is time to calm the institutions down , settle the issues and focus on real policymaking .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the first place I would like to thank the Members of the European Parliament for their very significant support for the endeavours and the work carried out by the Portuguese Presidency within the scope of the Intergovernmental Conference leading to the approval , we hope , of a new Treaty for our Union .
To those who spoke less favourably , or even against , I would like to say that the Presidency will take note , and it is our obligation to do so , of those concerns and criticisms because we regard them all as part of the collaboration in our work and our endeavours , and they must naturally also be taken into consideration .
I think it was Graham Watson who said here that Portugal 's Prime Minister must feel that he is preparing his army to fight the Intergovernmental Conference battle on 18 and 19 October .
That is one way of looking at it and I would say that I am a soldier in that army , hoping that many other soldiers also present here will join our army , so that in Lisbon we can actually achieve a new Treaty on European Union .
The Intergovernmental Conference has finished its work of the lawyers and experts .
Now it is the politicians ' turn to pronounce at the level of justice and I am sure that the politicians and governments will be equal to their responsibilities .
It has been said here that we cannot fail and the Portuguese Presidency fully concurs with that statement .
We cannot fail and we are going to build an agreement which will , I am sure , have everyone 's support ; it could not be any other way .
We will pay attention to the sensitivities , interests and concerns of all .
We will not disregard anyone .
As I say , we are therefore confident of success , given the feeling that a debate which has perhaps been running for too long needs to be drawn to a conclusion as well as the perceived urgent need to create a spirit of construction , union and positive energy in order to face many other problems which we shall have to confront in the future and which have been mentioned here : climate change , energy issues , immigration , our own internal reform , which we need to achieve in order to face the more general problems of globalisation .
I am sure that the feeling of urgency with regard to the conclusion of a Treaty , in order to inspire us to win other battles , will be felt in Lisbon and that when we return here for the next Plenary , we shall be bringing you glad tidings , bringing you good news .
I would like to thank the Members of the European Parliament once again for the support they gave to our team of lawyers and I am sure that they will continue to support them in subsequent phases , as many speakers have mentioned here .
Just a word about the question of the Lisbon Strategy in order to thank João de Deus Pinheiro for his speech .
We are going to introduce a new element into the debate on the Lisbon Strategy and that is bound up with the foreign policy dimension of that strategy .
It is fundamentally bound up with the need to lay down rules , to regulate , on matters where there are no rules and there is no regulation , in order to achieve effective progress , social stability , economic stability and peace in an ordered and regulated world where the rules and standards are clear for all to see because we must all , so to speak , deal with them so that in fact the world we are building will be a fairer world for all .
As I say , I shall be here with the Presidency .
I know that the Prime Minister of Portugal will also be intending to come here and I shall be with him at the next plenary session ; we are confident that we will be able to announce that the European Union has a new Treaty : the Reform Treaty .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for this interesting debate .
You always learn a lot of new things and I can , of course , promise that I will report back to the Commission .
I have taken careful notes so that we can follow up also at the meeting that will take place in Luxembourg next Monday .
I have heard three direct questions that I would like to respond to as well as I can .
The first one alludes to Parliament 's involvement in the procedure of appointing the first High Representative .
The Treaty here reproduces the 2004 text .
I am sure that everybody will want to find a pragmatic political solution that can satisfy all sides when this moment comes .
You may remember , of course , the precedent of Commissioners appointed after recent enlargements .
There , too , Parliament got satisfaction in practice , although the legal texts were not clear .
I think it is in our interest to make sure that there is a satisfactory role for Parliament in this whole procedure .
The second question had to do with Article 24 of the Treaty , on protection of personal data in the field of security .
Here , at least , I can respond for the Commission , which understands Parliament 's concerns on provisions relating to the transmission of confidential data by the Member States .
As it stands now , Article 24 of the EU Treaty allows the Council alone to define the rules in this field , with no possibility of involvement of the European Parliament .
This new provision , of course , stems from the IGC mandate .
It applies to Member States only , whilst the European institutions remain subject to the general regime , and the foreseen procedure complies with the very specific regime that exists on the common foreign and security policy .
Here , it means that the competence of the Court is restricted .
I am afraid that there is little margin to change the substance agreed in the mandate , but , in any event , I want to reassure you that we do not read this article as covering , for example , the EU agreement with the United States on passenger name records .
That agreement currently has a third-pillar legal base and , therefore , in the Commission 's view , it will therefore be covered by the normal competence of the EP and the Court in the future .
So this is how the Commission sees those issues .
I am seated so that I can actually watch all our visitors .
I am not sure that we can always explain very clearly what we are discussing here , but I am sure that the visitors have felt the type of frustration that comes from this debate and the fact that some are very happy with this , they say it is a good compromise ; others are not pleased at all and say that this is not good enough ; others say that we are going too far .
Of course , it reflects the political situation and the difficult political game that comes after a long period of actually having discussed how we can adapt our decision-making procedures to enlarge the European Union of 27 Member States ; how we can actually incorporate also the new issues that have emerged lately , like climate change and energy ; how we can be more open and effective .
All the visitors also remind me that , whatever the outcome - and we think and hope , with the help of the Portuguese Presidency , that we will have a good outcome , that we will be able to agree a new Reform Treaty - we will have to communicate ; we will have to engage with citizens to try to do our best to explain .
I hope that the Commission and the European Parliament will be able to plan also the communication activities together by making sure that we also provide a text which is as accessible and readable as possible ; that we can create a debate which is European , so that you can , hopefully , follow the debate in other Member States as well - and with a political commitment from all of us , all the institutions , to engage with citizens : to explain , to advocate and also to listen .
This is our role from now on .
This is only the beginning .
We also have the ratification and the implementation awaiting us .
But , for me and the Commission , we believe that this is a good Reform Treaty - not a perfect one : it is , of course , a compromise ; we would have wanted no opt-outs but really good support for what is in there on the Charter of Fundamental Rights especially , but we have a compromise , we have an agreement between all the Member States - and now we will make the best of it .
( Applause )
That concludes the item .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) Hungary has always championed support for the Constitutional Treaty - or , in its new form , the Reform Treaty .
Hungary 's interest , and the Union 's objective , is that we should safeguard peace and our fundamental interests , and promote the welfare of the citizens of the Union , already approximately 500 million in number .
Europe has changed , and the world has changed .
The new security threats must be responded to with new strategies and new policies .
Europe must prepare for change in all areas .
I believe that the Reform Treaty can help to set Europe 's course , and to define its future operating framework , policy and the Europe in which we would like to live and succeed .
I consider it important that the heads of state and government act responsibly at the informal summit on 18-19 October , setting aside their historical grievances , and that they reach a unanimous decision on the final text of the Reform Treaty , which can move the Union in the right direction .
The objective of the summit is to adopt the text of the Reform Treaty , thus reinforcing the effectiveness of the enlarged European Union , and to increase the role of the European Parliament , the only elected body , and also the Union 's external action .
The European Parliament has guaranteed and will guarantee its full support for the constitutional process and the creation of the Reform Treaty right up to now , and it trusts that the 27 Member States will ratify it as soon as possible .
The representatives of the parliamentary groups will ensure that the Parliament is present at the Lisbon summit , thereby also reinforcing the creation of the Reform Treaty .
The essential thing is that we need a Europe in which 27 Member States feel a joint responsibility for us to take suitable steps together for a better future .
The time has come , and we have to prove it in Lisbon !
in writing . - ( FR ) The draft Reform Treaty corresponds precisely to the mandate approved by the 27 in June .
It translates their political commitment to the letter , and should enable the European Union to leave behind the political impasse it has found itself in for more than ten years .
I now ask the members of the European Council to keep their word and stop raising ' off-mandate ' questions in extremis .
This is not the time for minor last-minute arrangements , sudden nationalistic reactions , or withdrawal reflexes that are in danger of making this Treaty lose all its coherence , by introducing lots of accommodating opt-outs .
The adoption of this text should respect the timetable envisaged , with a view to the Treaty of Lisbon entering into force on 1 January 2009 .
We should now be focusing on raising awareness among our fellow citizens , who are now more demanding and critical of the European Union .
They need explanations , and we should be providing them , showing ourselves to be good teachers .
It is the responsibility of every one of us to share our enthusiasm in this new context characterised both by a return to the European mindset and by the imperative of democratic transparency .
Membership of Parliament
The next item is the report by Alain Lamassoure and Adrian Severin , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the composition of the European Parliament .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the motion for a resolution is a response to an invitation by the European Council in June .
Article 9 A of the draft Treaty states that in future the composition of the Parliament will be a matter for secondary legislation .
This will be a decision of the European Council , adopted by unanimity , on the initiative of the European Parliament and with its consent .
The Council is inviting us to explain how this procedure should work .
It wants to see us deal with this hot potato .
For our Parliament , this is a real political challenge .
Are we capable of coming up with a reform that applies to ourselves ?
The last time we were asked to do this was in 2000 , and Parliament did not manage to do it .
For this reason the vote secured in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is already a remarkable political result .
We obtained a large majority : two thirds in the final vote and three quarters on the main point , the distribution of seats , in terms of actual numbers , between the Member States .
What is the problem we are facing ?
We should first remember that the current Parliament of 785 MEPs no longer complies with the new legal position resulting from the amended Treaty of Nice .
It is this system that would apply , based on 736 MEPs , in the absence of any new decision .
Up to now , in the Council and in Parliament , the Member States have been divided into categories : one supersize state , some large ones , some medium-sized , some small , etc .
Each category has the same voting rights in the Council and the same number of seats in Parliament .
This is over !
The future Treaty introduces two types of innovation in relation to this system .
On the one hand , there are actual figures : a maximum of 750 MEPs , a ceiling of 96 and a minimum of 6 seats per Member State .
On the other , there is a principle : between the maximum and minimum , the Member States must be represented according to degressive proportionality , and it is our job in Parliament to define this principle today , namely to choose how much proportionality and how much degressivity there is , or how over-represented the least populous countries are and how under-represented the most populous countries are .
Your committee is proposing that this principle should be translated in the following way : firstly , the minimum and maximum numbers set by the Treaty must be fully utilised .
In particular , the use of the ceiling of 750 seats will give us a small reserve -as it were - of seats , so degressive proportionality can be applied without reducing the number of seats of any country .
This is a fundamental political choice , and is absolutely necessary to obtain unanimity in the European Council .
Secondly , the larger the population of a country , the greater its entitlement to a large number of seats , of course .
Thirdly , the larger the population of a country , the more inhabitants are represented by each of its Members of the European Parliament .
So at present , a Spanish MEP represents more than 875 000 people , Mr President , while a German MEP represents only 832 000 .
Up to now , Germany has had twice the population of Spain .
This anomaly will be put right by the allocation of four additional seats to Spain .
In total , ten countries are affected by the proposed increases .
We are fully aware of the fact that this is only a temporary solution .
It would be desirable to come up with some sort of mathematical formula that would automatically apply to any future enlargements , but the tight timescale given to us did not allow this .
However , the resolution makes some recommendations on this point .
Similarly , we had to use the only population figures available , those from Eurostat , since we did not have any figures from the citizens themselves .
Adrian Severin will say more about this .
Finally , we would warn our fellow members against amendments that contradict the fundamental principles of the report and will have the effect , depending on the case , of giving the large countries an abnormal advantage over the smaller countries or small countries over the large countries , in which case our work will have been in vain , because without unanimity in the Council we will have to stick with the 736 seats of the Treaty of Nice .
So , ladies and gentlemen , please refrain from bidding up your countries .
We have spent the afternoon proclaiming that we are the only democratic institution protecting the interests of Europeans before the other institutions , above national egotism .
Now , today , we have the perfect opportunity to show that our actions are faithful to our words .
( Applause )

rapporteur . - Mr President , our proposals - Mr Lamassoure 's and mine - confirmed by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , bring a number of improvements to the current practices regarding the composition of the European Parliament .
If adopted , and properly enhanced , there will be no more artificial groupings , no more arbitrary negotiations , no more enlargement at the expense of the efficiency of the European Parliament , which is always growing with the number of Members .
There will be more representativity , based on demographic realities and not on nominal or symbolic legal relations , more solidarity between the big and small states resulting from the digressive proportionality of the representation , and full legitimacy based on the civic representation resulting from the fact that the European Parliament is elected by European citizens .
One should note the difference between the democratic legitimacy of the European Parliament , which is based on the vote of the European citizens , and national representativity within the European Parliament , which is based on the demographic realities within the Member States .
We , the European Parliament , are representative of citizens and of the states at the same time .
( Murmurs of dissent )
You see , immediately , some say only citizens , others say states .
We are a Bundestag and a Bundesrat at the same time .
A clear separation of this dimension should , perhaps , be considered in the future , but for the time being - once we have accepted that the citizens are voting and that digressive proportionality should take into consideration the size of the communities living on national territories - I am sorry , but we are both .
Of course , within this framework , the concept of European citizenship is still to be clarified , and I hope that this will be done in the near future .
Our report , however , is not provisional but transitional .
It is transitional because I believe the principles we have defined are long-lasting , but progress is needed , and I am sure that in the future we can add to what we have already proposed to you .
Therefore , we have included a number of revision clauses which to our minds - Mr Lamassoure 's and mine - will assure flexibility , adaptability and future progress in the way in which Parliament is composed .
Nobody is penalised by this report .
Maybe those with a better demographic policy are rewarded , and certainly it is an invitation for a better demographic policy , including migration policy .
I do not think anybody loses - and , perhaps , nobody wins - in terms of a zero-sum game .
As long as we have a more democratically legitimate Parliament , everybody wins .
We have some amendments .
Some colleagues would like to reduce digressivity in favour of proportionality - more proportionality means more seats for the big countries .
Some others would like more digressivity and not more proportionality .
More digressivity means more seats for small countries .
Therefore , I believe that we have to reject both these extreme options in order to promote the option which is , I agree , imperfect , but which for the time being is the best one .
This is the option proposed by Mr Lamassoure and myself .
Some would look on the basis of reference .
Some would like all their national citizens , irrespective of their country of residence , to be taken into consideration .
Others would like to see all inhabitants in their countries being taken into consideration .
Others are trying to see only the European citizens residing in a certain country .
So we are divided on that .
The only solution is to stick with the actual practices and the actual Eurostat figures .
Finally , there are some who are fighting for political prestige and think that , if we are not equally represented in this Parliament , we are unequal in our political weight .
I think that once we have accepted digressivity - and proportional digressivity - these artificial groupings cannot survive any longer .
If we fail to adopt this resolution , I am afraid that the European Parliament will send the message that it is not able to adopt an important reform and that it has to always wait for the executive institution to decide for it .
I think that the IGC will suffer a first failure before it can even consider the issues on its agenda , and this failure might be a prelude to a total failure .
I am afraid that everybody will go back to Nice and not to illusory dreams .
I am afraid that , then , we will give a message which will mean a split between the big and small countries , and this will undermine any dream of unity , fairness and inclusion .
Therefore , I end with an appeal to all my colleagues .
I make this appeal to our sense of European responsibility and European solidarity .
Hic Rhodus , hic salta !
Here is Rhodes , and let us prove here that we are true Europeans , and not when giving lessons to the Commission and the Council .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the report provides clarification for which I would like to express my sincere thanks to both rapporteurs , Messrs Lamassoure and Severin .
It makes clear that we are constantly exceeding the stipulated upper and lower limits .
I would like to express my thanks specifically for this .
This clarification is important for us all .
Secondly , there are two outcomes to this report .
Firstly , the less degressive the scale we have , that is , the more we gear ourselves to proportionality , the more genuine authority and legitimacy Parliament has .
The conflict as to how much degressivity we need - how much less , how much more - must be continually managed and it is logical here , I believe , for us to say the less the degressivity , the greater the legitimacy .
As a German , I would also add that it is somewhat problematic , of course , that we as Germans are the only ones getting less than we did on the basis of Nice .
We would like a little bit more support here because the discussion in the German press is very explicit in this regard .
We shall accept this because we too believe that the European aspect is more important than all the others .
Finally , two findings which we ought to utilise for the future .
Firstly , we really ought to be working towards obtaining a logical system in the long-term , which we do not have to be constantly renegotiating .
Secondly , there are two controversial amendments , 2 and 3 .
Our Group has decided that irrespective of how the vote goes on the two controversial subjects , in the end the Group will vote in favour of the Lamassoure / Severin Report .
The Council has no excuse .
In Amendment 2 , which differs only minimally from the figures in the Lamassoure Report , the outcome would be that the Council is given a message from Parliament for the period 2009-2014 .
Hence our Parliament and all the Groups have on balance , as I believe , fulfilled their duties and the Council can decide , if it is willing .
Many thanks for a fair discussion on such a difficult subject !
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , on behalf of the PSE Group , I would like to support this report .
My group will be voting for it and we hope that this text that was adopted by a 70 % majority in committee can now be endorsed by an equally impressive majority in Parliament as a whole .
The rapporteurs have - sensibly , in view of the legal constraints laid down by the new Treaty , in view of the time constraints laid down now before the conclusion of the IGC - focused on correcting the main anomalies in the current distribution of seats rather than embarking on proposing a radical overhaul of the system , which could only have led to deadlock in the IGC and endangered the approval and ratification of the new Treaty .
In particular , no Member State will see a reduction in the number of seats that it is entitled to under the current treaties where they provide for the distribution of seats from 2009 onwards - except , of course , where it is laid down in the Treaty itself for the Federal Republic of Germany .
With that sole exception , no country will see a reduction compared to what is planned already in the Treaty for 2009 .
Now , of course , some of our colleagues are trying to win more seats for their own Member State , sometimes arguing that their country 's population is suddenly much bigger than we had all assumed beforehand , bigger than the Eurostat figures that are used by everybody , including the Council .
Others are arguing , for reasons of national prestige , that they should have the same number of seats as another particular Member State .
I must confess that I am very surprised at the attitude of the Italian Government .
I understand that Mr Prodi , and indeed some Italian Members here , have been arguing that it is essential for Italy to have the same number of seats as France and the United Kingdom .
Yet they accepted - we all accepted - the principle of proportional degression : proportional to population .
I accept that my country will have one seat fewer than France although we have always had the same size up to now .
I do not see why it should be so difficult for Italy as well to accept that it has fewer seats than France for exactly the same reason .
And I am surprised that a government from a country that has so often said that it is the example to us all in terms of being communautaire , that it has a strong European commitment , that it is not nationalist , it always puts Europe before its national interests , that now Italy and Mr Prodi is arguing that Italy , for reasons of national prestige , should have the same number of seats as France and the UK , even though its population does indeed differ .
To conclude , may I urge that this House support this report , reject the amendments and send a clear strong message to the European Council .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the ALDE Group will also support the Lamassoure-Severin proposal .
The IGC is asking us to change our composition to suit the terms of the Reform Treaty , and that is a perfectly proper request .
We , as a Parliament , need to send a strong , clear message back that we are able to take such a sophisticated and brave decision .
There is no pure , definitive formula .
Paragraph 6 applies a practicable and sensible definition of degressive proportionality .
Of course , I , too , accept that some national delegations are seeking to improve their position on the league table , but it transpires that all such proposals are mutually contradictory .
All those who seek to alter the system fail .
The D 'Hondt proposal would give too much clout to the larger states , and I would say to Mr Friedrich that his proposal breaches the Treaty principle of degressive proportionality .
The square root system gives too much clout to smaller states .
I completely accept that the Italians raise an interesting point about the statistical basis , and we should examine , as a Parliament , the distinction between nationals , citizens , residents and voters .
But the issue is extraordinary complicated , and it treads firmly upon national sovereignty in the area of electoral law and citizenship .
We cannot possibly solve such a problem inside the space of a week before the end of the IGC .
Following the IGC , there will be a report from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , for which I have the privilege to be appointed rapporteur , that can address all these questions and propose a reform of the primary law of 1976 .
But all of that is for next year rather than the present state of affairs .
Meanwhile , let us give solid support to the proposal and send a solution , rather than a problem , to the IGC .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Madam President , I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the co-rapporteurs for their efforts with regard to what is a very difficult and complex issue .
Ultimately , despite what some colleagues may say , turkeys do not vote for Christmas , so why would any present Member of the European Parliament look to see their seat being taken away ?
There is a legitimate reasoning behind the desire of those who seek to have the highest number of seats available to them in each of the national categories .
I would be slow to denigrate that attitude in anybody .
Because , if anything , when we look back over the changes that have occurred since the first direct elections to the European Parliament took place in 1979 , there have been phenomenal demographic and population trend changes across the European Union , not least because of the expansion of the European Union into eastern Europe in 2004 , which allowed for the free movement of so many people into other countries , which has altered the populations greatly .
I think one of the careful elements that we have to speak about ( and we can speak about degressive proportionality till the cows come home ) is that there has always been a balance between the different institutions - and also a balance between the larger and smaller Member States - to ensure that no one institution would have total domination over another , or that larger Member States could not dominate medium-sized or small Member States .
That is why it is important to maintain this balance as much as possible .
I welcome the rapporteurs ' inclusion , in a compromise amendment , of maintaining that interinstitutional balance .
But , as well as that , when we look at the figures that have been used - and much has been quoted by other colleagues here with regard to the Eurostat figures - out of the 27 countries , the figures that Eurostat for 15 of those countries are using are only provisional figures from the central statistics offices of those countries .
So , decisions are being made on only provisional figures when that could have a lasting impact with regard to the future allocation of seats in Parliament .
We must also keep an eye on further enlargement taking in Croatia , which would also impact negatively .
Therefore , I would urge caution when voting on this issue .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , my Group will not be voting for this report because the proposed system of representation , and the distribution of seats , disregards basic democratic principles , sustains historic inequalities and is contrary to the nature of this House as representative of the citizens and of its electors .
These are not dreams that are not being fulfilled .
Yes , Mr Severin , there are many who are wanting a great deal , but what we should all be wanting is to be getting some idea of what a Parliament is .
A Parliament is not - as the rapporteurs told us in their letter yesterday evening - the representation of the Member States ' socioeconomic capacity .
No , it is the representation of the electors and nothing more .
It is the representation of citizens or it is not a Parliament !
It is not a Parliament if there is no demos on which to base ourselves , and it is not true that the term citizenship in Europe has nothing to do with the term under international law or the term citizenship in the United States .
It is precisely the same and I would advise you to look at the existing treaties .
I would advise you to look at the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights , in which the rights of those citizens are laid down .
I would advise you to look at the rules governing access to the European Court of Justice .
I would advise you to look at the rules on how we become voters .
Then you will recognise that it is the easiest thing in the world to find out who is a citizen of this Union and who is entitled to vote for this Parliament .
This is decided every five years .
The inhabitants , the population , these are a symbolic expression of socio-economic capacity .
But we have already failed here once , when we were asked in Nice : dear Parliament , just tell us yourself what you want your composition to be .
We failed on that occasion .
Unfortunately , we have not used those seven years to clarify what this Parliament is .
We are therefore reassessing the historical nonsense and the historical practical constraints that have arisen to date .
These do not have anything at all to do with democracy and thinking on the Constitution .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , there are different views in my Group .
I , however , support the report by Messrs Lamassoure und Severin .
With the report Parliament responsibly keeps its right of initiative to submit a proposal itself on its future composition .
It does so thanks to the intensive work done by both rapporteurs in a genuine European spirit .
The proposal is well balanced , it is based on a clear , comprehensible and transparent system , and can also be sustained for future enlargements .
The proposal follows the principle of diversity .
By using all 750 possible seats , it also ensures that in future Parliament will reflect the whole range of the main political orientations from each country .
The proposal is also based on the principle of solidarity , hence the larger , most populous Member States agreeing to have less influence in order to allow the smaller , least populous Member States to be better represented .
All this helps strengthen the Union 's cohesion .
I therefore hope that the Council unreservedly and speedily implements Parliament 's proposal before the 2009 elections .
One further comment in conclusion .
All the people who live in the Member State concerned form the basis for calculating a Member State 's seats - as with the Council - including third-country nationals living there , because they are part of this society .
However , this is only one side of the coin .
Third-country nationals whose homes are in our Member States must also have the right to vote for the European Parliament .
I have always fought for this and I shall continue to do so !
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , the usual thing to do when we have such a report before our hands is to argue what one country should get and what another should lose , which only proves that European solidarity is a myth and national egoism always triumphs .
In light of the recent German aggression by Mr Schulz against the President of the European Commission , let us look at a good method of winning at the zero-sum game .
In paragraph 8 , we witness a lamentation that Germany will lose seats .
We hear more and more of this lamentation : that more EU documents should be translated into German , that Germany is the biggest net contributor to the EU budget , that it should have its own seat on the UN Security Council and so on .
We could make a whole list of such complaints .
At the same time , Mr Severin is trying to convince us , through his undefined degressive proportionality - which , coincidentally does not affect his own Romania - that when Poland loses three seats , it actually gains one .
I only wish that his concept would work this well in the casino .
But let us get things clear .
Only a socialist from Yorkshire could accept that two plus two is five .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lamassoure-Severin report should be scornfully rejected because of its ideological anti-Italian subtext and the superficial nature of the technical arguments versus the political arguments on which it rests .
I will not enter into a discussion of the merits of how much the ius sanguinis weighs with me as compared with the Jacobinism of the ius loci , as this is clearly absent from the thinking of the rapporteurs and those who commissioned the initiative .
I am not a legal expert , nor do I have a major reputation like Professor Manzella , chairman of the Italian Senate 's Committee on European Affairs , nor like other fellow Members , who can challenge with equal precision the legal inconsistency of the assertions made in the report .
I believe , however , that it is worth stressing that for the rapporteurs incontestable facts do not count : in politics it is the assessment and the role that Italy has had in the past and still has today in the institution of Europe .
The very poorly Italianised principle of degressive proportionality , redefining the allocation of seats established in the Constitutional Treaty that has been put on hold , has been applied with clear discrimination against Italy .
For some countries brackets have been left in the system , and there are some glaring instances of distortion of the facts , such as the allocation to Estonia of the same number of seats as Malta , although it has three times the population .
We can accept that in the United Kingdom people with the right to vote include residents who are not European citizens , and on this basis the rapporteurs allocate the UK one more seat than Italy , even though of those with the right to vote only a little more than one third voted in the 2004 election .
We can accept that France , which compiles its electorate and fills up its demographic profile with the same variety of birthplaces that can be seen in its national football team , is allocated two more seats than Italy .
We can accept the sloth of the Italian Government and we saw the flight at the time of the preliminaries to the debate in the Council .
There is something , however , that cannot be accepted .
The rapporteurs cling to their debatable sense of citizenship .
They claim that anyone living in Europe , even if they hold passports and citizenships from outside Europe , is a voter .
They exclude from the calculation , however , citizens living outside Europe .
This gives an idea of the gross , manipulative and unacceptable anti-Italian discrimination that we most strongly reject !
( SK ) First and foremost , I would like to express my support to the rapporteurs , Mr Lamassoure and Mr Severin , for their report .

We must reconcile ourselves to the fact that the Slovak Republic will lose one Member as a result of the agreed principle of digressive proportionality .
In relation to the proportional allocation of seats in Parliament , this principle should be extended to all areas of EU employment policy .
I therefore ask for an increase in the number of representatives and employees from the 12 new Member States in all EU institutions .
I think that every Member State has a sufficient number of qualified people who can make a valid contribution to the EU .
Equality is one of the principles underlying the EU .
Even the original Member States committed to honour this principle when they welcomed among them the 12 new Member States .
It should apply to all areas and not just the positions of Member of the European Parliament or Commissioner .
I call for the principal of equality to be observed and honoured .
When the new Member States joined the EU they had to fulfil many criteria .
Now I appeal to the EU as a whole to fulfil its commitments towards them .

( SV ) Madam President , by supporting Mr Lamassoure 's report the European Union can take a historic step .
With this report we can leave behind a time when the number of seats in the European Parliament was distributed on the basis of a system where different countries were categorised in different groups , on the basis of the negotiating skills of different heads of government , and where it is assumed that the EU 's Member States have conflicting interests .
If Parliament chooses to support Mr Lamassoure 's report , we will leave behind this system and move to one based on the proportionality principle , where a country 's size affects its representation in Parliament .
The system that we have had up to now has been very difficult to explain , but the system that we can get with the Lamassoure report is possible to explain .
It is based on a maximum and a minimum level and on account being taken of the number of people in the different countries .
This principle is also tenable looking to the future .
It means that the interests of one country or another are not furthered , but the number of citizens is taken into account .
This is a step forward in the democratic process in the European Union .
I want it to be quite clear what alternative we are facing .
We either support the proposals set out in the Lamassoure report or we go back to the Nice agreement with its arbitrariness and negotiations marked by conflicting national interests .
When I hear the latest speakers from the benches up here and their agitation , I can also hear the national interests in relation to conflicts .
The Lamassoure report should be supported because it is based on a principle .
( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs drawn up by Alain Lamassoure and Adrian Severin on the future composition of the European Parliament is an important contribution which highlights a balanced and objective solution on a matter which is , politically speaking , highly sensitive .
I should therefore like to congratulate the two co-rapporteurs .
We should remember that it was last June 's European Council which promised the European Parliament , by October 2007 , a solution to the problem of its future composition so that the solution could be applied in time for the 2009 European elections .
To those who feared that Parliament would be unable to resolve that question due to the prevalence of nationalistic ideology this report is an apt response and demonstrates that this institution is proficient at pinpointing and expressing the common European interest within the national dynamics which tend to complicate intergovernmental matters .
It is important to set out the European Parliament 's position for the smooth running of the work of the IGC , which should be completed in Lisbon on 18 and 19 October .
It is therefore essential to acknowledge the political link between this new proposal on distribution of seats in line with the principle of degressive proportionality and the reform package for the Union 's institutions , in particular the double majority principle for the definition of a majority in the Council .
I would like to take the opportunity to stress that the institutional aspect of the Reform Treaty needs to be coherent and that , as regards the question of double majority , which will ostensibly enter into force only in 2014-2017 , the Treaties should not contain any gentlemen 's agreements like the Ioannina compromise , which remain in force but , whilst they are legally recognised in the current framework , would merely serve to block the decision-making process in the Council .
We knew from the outset that the composition of the European Parliament would not merely be a question of mathematics .
Within the limits of the present factors , the solution to be devised would have to meet three principles : the principle of solidarity according to which the Member States with the biggest population accept that they will remain underrepresented , the principle of plurality to make it possible to have representation over the full range of the principal political orientations in each country and the principle of efficiency keeping the maximum number of representatives limited to a level compatible with the role of a legislative assembly .
With the application of the principle of degressive proportionality , the reports will achieve a reasonably consensual proposal .
In conclusion , Madam President , I would like to say that the European Parliament does not need to regard the agreement obtained as perfect before it can give its political consent .
Despite its weaknesses , the current text enhances the European Parliament 's credibility and is infinitely better than the irresponsible dragging out of an arm wrestling match between national egotisms , which would cost the Union and its citizens dearly .
On the eve of an important European Council , this House , which represents our citizens although I find it hard to follow the idea that this House also represents the Member States , is putting the European interest first trusting that the Heads of State will do the same .
( SV ) There is a large group of citizens who have been ignored in the discussion on the composition of the European Parliament .
I am thinking of the almost 50 million Europeans who belong to a regional or a national linguistic minority .
Today we are only a handful of MEPs who represent these groups .
This is not acceptable and , sadly , it gives a false image of the European Parliament .
It is as if we do not understand the vulnerable position in which certain linguistic minorities still live .
The report by Mr Lamassoure and Mr Severin , which is based on the principle of ' degressive proportionality ' , is a brilliant display of statistical work and I too will be voting in favour of it , but we must now also dare to begin discussing other substantive issues .
How will we increase the citizens ' trust in the European Union ?
How will we guarantee that the EU and the European Parliament live up to the aims that we want others to pursue , that is to say how will we ensure that the voices of minorities are also heard ?
Ladies and gentlemen , will we MEPs tolerate regional and national linguistic minorities being left at the mercy of the goodwill of national governments which may give them a seat , or do we want those minorities not to be represented in the European Parliament ?
The answer should be a resounding no !
So as to ensure diversity it is therefore time to reserve a number of seats in the European Parliament for linguistic minorities .
I myself speak for the Swedish-speaking population of Finland and for the province of Åland .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the composition of seats at Parliament contains some obvious contradictions , reinforced by the letter sent by the rapporteurs yesterday , as if to justify their position regarding such politically delicate questions , and it distorts the legal concept of citizenship as it has always been codified .
The principle put forward by the report goes beyond both nation states and the treaties .
From a legal viewpoint , European citizenship is the legal status enjoyed by those , and only those , who hold citizenship of a Member State and who are , as a result , in possession of all the rights and duties connected with that status .
It is citizenship , and not residence , which must be the test .
This proposal also distorts the approach taken in the draft of the next treaty , which clearly specifies that the concept of citizenship has nothing to do with residency .
The European Parliament has wasted a great opportunity to demonstrate to the other institutions the capacity to find within itself solutions based on legal principles that are commonly recognised and shared .
I would ask the rapporteurs why they did not even consider the possibility of using , for the purposes of allocating seats , the number of citizens in the Member States rather than the resident population .
Perhaps it was to benefit some states more than others ?
Look at the case of the United Kingdom , which grants the right to vote in European elections even to those who are not EU citizens .
Mr Lamassoure and Mr Severin : stating , as you have done , that nobody has been penalised as compared with the Nice agreements , seems to me an obvious distortion of the truth , which others will be called upon to remedy .
For this reason , we cannot back this report .
Not only that , but it is also detrimental , not only for our country - my country - but also for the other countries of the Union .
It is also detrimental to representative democracy and the future treaty , which , as you yourselves recognise , contains guidelines and principles on which the distribution of seats at Parliament ought to be based .
We cannot ignore the concept of European citizenship as the basis of the democratic legitimacy of our Parliament .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in favour of a decisive role for the European Parliament , which is often argued against , but it seems that the governments wish to use this proposal to manipulate our Chamber .
This proposal for the composition of seats is , in our view , ill-advised .
Italy is being penalised , and that is a cause for concern , but what matters most of all is that the reasons for this penalisation are ill-founded .
A historical parity is being destroyed , and , worst of all , the allocation of seats is being altered in the name of a resident population not granted the right of citizenship .
Those who , like Italy , have given the right to vote to citizens not resident in the country are being penalised .
What we need is something totally different : I think , for instance , that we really need a citizenship of residency , but one that would count not only in terms of the number of Members of Parliament to be elected , but also in terms of the right to vote and to be elected .
We need to guarantee representation for political minorities and small states , setting this out expressly in the criteria to be adopted in national electoral laws , and we need to think about new arrangements that make the most of the European parties and their ability to present themselves as such in elections .
None of this appears in the report , and for that reason I will be voting against it .
( DA ) Madam President , the report that Parliament will be adopting tomorrow will effectively halt the accession to the EU of Turkey and other populous European countries .
Germany will have its say in the Council doubled , whilst smaller countries will have theirs halved .
At the same time , some of the larger countries will obtain more seats in Parliament .
On the whole , Germany will continue to be compensated for having had the same number of votes in the Council as Italy , the United Kingdom and France , even though it currently gets maximum value out of every German in the Council .
I do not think that the larger countries will produce such gains again , and the smaller countries cannot produce any more if the electorate is to perceive decisions as legitimate : listen to Mr Lax .
I would appeal to the largest countries to stop and think .
There cannot be both voting according to population figures in the Council and an approximation of the same voting principle also in Parliament .
In the United States , there is equality between states in the Senate .
In Germany , Saarland , with one million inhabitants , has three votes in the upper house of the German Parliament , whilst Rhineland-Palatinate , with a population of 18 million , has six votes ; thus the German system is hardly fair .
When my country joined the EC , Germany had three times more votes in the Council than Denmark ; now it will be 15 times more .
Previously , Germany had three-and-a-half times more seats in Parliament than Denmark ; now it will be eight times more .
That is too uneven , and will never have the understanding of the electorate .
It will destroy the EU - that is the problem .
( NL ) Madam President , allow me to begin by expressing my doubts about the timing of the resolution now under discussion .
It is true that the June European Council asked Parliament to present a draft concerning the future composition of Parliament , but we now discover that the whole proposal is based on the Reform Treaty , a text that has yet to be ratified , let alone enter into force .
In other words , we are putting the cart before the horse .
Incidentally , it is not the first time this has happened , and it is really starting to become sickening .
I am speaking here not on behalf of the Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty Group but as a representative of a small Member State - or rather a future Member State , as it is no longer a question of if but when Belgium will be split up and Flanders becomes an independent state .
I digress .
I think that the principle of degressive proportionality advocated by this report is the most workable and also the fairest starting point if one believes at least that the smaller Member States and their representatives in this Parliament must be able to go on playing a meaningful role .
In any case , I support a broad interpretation of this principle of degressive proportionality , and therefore intend to support the relevant amendment by Mr Bonde .
In my view , it is in the interests of the European Union that the smaller Member States have the best possible representation in the European Parliament ; if not , we shall see a further fall in popular support for the European institutions .
( PL ) Madam President , today we have two successive debates here in the European Parliament which will tell us what the order will be in the European Union and how power will be shared out .
For me , as a representative of Poland and the League of Polish Families , this is a very sad debate .
I take a highly critical view of this new attempt to introduce the Constitutional Treaty under the new name of Reform Treaty , as well as of the new distribution of votes in the European Parliament , which discriminates against my country .
The report , based on highly dubious and far-fetched arguments that was adopted in the European Parliament 's Constitutional Committee , clearly strikes at some countries and favours others ; and not for the first time , either .
I cannot give my consent to that .
I am also calling on the President of Poland to reject this Treaty in a week 's time in Lisbon .
Madam President , I think this is one of the saddest days in our plenary work over these five years because it is the first time I , at least , personally , feel that this has become an intergovernmental body .
This reminds me of the nights in Amsterdam in 1997 ; this reminds me of the nights in Nice in 2000 .
And today in the group , and I think here in plenary , we can see what it is all about .
I really thought that the European Parliament was here to represent the interests of all European peoples , not narrow national interests .
We have three options on the table : one is the Severin-Lamassoure proposal , which I think is a European proposal .

It is an excellent proposal and they have done a fantastic job and should be congratulated for it .
( Applause )
The second option that we have is to go back to Nice .
Perhaps some of us want that ; I do not know .
But do we really ?
Is that why we are going through this whole debate ?
Do we want to go back to Nice ?
Does Spain want to lose seats ?
Does Poland want to lose seats ?
I do not know .
The third option is what I call a provocative option and that is two provocations : one , to give the big states a hell of a lot more and the small states a hell of a lot less .
The other provocation came from the other side , to give the little ones a lot and give absolutely nothing to the big .
Is that what we want ?
Is that what we are here for ?
I do not think so .
At least , I do not hope so .
Tomorrow 's debate is about the credibility of the European Parliament and whether we can take a rational , logical and fair decision .
Are we capable of coming up with a proposal , or are we just like the Member States ?
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , fellow Members , Parliament is providing an input with this Lamassoure / Severin Report .

We will be distributing the seats in 2009 , whereas the new formula for distributing votes in the Council of Ministers will not apply until 2014 .
We are now ready to introduce this operation for the next period .
The entire proposal , however , only applies if there is a new treaty .
If the new treaty is not implemented , the Treaty of Nice and the accession treaties will remain in force , which means that all countries will have fewer seats .
There should therefore be great interest in backing this proposal in the Plenary tomorrow .
I thank both the rapporteurs , Messrs Lamassoure and Severin , for the work they have done .
We cannot satisfy everyone ; that would be a miracle .
However , I do protest against what has been said by the Polish here , that somebody is suffering discrimination .
There is no discrimination against anyone .
On the contrary , a proposal has been put forward , which is plausible and adheres to objective criteria , on the basis of which the seats we have can be distributed .
We must , however , continue a debate which our Italian colleagues have started , namely the debate as to whether the concept of citizenship in the European Union is the same as the concept of citizenship at national level .
The nation state has closed the borders and excluded all others .
The EU is based on a different concept and we are in fact broadening this debate in order that all residents of the EU are represented by us and not just those in possession of a Member State 's passport .
There are 30 million in the EU who do not have the passport of a Member State , but who abide by our laws .
We shall be coming back to this once again next time .
Thank you for this proposal , which now brings us on track to a successful conclusion for the Intergovernmental Conference and for a new European treaty .

Madam President , I would just like to say to Mr Stubb that Lithuania does not gain in any of the cases he gave .

( LT ) I would like to say to Mr Alexander that Lithuania will have the same number of seats in all three cases , because in the first case it is determined , in the second case it is determined , and in the third case ...
When we are debating here as Parliament ( as the President of the Parliament is not in the chair for this important session ) , when we are debating about Parliament and I do not see Mr Lamassoure .
Is he here in the Chamber ?
Why should we talk ?
The key individuals have left .
Everything is obvious .
I speak about this because we really have to talk about a common home , a common Europe , and hear every voice of every country .
The problem of my country is that we have fought for our survival for many centuries .
We are a small nation .
Now many people live in other countries , they work in your enterprises and , practically speaking , they will be unable to solve Europe 's problems .
We try to maintain a relationship , to be together , to be a nation and will not disappear from the map , but these people will not be able to vote because the number of Members of the European Parliament will be set in respect of the number of citizens , yet they live in your country , Alexander , as well as Great Britain and Ireland and they work there honestly .
Of course , they can elect the representatives of Sweden , Finland , Britain or Italy , but in this way we are simply declining as a nation .
So this is the most important issue that makes me worry and am so sorry that , as Mr Lamassoure says , in this Chamber we really talk little about values .
Today 's debate is a perfect example .
Looking at the surnames , I know who has got how many seats and I can say in advance what opinions will be presented .
( PL ) Madam President , I have long since become used to the flagrant hypocrisy that prevails in this House .
But today I would like to ask one question .
Alright , what you want , as I am hearing from most of the speeches that have been made , is for there to be a change in the voting principles and the allocation of seats in the European Parliament so that citizenship of a given country should not be decisive , in other words you are saying that we are already looking at an integrated European people with a unified standard and unified interests .
This then is a European people .
I would like to ask all you hypocrites how it can be that poor old Poland has only one third of the agricultural subsidies , that the Germans , the richest of all , despite the common energy policy , want to negotiate over the heads of other states with Russia and run a pipeline under the sea , with its threat to environmental protection ?
Can these two things be reconciled ?
And if what I say is true , then is it not too early yet to create the myth of a European state ?
We need to work towards it , but slowly and systematically , whilst accelerated actions of this type can only lead to results that are the opposite of what is intended .
( ES ) Madam President , I understand the difficulty of the undertaking , and I acknowledge and commend the work done by the rapporteurs .
However , on some points the proposal for the distribution of seats that they make is , in my opinion , too discretionary and also does not take sufficient account of the necessary institutional balance inherited from the current Treaty of Nice .
Some MEPs have therefore signed amendments that will be submitted to the plenary tomorrow and which , I would like to stress , fully respect the principle of degressive proportionality ; and also in our view , they objectivise the allocation of seats for the future , linking it to clear and transparent criteria .
One of these amendments , which I should like to focus on , which would enter into force in the 2009 elections , is in line with one of the most prudent studies produced by the Spanish Government and sent to Parliament and the Council .
As you will understand , ladies and gentlemen , I am not guilty of defending the proposals of the current Spanish Government for partisan reasons , but what is true is that , in this case , the demographic factor is taken into greater account , and it should be considered to be essential in shaping the institution that represents the interests of the people .
Therefore , Madam President , I would ask the rapporteurs to take them into consideration , and my fellow members to vote for them , and in any case , I hope that they will be submitted , defended and taken into account by the European Council when it makes its decision next week .


( ES ) Madam President , this was not an easy undertaking , and I think that Mr Lamassoure , from the Group of the European People 's Party , and Mr Severin , from the Socialist Group , have presented us with a magnificent report that has a profound sense of being European and pro-European .
Mr Stubb is right : this is one of the saddest debates that I have attended in this House , but I hope that tomorrow the result of the vote on this report will be one of the best moments that we experience , because this report , which is not only theirs but also belongs to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , with 70 % support , firstly responds to what the Council has asked of this House ; secondly applies the principle of degressive proportionality , thirdly , guarantees a representative Parliament , something that would have been impossible with the Treaty of Nice , partly because under this treaty , in an unjustifiable and unjustified way , some countries like Spain ended up with no proportional logic in terms of their representation .

Fortunately , the proposal by Mr Lamassoure and Mr Severin , of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , adequately resolves this problem .
This is the question : either this report or Nice .
Either this report , with a representative Parliament , or Nice , with a Parliament that is not fully representative .
All the promises we want can be made about this , but , of course , what we need is a realistic report so that at the Lisbon Summit , Parliament will have its efforts recognised , and also supported along with the adoption of the new Reform Treaty . Thank you very much .
( DE ) Madam President , allow me to begin by saying that the Members of the Free Democrat Party ( FDP ) have allowed a free vote for tomorrow .
There will therefore be no party line .
Why is this so ?
There is a dilemma .
The situation for Germany is , of course , deteriorating .
Instead of the 832 000 voters per MEP to date , there will now be 858 000 .
Parliament wants to make this happen from 2009 onwards .
This will not happening in the Council until 2014 .
Reference is being made to this among other things .
Even good German newspapers like the Berlin Tagesspiegel write that the seats are being redistributed tomorrow .
There are fellow Members here in Parliament who are saying : Germany will lose three seats tomorrow .
The problem is - and this now skips to the part by which I personally stand - this is wrong .
The Lamassoure / Severin report secures the highest possible number of seats that Germany is able to have under the Treaty .
The Treaty of Nice already stipulates that there is a maximum of 96 seats .
The report clearly endorses this .
Why , then , this debate ?
Why the provocation with the d 'Hondt method , in which only the larger countries gain and the smaller ones lose massively ?
It is a proposal backed , even initiated , by fellow Members from the Christian Democratic Union ( CDU ) to my great surprise .
What does it actually mean ?
I believe that it is an un-European proposal .
The balance , the just and fair balance between large , medium-sized and small countries , is lost here .
What is more it is a proposal , which does not have the slightest chance in the Council .
Do we and our fellow Members in the CDU therefore really believe that in Belgium , Ireland , Sweden or Estonia they cannot carry out any analyses and they will vote for this proposal in the Council ?
No !
This proposal is an empty bubble , which is being replaced without any consequence - with one exception .
This consequence is a further deterioration in the atmosphere as regards European policy at home in Germany .
We should support the Lamassoure / Severin Report .
We should ensure that a strong political signal goes out from the European Parliament to the Council that we are able to deal with the problems ourselves .
If this signal , a European signal , is strong , it is good for us all and I expressly include Germany in this .
( NL ) Madam President , as has already been said repeatedly in this House , it is ultimately Parliament 's credibility that is at stake in this debate .
At issue is its ability to carry out its task of presenting a proposal with a broad majority , thus making it difficult for the Council to disregard the proposal .

The virtue of the Lamassoure / Severin report is that , pragmatically , it makes a proposal that meets all the requirements of the Treaty .
There are not four alternatives , but in fact only two , namely the Lamassoure / Severin report or Nice .
After all , if we fail to win the support of a broad majority for a proposal , so will the Council , and we will revert to Nice .
I do not really understand a number of the amendments tabled .
Although it is clear that the square root amendment strongly supports the smaller countries , this is actually a caricature of proportionality .
Nor do I understand , however , the amendment instigated mainly by German Members , which takes no account of the position of the smaller countries and requests that more opportunities be given to the larger Member States in the Council .
Am I to understand , perhaps , that this is a vicious way of returning to Nice and restoring 99 seats to Germany ?
If that is the case , I find it very debilitating for this Parliament .
I hope that , tomorrow , Parliament understands that its credibility is at stake , and that this can only be retained by supporting the Lamassoure / Severin report with a broad majority , as that is the only realistic amendment .
( PL ) Madam President , it is hard for me to accept a report according to which my country - I should say , and I shall say , the Polish people , as it is they who elect their representatives - loses the opportunity to elect three additional MEPs .
That is by how much the Polish representation in the European Parliament is diminished under the proposal that has been tabled today .
Why do I think that this is unfair , and why do I think that the criteria adopted in this report failed to take into account such obvious facts as those which my fellow Member from Lithuania has already mentioned today ?
This is about workers , about employees , about Poles who are temporarily living abroad - 3 million Poles abroad .
Let us assume they have a right to vote in Great Britain or Ireland , but they come home .
My question is : who is going to represent them ?
They are deprived of the right of representation even if they had a right to vote .
This report , and this is my second point , accentuates the institutional imbalance which has existed to date , fragile though it may have been , between the position of the states in the Council and in Parliament .
Poland is losing the most in the Council with the transition to double majority voting , and it also loses out in Parliament .
My final point concerns a certain imbalance that has been spoken of here today , in the employment of officials in EU institutions , and especially in Parliament .
This imbalance , which affects all the new Member States , could be ironed out here in Parliament .
I am requesting an amendment of this report .


( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , of course I realise that the task with which my fellow Members Mr Lamassoure and Mr Severin were burdened was not easy , but I must say that the result , despite the efforts that have been made , leaves me rather perplexed , both from the legal viewpoint and in purely political terms .
The proposal refers for the first time to a criterion for calculation based on the resident population in each Member State , replacing the criterion of citizenship .
Here a problem of legal and political consistency arises as regards the provisions of the future Reform Treaty , and specifically Article 9A , which expressly sets out the principle of the representation of European citizens .
I also see the issue as political , partly because Parliament is making the function of the voice and the expression of citizens a little opaque - and what is more , at a time when the Union is undertaking to disseminate the culture of European citizenship , identity and the rights of European citizens .
And please do not take the issue back to the level of national claims or , worse , reduce it to a mere quantitative issue .
That would be a totally reductive and vulgar approach , and would in fact be ungenerous to the reputation of Italy .
I also note , however , a disparity in treatment ; there is a lack of homogeneity between one bracket and another ; in many cases the reference parameters do not justify the difference in the number of seats between one country and another .
I will finish , Madam President , by calling upon my fellow Members to vote in a way that is consistent with what is laid down by the Treaties and with what our role as members of parliament has been up until now and ought to continue to be : the expression of citizenship .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Stubb , who has unfortunately left , mentioned sadness this evening , and other Members have also expressed the same feelings .
I believe , however , that it is sad to see discrimination between countries and MEPs , particularly those who are trying to ensure that fundamental principles are observed , as Mr Voggenhuber and Mrs Muscardini rightly said .



Here , what is important is not to cast doubt upon the Lamassoure-Severin report ; it is probably well constructed , albeit built upon a foundation of sand .
In fact , there is a legal principle whose import is being completely destroyed , and that is the principle of citizenship .

This point has also been made by those who have supported the report , as well as in the compromise proposals by Mr Lamassoure and Mr Severin ; Mr Leinen mentioned it , and Mr Duff also put it excellently : here we are not sure of our electorate !
Still , on this total uncertainty over the electorate we wish to construct a criterion or a castle that has its own internal consistency - apart from the basis or foundation - and this will give us a composition that in no way respects pre-existing realities or the citizens .
It will also bring us , as a further consequence - and heed what I say , for I do not wish to be a prophet of doom - before the Court of Justice .
It is natural , and probably a duty , for those who find themselves injured to go before the courts as the extrema ratio , as the supreme decision-making body for such an important decision .
I appeal to my government , the government of my country , which has shown extreme weakness so far on this process , from the outset in Berlin , to finally rediscover its pride and exercise the right of veto on this proposal .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , between today and tomorrow we have a historic opportunity to influence the decision on the future composition of the European Parliament .
The report prepared for this purpose by the rapporteurs , Mr Lamassoure and Mr Severin , shows a good measure of quality , balance and responsibility .
It brings a pragmatic solution , which should be embraced unchallenged by the Intergovernmental Conference , as it does not constitute an obstacle to the adoption of the Reform Treaty .
The proposed distribution of seats in the European Parliament is based on the principle of digressive proportionality .
It is a just principle , which expresses solidarity between big , medium and small countries .
The proposed solution is also based on the principle of demographic realities of individual Member States .
Again this is a just and correct principle .
In spite of it , some Members expressed their disagreement with this solution .
They are of the opinion that their countries were discriminated against .
I , however , do not see any sign of discrimination .
Discrimination and inequality would be allocating the same number of seats to two countries with a difference in population of five million .
I trust that Parliament will grasp the historic opportunity tomorrow and adopt the Lamassoure and Severin report by a decisive majority .
Not supporting it would signal a return to Nice .
That is returning to an alternative , which would also represent a loss for those Members who only recently have been touting the slogan ' Nice or death ' .
( PL ) Madam President , today we are debating a very important report , on the basis of which the distribution of seats in the next term of Parliament is to be made .
The rapporteurs have put forward a proposal that is very interesting and certainly must have required a great deal of work , both analytical and conceptual .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to them for that .
But as far as I am concerned it does have two serious weaknesses .
Firstly , our fellow Members are proposing a solution that is ad hoc in nature , temporary , and solely for the next term .
However , I recall that when we began work on this report in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs we agreed that we would look for systemic solutions enabling an automatic change to be made to the composition of the Parliament when new states accede to the EU .
The alternative proposal announced by about 80 MEPs , including me , meets this condition .
Use of the d 'Hondt method to calculate the number of votes from individual states is an objective instrument eliminating political horse-trading .
By accepting this amendment the European Parliament could become the first institution to rise above political and national disputes .
I accept a neutral , mathematical method of weighing the strength of individual countries .
This would be a step in the right direction and a model to follow for other multinational European institutions .
Another weakness in the conception presented is the lack of consistency in the approach to European citizens ' rights .
These include the right to be represented in this forum .
In my view , the criterion of calculating the size of the Parliamentary representation from population numbers weakens this right .
For example , how are citizens of Poland who live and work in Ireland or Great Britain supposed to feel ?
Various estimates suggest that there are between 2 and 3 million such people .
Under the electoral regulations that are binding in Poland , votes may be cast for candidates standing in Poland .
But if we take the criterion of population as is suggested in the report , as a result of people leaving the country the number of MEPs elected in my country is diminishing , while it is rising on the islands .
So who is going to represent them here in this forum ?
Irish MEPs , or British , or Polish , of whom there will be fewer ?
The report does not answer these questions .
In this context I feel it is essential for changes to be made to the report 's text , and along with many fellow Members we shall be voting for certain amendments .
( EL ) Madam President , it is widely accepted that the current distribution of seats in the European Parliament does not properly represent the demographic realities in the Member States and that the correlations are unfavourable for certain medium-sized and smaller countries .
The fact that the report does not reduce the number of seats laid down in the Treaty of Nice is certainly a positive one .
I must also stress , however , that in the case of Greece an increase in the number of seats provided for , from 22 to 23 , would be absolutely fair , since the country 's population exceeds by 10 % that of other countries with the same number parliamentary seats .
I should like today , however , to focus mainly on the various amendments that have been tabled and which relate to the method of calculating the number of MEPs .
One issue is failing to assess the entire population of a country , but only its citizens .
I am in favour of the concept of the European citizen , but I disagree completely with its application here .
As an MEP , I feel that I represent those in the section of the population of my country : without necessarily being citizens of Greece or of Europe , they are bringing up our children , looking after our elderly people , building our houses , staffing our universities , contributing to the insurance system and sending their children to our schools .
Our decisions on the environment , services , immigration and insurance issues , and dozens of others , also in reality affect the lives of these fellow citizens of ours , who are , of course , often the least privileged .
I therefore believe it to be democratically imperative that the number of MEPs ought to be based on the total number of residents of a country .
( DE ) Madam President , today 's debate on the future composition of the European Parliament has unfortunately not been a highlight in the history of European democracy .
It is perhaps good that neither the Commission nor the Council have found the time to listen to it .
We have had to listen to speakers who have put forward principles with a very great deal of pathos , principles which have still not brought us any further forward in practical terms and which therefore have nothing to offer apart from pathos .
We have actually heard very many speakers who have focused on their own national interests .
This has certainly been no way to success in the search for a European solution and as such , will probably not bring us any closer to a solution either .
Thankfully we have also heard some who have been pragmatic and looked for comprehensible solutions and therefore in the proposal of both our rapporteurs - Alain Lamassoure und Adrian Severin - have found a suitable base .
I believe we should express our sincere thanks to both rapporteurs for the work they have done in committee as well as in what follows next .
This is something that Mediterranean courteousness would normally always demand , but in this specific case both rapporteurs have really earned these thanks .
From someone who does not come from the Mediterranean , therefore , my sincere thanks to you .
I hope and am also looking forward to us perhaps experiencing an historic moment for this Parliament tomorrow at the vote .
That is , if we manage to get clear and definite majorities for the proposal by Messrs Lamassoure and Severin and are thus able to give another clear signal to the Council .
The European Parliament has at any rate put forward a sensible base for the 2009 elections .


( EL ) Mr President , in order correctly to assess the report by the two rapporteurs , Mr Severin and Mr Lamassoure , we need to take into account certain facts and to apply certain rules .
First of all , we must approach the report in a European manner , not a nationalistic one .
If we fail to do so , we will be faced with competition over which country gets more seats and which fewer .
Secondly , we must take into account certain facts , for example the European Parliament is not deciding today on the composition of Parliament , but is making a proposal to the Council .
The Council has a certain margin and foundation on which to build , even it is based on the past , which we may think is not particularly well-balanced .
In addition to this , we have to apply the arithmetical facts we have been given .
There are 750 MEPs , 96 per country at most and 6 per country as a minimum .
We cannot also start bargaining about parts of the population which are inside and outside .
We ought to reach a compromise based on the existing situation in line with the population and with what applies to other sectors .
We are not here to re-found the EU .
When we do , let us use different calculations .
What matters today , therefore , is that we reach a result which has the widest possible support from the European Parliament , so that we retain our credibility and at the same time open up the way for European and not nationalistic movements .
Let me appeal here to the esteemed Germans , who have always been generous ; besides , if in the past they had displayed the tendency they have today we would have no EU .
I also appeal to my fellow Members from the other states , so that tomorrow we can adopt the Lamassoure and Severin report with the greatest possible majority .
Mr President , once we move away from strict proportionality in elections , we inevitably end up applying political compromise rather than pure mathematics .
The democratic principle that all votes should have equal weight is something that cannot be applied until such time as the European Union becomes a fully federal system .
Within the limits set by the Council , this political compromise by Mr Severin and Mr Lamassoure is a reasonable and well-balanced effort to achieve fair play and solidarity for all the people of the European Union .
I support it , and I oppose the alternative systems that are being proposed as less fair and less balanced .
But , because some have approached this exercise as a national ego trip , it needs to be emphasised that we are dealing here with how citizens elect their representatives to this Parliament according to their political preferences , to act as a co-legislator with the Council ; it is the Council that represents the state , and not this House .
( MT ) Like the European Constitution , the Reform Treaty will introduce the principle that a Member State , no matter how small , should have adequate representation and cannot have less than six seats in the European Parliament .
Malta , my country , which at the moment has five seats , will increase to six seats .
This gain will heal a wound , as it were , that happened no less than seven years ago when in the Treaty of Nice Malta was given five seats instead of six , like Luxembourg , which has the same population .
Six seats instead of five means a 20 % increase in representation and it also means that the Maltese Members in this Chamber will be in a better position to perform Parliamentary duties that are always on the increase .
Suffice to say that in this House we have more than 20 Parliamentary committees which , with six MEPs , it is very difficult to keep up with .
With five it is impossible .
These Committees are now preparing laws that bind all citizens including Maltese citizens and it is appropriate that the citizens of each country , even the smallest countries , are in an adequate position , in a good and reasonable position to be represented and heard in each of these committees .
Even more so when one considers that under the new Treaty , the European Parliament will increase its powers and will be co-legislator with the Commission , indeed in all sectors .
The minimum threshold of six seats is thus a positive step that will increase the small countries ' faith in the European Union and therefore I believe that we should support the Lamassoure-Severin report .

rapporteur . - Mr President , it is never more difficult to understand an explanation than when the promotion of your interests depends on not understanding that explanation .
I am afraid that many of our colleagues have vanished because they are not looking for an explanation : they simply wanted to make their points , and that is all .
However , I would like very briefly to make some clarifications .
Firstly , if this report fails , we are not only going to go back to Nice , but worse than Nice because , according to the mandate of the IGC , the Treaty will mention the 96 seats as the maximum level for one country - so it will be Nice , and Germany will have 96 .
By acting against this report , Germany will not secure the 99 seats they have today ; they should be aware of that .
Ms Grabowska asked , what about the Polish citizens who live partially in Poland and partially abroad ?
It depends on their residence : whether they are tourists abroad or abroad for a short time does not matter , but if they are resident abroad and they are just visiting their families in Poland , they will be taken into consideration where they live , but they will , of course , be able to vote in the same way as any European citizens .
Ms Grabowska also asked , who is going to represent them ?
This is absolutely clear - the MEPs for whom they vote .
All European citizens will have the right to vote , and all European citizens will be represented by those MEPs for whom they vote .
A number of colleagues said , and I am only quoting an Italian colleague : for the first time in the history of the Union , we take into consideration the residents and not the citizens .
False !
We have always taken into consideration the inhabitants , the population , since the Treaty of Rome .
If you want to change this custom , you can certainly change it , but please do not say things here which are completely false .
I will end with this : if there is a problem , the problem lies with the lack of harmonisation of the national legislation on elections .
Certainly , I would be in favour of the approximation of that legislation , but this is a different issue .
This takes time and we have to address this issue separately .
I wish luck to the rapporteurs who are going to deal with the approximation of the electoral legislation ; I hope that they will succeed .
For the time being , I only hope that tomorrow , after a night of reflection , we will have a vote that will indeed reinforce the credibility of this institution .
My fellow Member has been given additional time as rapporteur .
I would like to reassure Mr Severin that this is not connected either with his report or with his person .
My experience tells me that parliamentarians are people who speak better than they listen .
And this was the way it turned out during this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 11 October 2007 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal falls within the ambit of the ' European Constitution ' which is to be taken up again at the Lisbon Summit in relation to a new Treaty , once again asserting the pressures and threats previously brought to bear before it was rejected in the popular referendums in France and in the Netherlands in 2005 .
Instead of upholding the principle of sovereign States with equal rights , which would require at the minimum that much-vaunted solidarity on the part of the more populous countries and respect for the balance within the various institutional bodies ( Council , Commission and European Parliament ) , the intention is to set minimum and maximum numbers and to apply degressive proportionality based on population , thus subordinating countries as a function of their population and constantly detracting from the representative nature of democracy .
The imbalance which existed before the Treaty of Nice is not even taken into account .
Thus , for example , Portugal loses two Members and is left with only 22 , whilst Spain gains four ; it is certain that Germany will lose three , leaving it with 96 ; in addition France will have 74 , the United Kingdom 73 , Italy 72 , Spain 55 and Poland 51 .
The six European powers alone account for 420 Members , many more than the majority of a European Parliament with 750 Members representing 27 Member States .
That is why we will be voting against the report .
in writing . - ( SV ) The distribution of seats among the Member States in the European Parliament must not on any account be arbitrary .
At the late-night negotiations at the Nice summit the Member States were generally reliant on how awake a single man , a Head of State or Government , was during the night-time hours .
For Sweden the outcome was extremely bad .
Even though our population is roughly only one million smaller than Hungary and the Czech Republic , we were given five fewer seats in the European Parliament , 19 seats rather than 24 .
It is important that we have a principle for the distribution of seats that is fixed over time with a view to the continued enlargement of the Union 's membership .
It is also important to establish the principle of over-representation of smaller states in accordance with a degressive distribution .
This report proposes improvements on the current distribution of seats in the European Parliament .
We therefore support it .
However , we are firmly opposed to the idea of creating one constituency across the whole EU .
It would mean having to reduce the size of national delegations even further .
Creating a separate EU constituency is an artificial way to try to create a European demos .
There is no common political arena in Europe .
An attempt to break barriers of language and tradition by creating an EU constituency is doomed to failure .
The humanitarian situation in Gaza
The next item is the statement of the Council and the Commission on the humanitarian situation in Gaza .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the short-term regional and international outlook before us presents a window of opportunity for a peaceful dynamic for resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and setting up a Palestinian State , an opportunity which the international community cannot miss .
We are at a crucial moment which could enable us to make significant advances in the Middle East peace process .
The bilateral political dialogue under way between Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas and the recent setting up of the negotiating teams on both sides are courageous and encouraging steps which we approve of and support and which we hope might enable tangible results to be brought to the international meeting in the autumn , a meeting instigated by the United States of America .
We hope that the current dynamic , which also notably includes participation by Arab countries , will make it possible to move towards the setting up of a viable , democratic , independent Palestinian State , to coexist alongside Israel in peace and security .
The European Union , both within as well as outside the Quartet , has shown itself to be a trusted impartial partner committed to the success of the dialogue between the parties .
Thus we remain committed to the political process , the mission to create the bases for a Palestinian State and to supporting the economic development of the Palestinian territories .
The meetings of the Quartet and the ministerial Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in New York on 23 and 24 September respectively , once again emphasised the international community 's support for the diplomatic efforts under way .
In the Quartet meeting 's final communication , the European Union and its partners in the Quartet expressed their concern over conditions in Gaza and stressed the importance of continued humanitarian and emergency assistance , and also regarding the provision of essential services for the Palestinian people .
Moreover the Quartet 's representative , Tony Blair , warned of the urgent need to develop the Palestinian economy and the respective institutions , as prerequisites for the appropriate functioning of the future Palestinian State .
It was stressed that it was important for the Quartet 's representative to draw up a multi-year agenda for economic and institutional development of the Palestinian territories .
That concern , as well as the need to mobilise financial and technical assistance from the international community for those projects , was also stressed by the international donor nations meeting at ministerial level within the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee .
Various international reports mention the deterioration in humanitarian conditions for the population in those territories ; a situation which nurtures poverty and violence , promotes radicalism and extremism - a cycle which urgently needs to be broken .
The Israeli decision of 19 September to declare Gaza a hostile territory and the possibility envisaged of broadening the scope of sanctions imposed on Gaza would , if applied , potentially exacerbate the current situation .
Although the European Union recognises Israel 's legitimate right to defend itself , it also underscores the need for the Israeli authorities to carefully weigh the implications and consequences of its decisions on the life of the people of Gaza .
The European Union has consistently reaffirmed its full commitment to continuing humanitarian assistance to Gaza .
The Union is the major donor .
In 2006 the total amount of Union assistance from the Commission and the Member States was EUR 688 million .
In 2007 the Commission allocated more than EUR 425 million , divided between humanitarian assistance and social assistance , strategic support for the setting up of the State and advice on economic reforms .
The Temporary International Mechanism , extended for three more months until the end of the year , was one of the means favoured for channelling donor assistance in view of the complex situation in that area .
Furthermore , the Commission is intending to restructure assistance to the Abbas / Fayad Government in order to make it more efficient and productive .
We do , however , think that the European Union should not bear that financial burden alone and that it would therefore be desirable for other partners , in particular the Arab States , to make a contribution to this effort and to bear some of the cost of building the Palestinian State .
The EU stressed the importance of reopening entry and exit points in Gaza , with a view to securing the movement of people and goods in accordance with the agreement on access and movement .
European support also envisages assistance to the private sector , the motor for economic development in the long term , in particular by granting support to the Palestinian Government to settle its debts with the private sector .
These are short-term solutions which must not lose sight of the long-term objective of economic development of the Palestinian economy and finances .
In fact , the long-term outlook should be evaluated in order to move progressively from the current phase of emergency assistance to a phase of assistance for economic development - that is , a transition from hate to trade .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , two weeks ago I was in New York where there were many meetings of the international community on the question of Palestine .
There was an important meeting of the Quartet , of which I am a permanent member as part of the EU delegation , and an Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting of the major donors to the Palestinians , in preparation for a pledging conference that will probably take place at the end of December , after the international meeting that is now being prepared .
The main conclusion for all of us , as the President-in-Office has already said , is that there is indeed a crucial opportunity for regional and international partners effectively to support the peace process .
I must say that , knowing how difficult this is , I am at least cautiously optimistic about the prospects of a serious and substantive meeting being hosted by the US this November .
I wish to thank those who have mentioned the contributions we have made , but let me also say that I have spoken out very clearly to our Arab partners , because it is those partners that have not yet contributed in the same way as we have .
I have called on them emphatically to do the same for their Arab friends .
We also stand ready to play our part in the future , and indeed we hope that this international meeting on the Middle East will be a next step towards having more ongoing , positive talks and hopefully , at the right moment , a Palestinian state living side-by-side with Israel within secure borders .
I am well aware , of course , that the delivery of humanitarian aid to the Gaza Strip has become much more difficult .
For instance , two projects in the sector of water and sanitation , financed by the Commission 's humanitarian office , have had to be suspended .
The partners implementing those operations did not succeed in importing the necessary materials , because the importing of items such as spare parts for hospitals and water pumps has been banned .
The European Commission has not been idle in responding to this situation .
On the contrary , humanitarian and emergency aid to the occupied Palestinian territory , including Gaza , has reached unprecedented levels .
We also continue our support for the precious work of UNRWA in Gaza .
Commissioner Michel has recently deployed new support through the World Food Programme in order to respond to the basic needs of the most vulnerable Palestinians .
Our direct emergency support to low income and social hardship cases continues through the payment of social allowances .
In September we disbursed allowances to 35 000 poor families in the West Bank and Gaza .
This demonstrates the added value of the temporary international mechanism , which is able to operate efficiently throughout the occupied Palestinian territory .
By September our fuel provision to the Gaza Strip had surpassed 90 million litres .
That fuel provides 25 % , or one quarter , of the electricity needs of the local population .
For those reasons , I requested the Quartet , at the latest meeting in New York , to extend this financial mechanism until December .
Also in New York , at several meetings and with different interlocutors , I yet again pleaded on several occasions for progress on the access and movement agenda .
We are very happy that Tony Blair is awarding close attention to this , as he wants there to be an economic possibility of development .
This , of course , is not possible without freedom of movement and access , notwithstanding the justified security concerns of the Israeli Government .
I believe that much more could and should be done , but that will require more political will than we have witnessed so far .
I also agree with Parliament that the closure of the Gaza crossings has dire implications for the livelihood of an already impoverished population , as well as for the required humanitarian response .
The Karni crossing point has been closed for almost four months now , so our aid has to pass through Karem Shalom and Sufa .
We only see this as a temporary arrangement , firstly because the facilities at those crossings are inadequate and result in extra handling costs - up to 40 % of the cost of aid supplies - and secondly because restrictions on the equipment we want to get into Gaza create problems for our project work .
Having said that , our actions must also take into account the illegal takeover of the Gaza Strip .
Our policy is consistent with the Quartet 's line and the position of the legitimate government of the Palestinian Authority , and we of course support President Mahmoud Abbas .
On 23 September , we and other Quartet partners made our position quite clear .
We expressed great concern over the continued closure of major crossing points .
We agreed on the importance of continued emergency and humanitarian assistance without obstruction , and we called for the continued provision of essential services .
Allow me also to refer finally to the situation within the West Bank , which should not be forgotten .
Despite recent announcements made by the Israeli authorities about the reduction of checkpoints , the reality on the ground is , unfortunately , quite different : things are getting worse .
It is not only that the settlement policy and construction of the security barrier continue , but also that 48 new checkpoints have been installed , according to a recent report by OTCHA .
It is essential that we see progress in the access and movement agenda .
Otherwise , the chances of a future sustainable Palestinian state are being undermined .
Let me just add that already , with a view to the next Foreign Affairs Council , the preparations for the draft Council conclusions emphasise very clearly the dire situation in Gaza and underline the importance of uninterrupted emergency and humanitarian assistance without obstruction .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , once again we stand here and we repeat : the situation in Gaza is appalling .
Once again we all agree : something must be done .
Therefore , it is my honour , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , to table this resolution , and I welcome Article 5 fully supporting the Maryland Convention .
But , frankly speaking , can I be positive , knowing that we urged you , and I called on you in this place before summer started , to be ready for a humanitarian crisis operation and for contingency planning ?
Many of you thought I was asking for foreign intervention .
No !
I simply knew that being ready for a humanitarian operation would help us to react in a fast manner when the inevitable situation comes .
It is October , and we are not very much farther .
Of course people in Gaza deserve our help : our immediate , short-term quick fix .
But for many years of our collaboration in the Middle East , we all know well that quick fixes do not count .
What we really need here is to solve the causes of suffering of Palestinians .
Many here think - and I strongly disagree - that Israel is the only cause of suffering .
I was in Gaza for the first time in 1990 .
I also saw Hodeida , Tanta , Benghazi , Ismailia , to name just a few other places in the Middle East which look very much the same : no occupation , no military intervention .
Mismanagement , corruption , nepotism , police regimes - these are the Pudelskern .
We have to name them ; we have to focus on how we can help those who suffer from both .
We have to have patience to see the truth , to analyse properly and objectively , to design help , to prepare tailored projects , to invest money , to teach and to lead .
And to be unforgiving . To be sharp , to be responsible .
In Gaza , Ottomans , the British , Egyptians , Israelis , Americans and Europeans are all part of the problem . But the main part is Palestinians themselves .
We can only help them .
They have to stop any use of threats , abuse , violence , terrorism and killing .
They have to stop corruption .
They have to stop nepotism and pashaliks .
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , since mid-July , when Hamas seized power in Gaza , one-and-a-half-million people have been confined to what the inhabitants themselves call a ghetto , a cattle farm .
Even cancer patients are not allowed out of the region .
Israel takes the view that they live in a hostile entity .
The only things that come in are food , medicines and a few humanitarian goods - but people cannot live on just flour , lentils and medicines .
Israel 's definition of humanitarian goods is absurdly restrictive .
Components for medical devices cannot be imported , the water supply system cannot be repaired .
There is a constant threat of Israel interrupting the energy supply .
The economy of Gaza has collapsed , the people are unemployed and despondent , and there is no money left .
Malnourishment is beginning to rear its head .
The blockade breeds despondency , anger and hatred , not peace .
Gaza is experiencing an unacceptable humanitarian crisis .
Calls for assistance are growing and , on top of this , the costs of assistance are rising as a result of the blockade .
Thus , the Member States must provide more financial support to UNRRA and the other organisations on site .
The European Commission has already taken that step , as have some Member States .
The European Parliament , too , yesterday voted in favour of increasing assistance .
My group urges the Council to support that decision .
Assistance alone is not enough , however .
The Presidency has remained diffident , cautious , on the subject this evening - but the European Union can no longer take the moral responsibility for providing assistance , whilst refraining from taking political action against the blockade .
On behalf of my group , I would therefore request that the Presidency , the Council and the European Commission call on Israel to end the blockade immediately .
In Gaza the whole population is being punished - which is illegal under Article 33 of the Fourth Geneva Convention .
Besides , this method does not befit Israel , and the European Union should be telling Israel this instead of remaining passive - precisely because it is an ally .
This would give meaning to the Association Agreement with Israel , as only by taking action against the blockade will the EU do justice to the section on human rights .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I speak not on behalf of my group , but as a Member who has seen things he did not wish to see .
I hope the Minister does not believe the sanctimonious claptrap he read this House .
To suggest for one moment that the policies of this European Union are impartial is just ridiculous .
Everyone knows that we pursue a policy of double standards .
We expect and demand the Palestinians to obey every requirement . We merely request that the Israelis meet our wishes .
Those double standards reek .
Commissioner , do you remember standing here just a few months ago , after the Palestinian delegation had returned from meeting Mr Haniyeh in Gaza , before the breakdown of the Palestinian Unity Government , saying to this House that you wanted to do everything you could to support that Government ?
Within a fortnight , of course , it had fallen !
It had fallen partly because we had refused to talk to the elected representatives .
We had refused to talk to Mr Haniyeh and , not surprisingly , having undermined the democratic forces , the forces of violence took over .
We never seem to learn the lessons of history .
We have to stop ignoring the wishes of the Palestinian people .
We have to start paying some respect to the forces of democracy , and we have to recognise that you cannot make peace without talking to your enemy .
( Applause ) .
The continuing refusal to deal with some of those elements in Hamas who want to take a step towards us just makes promotion of peace in the Middle East impossible to attain .
One question about the motion for a resolution before us : why are we even thinking about giving money to Gaza ?
What has it got to do with the European Union ?
Gaza is an Israeli prison camp !
It is nothing to do with us .
It is the Israelis who should be responsible for keeping one and a half million people alive .
They are the ones who keep them in misery .
It is not our responsibility to be providing our taxpayers ' money to meet Israeli responsibilities .
Finally , again on this question of impartiality , we have heard within the last couple of weeks that the Israeli defence force has ordered the confiscation of more Palestinian land to build the roads to enable the building of the E1 settlement - the further expansion of Jewish settlements in East Jerusalem - against every commitment we have requested the Israelis to make , and against every hope there could be for a genuine outcome from the forthcoming peace talks .
As the Palestinians see all hopes of a viable , independent Palestinian state disappearing before their eyes , what is the European Union going to do about it ?
You know very well that it is going to do nothing except mouth a few words and take no tangible action !
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I was a member of the five-man delegation from the European Parliament which spent a couple of important days in the Palestinian Autonomous Area .
I can categorically state that our mission was humanitarian in nature , not political .
I am saying this because I would not like our debate to turn into a very political debate , where the European Parliament takes the role of a prosecutor acting against someone .
I would like us to stand above political divisions and consider how we can help civil Palestine .
Let us , however , make it clear that it appears that raising the standard of living in the Gaza Strip , normal functioning of hospitals and schools , full access to drinking water , food and electricity , the potential to work normally in agriculture are more likely to cause a fall in tension in Palestinian-Israeli relations and to ensure a weakening of the potential for enmity , where Jewish settlers , Israeli settlers and the State of Israel as such are concerned .
A few months ago I spoke in this House about the controversial texts delivered in some Palestinian schools , in Palestinian textbooks , but now we have moved from one extreme to another .
We cannot criticise certain aspects of Palestinian schooling any longer , as that system of schooling has effectively died .
But this coin has another side to it , an intra-Palestinian aspect .
The political stalemate between Hamas and Fatah and the President Abu Mazen camp continues .
This impasse makes it difficult for Palestinian institutions to function , and thus hurts Palestinians who live there , and is certainly not Israel 's fault .
We speak a lot about lasting peace between the State of Israel and the Palestinians , but that is a bit like talking about a house and starting with the roof .
We should always talk from the foundations up , and the foundations in this case are an improvement in the functioning of Palestinian power structures , public institutions and humanitarian assistance for the people of Palestine .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , the visit to the West Bank and Gaza a couple of weeks ago that has been mentioned was a shock - even for those of us who have been there many times .
Israel 's closure of the borders and the countless roadblocks make it impossible to develop a healthy economy , and for the EU 's rules on humanitarian assistance to be followed .
The Council and the Commission should intervene immediately to help the Palestinian economy back on its feet .
Let me make myself clear : without such intervention a peace conference cannot succeed .
As has been said repeatedly , the economic dimension is inseparable from the political .
In other words , Israel 's occupation must be brought to an end or there will never be peace .
Besides the economic exhaustion , radicalisation of Palestinians is currently taking place .
It is growing among the poor - of whom there are more and more as a result of Israel 's blockade - and among the young .
Older generations of Palestinians have warned repeatedly that the young people growing up today have never lived side by side with Israelis , and that their only experience of them is ugly walls , military invasions and teenage soldiers humiliating their fathers .
This is not the way to create peace , only implacable enemies .
Nor is there any confidence in the EU , which disregarded the democratic elections in the Palestinian territories and , by isolating Hamas , has demonstrated both diplomatic incompetence and , once again , double standards .
Unless all Palestinians are represented in the ongoing negotiations there will be no peace , as anyone involved with the issue is well aware .
As Mr Davies and others have mentioned , all hope of peace will shatter if , as has been reported , the Government of Israel means to expropriate E1 .
Both the USA and the EU have said in no uncertain terms that this must not happen .
The question that Council and Commission should answer now is what action is planned to prevent this expropriation of Palestinian East Jerusalem .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one minute is nothing .
Mr Lobo Antunes spoke of courageous gestures and steps : the courageous step Mr Olmert ought to take is to close all new settlements , to free thousands of Palestinians , to stop the military incursions in the West Bank , to remove the checkpoints and to reverse the blockade of Gaza !
He should come to the negotiations with concrete steps ; instead , yesterday we saw new seizures of land inside Jerusalem .
Our courageous step , here in the European Union , ought to be to reject any form of collective punishment imposed by the Israeli Government on the civilian population .
Our plans in Gaza are blocked because there is no cement , there are no pipes , costs have quadrupled and UNRWA continues to instigate emergency measures .
In the resolution that we will adopt tomorrow we are calling for the lifting of the blockade of Gaza and free movement of people and goods everywhere , but we are aware that the Palestinian issue is not a humanitarian one .
Our responsibility is political : it is the responsibility to put an end to the military occupation and to call for two peoples and two states , able to coexist in mutual safety .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , at the end of last week a delegation from our Parliament debated the grave situation in the Middle East with our US counterparts as part of the Transatlantic Legislators ' Dialogue ( TLD ) .
During this , the US peace negotiator Dennis Ross gave us the very practical advice to offer the Palestinian population assistance with its precarious existence .
A network of reliable , politically independent NGOs is needed .
Council and Commission : to what extent do you envisage real possibilities for both the West Bank and Gaza ?
I now take the view that the behaviour of Hamas lies behind the present internal and external crisis situation in Gaza .
It unfailingly delegitimises the State of Israel and legitimises violence against Israelis and Palestinian ' dissidents ' .
Mr President , the recent brutal murder of the Palestinian Christian Rami Ayyad , who was only thirty years old , underlines the perilous position of this minority in Gaza .
I expect of the Council and the Commission that they devote attention and provide support to the Christian minority in all the Palestinian territories .
Mr President , Mr Davies asked , earlier on , what role the European Union had in the Middle East .
Of course , I know it was a rhetorical question , because he is very committed to a solution , but it is a fact that the European Union has a direct interest in the outcome of the Middle East peace process .
I speak from a constituency in Yorkshire from which the four bombers who attacked London several months ago came .
They were motivated by what was happening in the Middle East .
The bombers in Madrid also .
So the security of Europe is directly connected to the Middle East .
I believe that we also have historic and humanitarian commitments to a peaceful outcome .
After all , the process of peace has been slow and patchy , and has resulted in numerous initiatives , numerous intergovernmental conferences - Madrid , Oslo and so on .
We have got to the point now , in October 2007 , where there is almost a desperation to try and find some solution .
So I believe that it is now time for some fairly radical new thinking .

One of the propositions I would make is that the recent talks between Mr Olmert and Mr Mahmoud Abbas about - in effect - a final status solution , should reflect the negotiations that Mr Olmert himself , a young parliamentarian , had in 1987 , where he and the PLO negotiated privately actually to talk about the capital of the Palestinian state in East Jerusalem , about the borders of 1967 , and about some settlers returning .
In other words , he got there in 1987 , and maybe now the time will come , this autumn , when these two leaders , encouraged by the international community , will come together radically to shape the future for a peaceful , two-state solution to the Middle East peace process .
Mr Triantaphyllides and his delegation , who went to Palestine the other day , came back with two fundamental conclusions .
Let us focus on the humanitarian situation in Palestine , but let us also think about the role that elected parliamentarians there and elsewhere can play in this process .
We should not be forgotten .
( FR ) Mr President , while preparing this resolution , we said to ourselves ' no politics , just humanitarianism ' .
It is intolerable that today , in an immense open-air ghetto , a people is slowly dying , hounded by the cameras of the whole world , a people bled dry , without the right to develop , to move freely or to educate its children , but a people for whose survival we pay a high price and who most of all must not die on us , because that would taint us and our democracies could not cope with it .
This year the European Union will have paid more than EUR 300 million to prevent this crisis .
It is too little for the Palestinians to be able to live , but it is ten times , a hundred times too much , because if all the international obligations , the fourth Geneva Convention and human rights were being respected , it would not be necessary .
Shame on the ghetto !
Shame on us Europeans !
We were able to supply Berlin when the people there were under siege !
Shame on us who welcomed the fall of the wall in Germany with tears of joy , but who are now prisoners and accomplices of other walls and other ghettos !
Stop the closure !
But today , humanitarianism cannot let politics be forgotten .
On 24 September the Israeli government issued an order for the confiscation of 1 100 dunums of land in four Arab villages between Jerusalem and Jericho , to build a road that will cut the West Bank definitively in two .
It is an old Israeli plan from 2004 that Europe and even the United States have always rejected .
Today , on the eve of the international meeting in Washington , it is a real time bomb .
With Gaza trapped and the West Bank cut in two , how can we still dream of two states living together peacefully .
On 8 February 2005 at Sharm el Sheikh , Sharon declared : ' We have an opportunity to start on a new path .
For the first time in a long time , there exists in our region hope for a better future for our children and grandchildren . '
It is an extremely fragile opportunity that the extremists want to shatter .
If this road , and many others , see the light of day , the extremists will have won .
Architects and geographers are now using more perverse weapons than bombs .
They are encircling Palestine with walls and roads that are pulverising any dream of a viable state .
( Applause )
Mr President , there is nothing more demoralising than life lived in poverty , life without any prospects and life marred by a conflict .
As a humanitarian catastrophe haunts the people of Gaza , it is clear that the only objective Israeli and Palestinian leaders are securing is the transmission of pain , poverty , misery and hatred to a new generation of young Palestinians .
As a direct result of the Israeli blockade on the movement of people and goods , children do not even have basic educational facilities .
Everyone is denied the basic utilities that all of us in this House take for granted .
Livelihoods are destroyed , as fishermen , farmers and others cannot trade .
Individuals suffer needless pain and death owing to limited medical services and treatment .
All of this is set against a background of violence and oppression .
NGOs estimate that there are nearly 2 000 newly severely disabled people in Gaza .
They are mainly young people , who are shot at by tanks or snipers , often resulting in loss of limbs , brain damage or spinal cord injuries - but organisations working to support disabled people are being hampered by the Israeli blockade and are unable to obtain the specialist supplies that they require !
Israeli must fulfil its international obligations , such as the Geneva Convention , to guarantee the flow of humanitarian assistance , humanitarian aid and essential services , and to open up the borders .
The Council and the Commission must keep up the pressure , but they must talk to all sides .
That is the only way we will find a solution .
It is pointless saying we will not talk to one side .
We have got to find a solution by talking to everyone .
If nothing is done , people will continue to die needlessly .
1.3 million people in Gaza will continue to be stripped of their dignity and the transmission of pain , poverty , misery and hatred to a new generation of Palestinians will only continue .
( FR ) Mr President , at a time when the crossing points into the Gaza Strip are closed and are controlled by the Israeli army , at a time when murderous incursions are being conducted there on a daily basis , at a time when the number of settlers in the occupied territories is continuing to grow , at a time when , in violation of international law , the construction of the wall and security surveillance are continuing , within these very walls , in the European Parliament , there are still people who would deny Israel 's status as an occupying power .
It is shocking !
Israel is an occupying power , and as such has obligations under the Geneva Conventions and , in particular , must not use collective punishment under any circumstances .
We would be well advised to ensure that Israel meets its obligations instead of sending disastrous signals , as we did for example by suspending funding for the fuel supply for the power station in Gaza .
The crocodile tears we have shed over the divisions between Palestinians are really inappropriate after the European Union was incapable of supporting Mahmoud Abbas ' efforts to co-opt the pragmatic wing of Hamas .
Can you imagine anything worse ?
Playing Ramallah off against Gaza ?
Deciding who are the good Palestinians and helping them to get rid of the bad ?
Who can believe in a lasting solution if the political and territorial unity of Palestine is not guaranteed ?
Who can believe that peace for the Israelis and Palestinians will be built through a policy that in fact leads to the radicalisation of the people of Israel and of Palestine ?
The humanitarian situation in Gaza breaches all the standards of human dignity .
The lifting of the blockade of the Gaza Strip needs to be secured as quickly as possible .
Due pressure needs to be exerted on Israel .
This question cannot remain a taboo anymore and I am asking you , the Council and the Commission , what measures you intend to take in order to encourage the lifting of the blockade and to force Israel to comply with its obligations and commitments .
I am asking you what you intend to do to make Israel give up its plans to cut the West Bank in two by linking Jericho with East Jerusalem , a month before the international conference .
( Applause )
( EL ) Madam President , developments in Palestine are moving exceptionally swiftly and leave us scarcely any time to react .
Thus we are now discussing the humanitarian situation in Gaza , whereas the Israeli authorities have unilaterally decided to expropriate thousands of hectares of Arab land in order to proceed with plan Ε1 , the construction of a road that will in practical terms cut the West Bank in two .
You know that the international community has opposed this plan .
I believe that it would be useful for Parliament to take a stand on this issue .
Political developments behind the scenes , however , have not permitted this .
The result is simple : once again we remain observers while the situation in Palestine gets ever worse ; every day the Palestinians ' negotiating position weakens and doubt is cast on any existing prospects for success at the imminent international conference on the Palestinian issue in November .

Mr President , last night I was privileged to attend the inauguration of the Brussels offices of the European Friends of Israel , which starts from the premise that we should support the democratic State of Israel 's right to exist and prosper .
In contrast , Hamas is committed , under its 1988 charter , to Israel 's destruction and remains a terrorist organisation banned by the EU .
It is no surprise to me that this resolution seeks to heap much of the blame for the current situation in Gaza on Israel .
Clearly , Israel 's unilateral withdrawal from Gaza as a bona fide gesture of land for peace is of very little significance to Israel 's critics .
The resolution refers to a humanitarian crisis in Gaza without exploring the reasons why .
The appeal of Hamas to Palestinian voters was that it provided many of the social services that were neglected by the corrupt Fatah Administration .
Yet the same schools are now devoid of children , who are too scared to leave their homes .
The hospitals are treating those injured in the daily violence that has characterised the Hamas violent takeover of Gaza and the defeat of secular Fatah .
Prominent Gazan Christian , Rami Ayyad , was murdered last Saturday , and on Sunday , eight mortars and a Katyusha rocket were fired by Hamas at Israel indiscriminately .
Bizarrely , Hamas has even been shelling the border crossing at Khani .
The resolution also calls on Israel to take steps to ensure the free passage of humanitarian supplies and essential utilities .
In fact , Israel has not stopped the movement of such goods as food , electricity or water into Gaza and is actually acting with restraint and moderation , even though Hamas has been attacking Israel militarily .
I appreciate that Israel has come to expect a steady stream of invective from this House , but Israel should know that it does have some friends here , and throughout Europe , who are committed to peace and security in the region .
That will never happen while the agenda of Hamas is so readily indulged by so many in this House .
Mr President , a humanitarian crisis requires a humanitarian response , and our first priority tonight should be to deal with medical supplies and school books being held up on one side of the border , while students and ill people wait on the other .
International humanitarian law does give the European Union a direct obligation to act and , four months after Gaza was cut off , our direct commitment to the border assistance mission is a commitment that we are failing to meet .
I thank the Commissioner for the cautious optimism she expressed tonight on the revival of the peace process and on the operation of the temporary international mechanism .
We of course urge her to do whatever more she can .
I agree with Mr Tannock that we should condemn rocket and mortar attacks by Palestinian militants , but his complaints would be much more credible if he also condemned the killing of civilians by the Israeli Defence Force in air missile attacks .
I ask you Commissioner , and the Presidency-in-Office too , to make urgent representations condemning the seizure , as was reported this morning , of a further 3 % of West Bank land between Jerusalem and Jericho as part of the E1 annexation plan .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) In the light of the European Parliament resolution of 21 June on the MEDA programme and financial support to Palestine , the resolution of 12 July 2007 on the Middle East and the Quartet 's statement of 23 September 2007 , it is vital for the European Parliament to express a clear stance vis-à-vis the situation in Palestine .
We must , however consider , the situation from at least two perspectives : the humanitarian and economic perspective , as well as the political and security one .
From the humanitarian and economic point of view , it is up to Europe , after having committed enormous financial resources to assist Palestine , to ensure the technical feasibility of delivering this assistance and humanitarian aid .
It is unacceptable for Palestinian civilians to be denied access to medicines and for health care institutions , schools and private homes to be devastated .
As it stands , access to proper drinking water and food is often denied as a result of the blockade on the movement of people and goods .
From the political and security perspective , it needs to be clearly stated that just as the international community recognises the Palestinians ' right to autonomy , Palestine , including the governing Hamas movement , must also recognise the State of Israel .
To date Hamas has not taken any action to distance itself from its own founding document , which includes destroying the State of Israel as one of its objectives .
Therein lies the political problem , which has escalated into an armed conflict : terrorism on one side and tough defensive actions on the other .

Mr President , first of all , could I say that Mr Tannock is doing Israel a disservice by his unquestioning support for Israel 's illegal activity against Palestinians , particularly in relation to Gaza .
I support this resolution , including paragraph 5 .
The humanitarian crisis in Gaza is not new , nor has it been unforeseen .
Those of us who have visited the area regularly over the years have consistently warned against the Israeli actions , which were driving the population to despair .
The economy is now in free fall .
Social services have virtually collapsed .
Malnutrition and chronic diseases are rife , and medicines are not available .
Gaza is now entirely dependent on outside aid , which is being blocked by Israeli embargoes .
It is a prison tightly controlled by Israel , and we cannot allow the well-being of the people of Gaza to be held hostage to the political manoeuvrings that are under way . Hopefully , these manoeuvrings will lead to peace talks .
I condemn the unilateral Israeli decision to seize land from four Arab villages , which cuts East Jerusalem off from the West Bank .
I regret the fact that neither the Council nor the Commission have made reference to this , and I would be surprised if they did not know about it .
We know about it in this House , and it is public knowledge .
This action by Israel is totally in breach of the Road Map , and it is in breach of the agreement that the 1967 borders will not change without a joint agreement between Israelis and Palestinians .
( PL ) Mr President , hopefully we might expect that with time the conflict will sort itself out .
That is the hollowest hope there could be .
New generations are growing up , and the conflict goes on and is even getting worse .
You would think that two nations that are quite close to each other , the Hebrews and the Arabs , could cohabit , but not under the conditions of a hierarchical system .
Every dependence of one upon the other , inequality , and above all the lack of a sovereign state structure for the Arabs , will be constant sources of negative emotions , convictions and retaliation .
If the State of Israel cannot entertain a territorial division , I find it difficult to foresee peace in this area , I am afraid .
Just as the Jews have a right to their country , their state , in the same way the Arabs , the Palestinians , have a right too .
Historically , before World War II , Palestine existed , and as we are seeing , it is not easy to erase it from the Arab memory .
Every day the situation is deteriorating for the people in Gaza to such an extent that explosions of built-up aggression are inevitable , and all we can do is look on in embarrassment and sadness .
The most we can do , for our part - besides trying to calm impulses towards mutual destruction and besides attempts at mediation - is to extend humanitarian assistance to people to enable them to live in as decent sanitary conditions as possible , to have something to eat and somewhere to go to school .
But I emphasise that this is only a substitute for a solution , a solution towards which , we are ashamed to admit , we are not able to lead .
Experience gained in central and eastern Europe in the nineteenth century and the twentieth century horrors of Europe and Africa : these clearly demonstrate the power of a people 's striving for independence .
This striving is what we are dealing with there too .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , of course the European Union must do everything it can to release the stranglehold on the population of Gaza in an unprecedented humanitarian crisis .
Personally , I would like to point out that the Israeli government 's designation of Gaza as a hostile entity has a number of dramatic consequences .
Israel can conduct much larger-scale operations in this area than in the past .
The Israeli electricity company can reduce the supply of electricity to Gaza 's 1.5 million Palestinians to a bare minimum , and the company Mekorot will ration the water it distributes , leaving it to Hamas to distribute it to the districts .
This Israeli strategy , clearly aimed at causing a popular uprising against the leaders of Hamas , is unacceptable and can only lead to a fresh escalation of violence .
Not to mention the new settlements that will turn Palestine into another Bantustan .
Personally , as a member of the Quartet , I would like the European Union to obtain an assurance that the sole aim of the peace conference planned for November is not to provide the United States with a way out the stalemate it finds itself in in Iraq and Afghanistan , but that it is a real summit for peace , bringing together all the Arab players .
Mr President , civilians are the silent victims of any conflict and we have an obligation - indeed , a duty - to stand up and protect them , and to live up to the covenant of Noble Peace laureate Elie Wiesel ' never to be silent whenever and wherever human beings endure suffering and humiliation ' .
I welcome , therefore , the initiative of this House to debate the situation in Gaza and also welcome the call in the resolution to call upon Israel to fulfil its obligations and guarantee the flow of humanitarian assistance to Gaza .
But today we also need to ask some other questions .
We need to start by asking ourselves , why is it that every time there is a movement towards peace , the violence intensifies ?
Why it is that every time the voices of reason in Israel and the Palestinian territories seek a resolution , there are terrorist groups to take up arms against peace ?
Why is the fear of a two-state solution , of Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace , so dreaded by some that they prefer to inflict pain and suffering on their own people ?
Let us not shrink from admitting that responsibility for the dire situation of the people living in Gaza also lies squarely with Hamas , who oppose a settlement , who call for the destruction of a legitimate member of the United Nations and who fear peace and promote violence .
In 2005 , 400 rockets were fired into Israel from Gaza .
In 2006 , 1 726 rockets were fired .
In 2007 , it was close to a thousand rockets .
Many have died , hundreds have been injured and thousands evacuated .
They are also civilians : men , women and children .
On 26 September , 54 mortars were fired from Gaza on the Sufa crossing terminal .
The next day , the crossing points to which the Commissioner was referring - Erez and Karem Shalom - were targeted .
Indeed , they were targeted because Hamas believes that closing those points fulfils their goal of increasing the suffering , and of people siding with Hamas .
That is the wrong strategy .
Let us acknowledge that there are forces of terror and forces of fear in Gaza who seek to profit from the suffering of their own people .
( PT ) Jimmy Carter said in an interview this week that since President Clinton there have never been any good-faith talks on the subject of the Middle East under the patronage of the United States of America .
Expectations are therefore running high for the international conference in November .
It is expected that there will be some tangible development so that we can actually envisage a time-scale for resolution of the human drama and conflict .
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is currently deteriorating .
Although a few months ago we had a real open prison which constantly closing in , that is becoming ever more apparent when every day we count the dead , the hunger , the fear , the power of weapons and their effect , on both sides of the walls , on civilians ' lives .
Humanitarian assistance is urgently required in the light of the Geneva Conventions and it is imperative that Israel should allow that assistance to be administered .
The movement of persons and goods must become a reality , unless we are to see a real human tragedy in that coastal strip .
The major objectives which we should be launching at the next international conference are to put an end to the violence and to seek a solution based on the existing resolutions which will allow Palestinians and Israelis to live together in peace , before it is too late .
Mr President , 20 years ago there were three theatres of violent conflict which caused worldwide consternation : South Africa , Ireland and the Middle East .
In the first two there has been reconciliation and political transformation .
In the Middle East there has been no progress made .
Arguably , the situation is worse .
The humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza obliges us to act , conscious that reconciliation and political transformation are possible , are necessary , are expedient .
But , equally , it is clear that the Palestinians and the Israelis cannot resolve their differences by themselves .
They both resort to violence , which perpetuates the impasse .
The humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza marks one of the lowest points in the 60 years of continuous conflict in the Middle East .
We call for security for the State of Israel and we call for security for the state of Palestine .
Today we have neither .
A new way , a new method is required .
It is clear that the United States Administration has the responsibility and the ability to exercise decisive influence on Israel , for example calling on them to dismantle the blockade of Gaza .
Just as the European Union must exercise equal guidance to the Palestinians to desist from violence , so that both may achieve their objectives for secure statehood through the only available effective means , which are peaceful means .
As this resolution will be forwarded to the parliaments of Palestine , Israel , Egypt and the Euro-Mediterranean Assembly , a constructive contribution could well be for us to support and promote a parliamentary dialogue to replace the existing war of attrition , which must be brought to an end so that it no longer disfigures the Holy Land .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , there is human suffering in Gaza .
The humanitarian crisis there has in the last few months indisputably grown into a catastrophe .
No longer is it a matter of just a shortage of basic food .
The Palestinian economy has collapsed and it has become harder to conduct business .
People 's everyday lives have been shattered and the relief organisations cannot operate in the region .
The people who live there are caught up in a blockade , and as the Commissioner said , on the West Bank the same problems loom .
The residents of Gaza are the victims of a failed policy by each of the parties in the crisis .
It is one thing to speak about Hamas as the enemy and a terrorist organisation ; it is quite another to declare the whole of Gaza enemy territory .
It is one thing to speak about Israel as the enemy ; it is quite another to refuse to cooperate with providers of basic services and international organisations .
Although the parties in the crisis have reached deadlock , they both have responsibility for fundamental humanitarian rights .
The resolution by Parliament 's groups is an exceptionally straightforward expression of opinion on the crisis in the Middle East .
It is stripped of any ulterior political motive .
All that is left is Europe 's profound concern about the lives of the people in Gaza .
I would like to remind everyone that this is the self-same concern we expressed earlier on this year .
We cannot take either side and we cannot point a finger .
The suffering of innocent people makes the desire to excuse and seek justification for the Gaza situation irrelevant .
We demand just one thing : that the parties in the crisis allow us to help and that they should help themselves in particular , because this is a human crisis on a huge scale .
Commissioner , I hope you will take this one demand by Europe regarding the situation in Gaza to the parties in the crisis , the Arab League and the Quartet .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you all for your comments and speeches , to which I listened carefully .
We understand that continuous and sustained support for the economic development of the Palestinian territories is one of the bases for peace .
There is a close link between security , political stability and the economy .
Peace and security cannot therefore be achieved unless a solid and lasting economic foundation is laid together with a peace process , which needs to be a credible peace process .
All these initiatives reflect our commitment to assisting and helping to improve the living conditions of the Palestinian population in Transjordan and also in Gaza .
These are tasks we wish to pursue and we are confident that the Conference of Donor Nations , scheduled for December in Paris , will provide an opportunity for the international community to express its support , in a practical way we hope , for the Palestinian Authority and the Palestine people in general .
It is vital that the international community does not abandon the people of Gaza , so that their highly precarious humanitarian situation does not continue to be a political factor of instability , tension and dissent .
I would like to say that the European Union has a political strategy for the Middle East Peace process based on sound pillars and principles and that is why the European Union is a welcome partner in the political process .
We also have a consistent aid policy for those who need it most in the Palestinian territories .
The figures which I myself presented and to which the Commissioner referred are , I think , undoubtedly proof of that .
I hope that all will follow the example of the European Union in this respect .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we all know that the situation in Gaza is dramatic .
However , we also know that , even if we are donating a lot of humanitarian aid , in the end we also have to find a political solution .
I said before , and the President-in-Office has mentioned now , that this international meeting is a very important occasion .
We have all clearly stated that it cannot be just a photo opportunity .
It has to be a substantive meeting , at which we hope the negotiations and personal talks between Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas indeed materialise into an important initial document , not least on the very difficult issues , knowing that from then onwards working groups will have to take ideas further .
We all know that there are many possible alternative solutions on the table .
At the same time , until now , there has for a very long time been no possibility of getting the two parties together at such an international gathering with the support of the European Union , with the support of the US , Russia and the United Nations , and also with the backing of the Arab League .
It is very important that this time the Americans too have said that they are also ready to invite the so-called ' follow-up group ' of the Arab League , including Syria and Saudi Arabia .
That shows there is a certain opening-up .
Having said that , we also know very clearly , and this was apparent from the second meeting we had , the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting , that we cannot only have political negotiations .
We also have to make a change on the ground .
That is , indeed , essential .
It is about promoting economic development , and this is part of Tony Blair 's mandate , in which we also want to support him as much as we can because this is a possibility and an opportunity that we have to seize .
We of course know , as he does too - I have had lengthy discussions with him - that the pre-conditions for economic recovery , as the World Bank has also clearly mentioned , are an improvement in movement and access , promotion of the private sector in Gaza , which must remain part of the economy there , and of course also promoting things like good governance .
What we want to do is create a viable Palestinian state for when things are , so to speak , ripe in the political sphere .
I agree that we cannot have a ' quick fix ' but , at the same time , what we do need now is a negotiation process that will finally start , and quick-start projects .
This is an area that we are already preparing , so that things are ready after the international meeting and maybe after or at the moment of the pledging conference .
We are considering projects - which , by the way , have been selected and supported by us and also by Tony Blair - such as projects for refurbishing schools , through which people see something is being done on the ground .
There are also many other projects that we are studying at the moment , in trying to find the right answers , and for which , of course , we also need Israel 's support .
It is also clear that Israel 's security concerns have to be taken into account .
But , at the end of the day , we have to find a political solution , and it is President Abbas who is the elected President of all Palestinians .
Therefore , we now have to give him credit and work with him and support him .
I want to thank you also for having very generously given the Commission the possibility , for 2008 , of straight away having EUR 10 000 more in the budget for the Palestinians .
We will definitely need this and it will be particularly important for our pledging conference .
Let me also say that we are not only supporting Christians - this was mentioned by Mr Belder - but are also supporting the most vulnerable sectors of the Palestinian population , of which some , but not all , are Christian .
Our criterion is need , not religion , as I mentioned before .
Let me say finally that we are very much aware of what many of you have said .
We have analysed the situation .
The only course is to try to come up with political solutions , while at the same time trying to mitigate the suffering as much as we can .
I have received a motion for a resolution tabled pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 11 October 2007 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I join others in calling on Israel to fulfil its obligations under the Geneva Conventions to guarantee the flow of humanitarian aid , humanitarian assistance and essential services , such as electricity and fuel , to the Gaza Strip .
Israel needs to lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip , and ensure the movement of people and goods at Rafah , in compliance with the Agreement on Movement and Access and the EU Border Assistance Mission , as well as the movement of goods at Karni .
All the Union 's institutions , including the Council , the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the Commission must face up to their full responsibility on the implementation of this Agreement .
Finally , I echo the call on Israel to guarantee the flow of financial assets to the Gaza Strip , which has been suspended since 25 September 2007 , given that the lack of access to any financial assets has a serious negative impact on the economic , social and daily life of the Palestinian people .
A Maritime Policy for the EU
The next item is a debate on the Commission 's communication relating to a maritime policy for the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , today is a noteworthy day .
Exactly 500 years ago the German cartographer Martin Waldseemüller created his striking single vision of a brave new world in which Europe was linked to Africa , Asia and the Americas by its oceans and seas .
10 October also marks the day when the King of Portugal mandated Bartolomeu Dias to seek a trade route leading to Asia , and in the United States Columbus 's discovery of the New World is celebrated today .
It is therefore a day worth recalling in the maritime world .
For my part , I am proud to come here today to this Parliament to talk about a new and exciting maritime future for Europe .
This is a future that builds on the strong maritime heritage that Europe has inherited from the past , yet which also looks strategically forward to determine how Europe 's well-being and prosperity , so closely dependent on the oceans and seas , can be enhanced .
Inspired by our own distinct vision of the oceans and seas , the Commission earlier today proposed an integrated maritime policy for the Union .
For the first time in its 50 years of existence , the European Union has explicitly recognised that an integrated approach is needed for the seas and the oceans .
This radical departure has its origins in the compelling argument that there is a maritime dimension to virtually every major issue facing Europe today - energy , climate change , innovation , international competitiveness , job creation , environmental protection , trade , transport and so on .
Whichever sector one looks at , one can see strong links that run between them and the maritime sector .
It would be unwise , indeed short-sighted , for the European Union to operate in these policy areas without taking account of their overlap with maritime affairs .
What we need is a single vision where policymaking can be done in a cohesive and all-embracing manner so as to maximise the potential of these intense and complex interrelations .
At a time when the discussions about global warming , globalisation and EU competitiveness have acquired new urgency , one can hardly ignore the undeniable need for a maritime strategy that directly treats these issues .
Today I am pleased to announce that the College of Commissioners backed an integrated policy document that will deliver exactly what the European Union has lacked until now : a genuine , single vision of the oceans and seas .
It is not just a question of fisheries or shipping , or of trade or regional development , or of research or employment , or of the environment or relations with third countries .
It is a policy that encompasses these , brings all these strengths together and treats them as an interrelated whole .
It is a policy that will feed from and into other Community policies .
At the College meeting earlier today , it was in fact a package of documents that was adopted .
This package is made up of three key components .
The first is a communication which details the aforementioned integrated maritime policy for the European Union .
This is accompanied by an action plan which outlines the first steps that will be taken towards implementing the policy .
Then there is a communication which sets out the conclusions reached following the broad and immensely successful public consultation that was held over a period of one year .


You will quickly recognise the key elements of the package , I believe , because they reflect in large measure the priorities you yourselves have expressed .
Allow me to just mention the following : deploying Europe 's strengths to combat climate change through research and innovation , through more sophisticated planning for vulnerable coastlines and by taking the lead in international discussions ; a European strategy for marine research and a commitment to excellence in marine research technology and innovation to help meet the Lisbon goals for growth and jobs and to fully exploit the opportunities that lie in new technologies ; better regulation of maritime transport to help create a true , barrier-free European maritime transport space in the internal market and to support Europe 's external trade in this era of globalisation ; respect for the crucial role in driving economic growth and an examination of how EU funding can best reinforce sustainable growth and boost prosperity in remote and disadvantaged regions ; ensuring that all forms of development take account of the environmental impact by fostering environmentally friendly shipping , reducing pollution risks and promoting ecosystem-based fisheries ; better use of planning tools , data networks and horizontal coordination to support decision-making for marine spaces and coastal areas and to ensure international compliance with rules ; backing maritime clusters and regional centres of maritime excellence to raise Europe 's competitiveness .



This will particularly help small firms that are such an important part of Europe 's high-tech maritime industries .
It will help realise the huge growth potential of coastal and maritime tourism and it will be an additional element in helping to improve the attractiveness of maritime careers .
The Commission today also adopted a communication aimed at boosting the attractiveness of maritime careers by initiating a review of the exclusions faced by seafarers and fishermen from various pieces of the European Union 's labour legislation .
This is a sensitive area of great concern to many of our stakeholders .
A background document on the important links between the European Union energy policy and maritime policy has also been published today .
We well know that there are enormous challenges ahead .
To address these , we need concrete proposals - proposals that are ambitious enough to meet the challenges we face head on .
In past centuries the seas and oceans have opened up new and exciting opportunities for Europe .
Now , at the start of the 21st century , we hope to discover our own modern-day New World of opportunities .
I believe that we really are at the start of something new .
I also believe that by setting in motion the actions detailed in the package adopted today we will be firmly setting Europe on the path to explore these opportunities in a novel way .
As the saying goes , ' Nothing ventured , nothing gained ' and , while that is true and most certainly is part of the inspiration that propels us forward , it is prudent to note that , like the voyages of discovery of the past , today 's venture will have a cost too .
There will be a first stage in 2008 characterised by a series of preparatory actions ; these will need the involvement of other partners and we will need to secure , together with your support , the necessary funding .
These actions are a direct follow-up to the thinking behind your report of 12 July , where I was delighted to see that you had clearly indicated your backing for these actions .
There are a number of other supporting actions which are already well advanced and which include a communication of 17 October on port policy , another on illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing , and a third on sustainable tourism .
These will later be followed by actions on maritime clusters and on maritime transport .
Complementing all of this will be a discussion on 22 October in Lisbon with the 27 Member State ministers responsible for maritime affairs , which will include ministers of transport , fisheries , the environment and defence , amongst others .
This will feed into a later discussion which will take place at the December European Council with a view to endorsing this policy .
Today is , therefore , not the end of the voyage , nor is it the beginning .
It is , however , a significant milestone , marking a decisive shift away from a period of reflection to what you in Parliament requested of us and what we in the Commission are looking forward to : a period of action .
The European Parliament has been a key player in this process and has given us invaluable feedback .
I would , therefore , like to renew my thanks to Parliament in general and to the rapporteurs and Members who have shown particular interest in this project more specifically .
I have been particularly glad to take part in many of the hearings and meetings held in Parliament .
I sincerely look forward to continuing this dialogue .
Parliament will remain a central figure in the evolution of this policy .
Making a success of the maritime policy is not something that the Commission can , or wishes to , undertake alone .
Its success depends on maintaining a common approach .
I hope that I can count on your continued collaboration .
As I said at the start of my statement , today is indeed noteworthy .
We have set sail on a new and exciting adventure .
This is an adventure that we trust and believe will bring increased and sustained prosperity to Europe .
We have ahead of us an ocean of opportunity .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I would like to present the apologies on behalf of Parliament 's rapporteur for the Green Paper on Maritime Policy , Willi Piecyk .
He is unable to be here today and I am to pass on his best wishes .
I should like to express my praise - I am a member of the Environment Committee - with regard to onshore transport connections for ships .
This has been included and , if we can bring about a decision such as this , is very good for air quality in Europe and it is also very good for reducing CO2 emissions .
In the Green Paper on Maritime Policy there is also discussion about the fact that ships should be included in the Emissions Trading Scheme .
We are only at the first reading concerning the inclusion of air traffic in emissions trading .
There has been no provision either for air traffic in the Kyoto Protocol and a very practical question is therefore : when does the Commission want to put forward a proposal for including maritime traffic in emissions trading ?
Madam President , may I , on the occasion of this Commission communication on a maritime policy for the EU , remind this House of the continuing embargo imposed several years ago by Turkey on all shipping associated with the Republic of Cyprus .
This embargo inflicts significant damage to the shipping industry not just of Cyprus but of the EU in general ...
( Remarks from the floor )
I am speaking English .
It would indeed be exciting if we had interpretation from English to English .
I was just talking about the embargo that Turkey has imposed on Cyprus for several years now , and I was saying that this is causing extreme damage not just to Cyprus , which is a Member State , but to the EU in general .
May I once again ask the Commission to redouble its efforts to convince the Turkish Government to reconsider its decision to continue to uphold this unfair and unnecessary embargo on the shipping of an EU Member State .
I understand that we must be soft - rather soft - on Turkey , but our patience is running out .
After all , what sort of maritime policy can we have if the ships of a Member State cannot use the ports in the shipping lanes of a candidate Member State ?
Please , Commissioner , can you reassure us that you will give this matter your urgent and serious attention ?
Madam President , I want to congratulate Commissioner Borg on this very welcome and visionary action plan addressing specifically the fisheries points which are of interest to me : the integrated network for maritime surveillance , which I think is absolutely vital if we are going to improve safety and stamp out illegal , unregulated and unreported fishing ; the plan to stop destructive bottom trawling in the high seas ; the plan to improve the conditions of the people who work in the fishing industry , one of the most dangerous and poorly paid jobs in the EU ; the improved cooperation between coastguards ; the ending of discards and the promotion of aquaculture , which provides 65 000 full-time jobs in the EU - all of these are wonderful .
I particularly like the idea of the road map towards maritime spatial planning and my question is on that specific issue .
Who will pay for this ?
Some Member States have already done this . They already have spatial plans for their maritime areas .
I think there will be a commercial value for these maritime spatial plans .
Who is going to pay for it in the mean time ?

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , on the question put by the honourable Member , Mr Groote , concerning CO2 emissions : I would like to underline the fact that emissions coming from vessels in connection with maritime transport in absolute terms are lower than in other categories like air transport and even road .
However , on an individual basis , it is true that the CO2 emissions coming from individual vessels are significant .
Therefore , it makes sense that action is taken and that the shipping industry is encouraged to take the necessary action in order to reduce CO2 if we want to maximise the potential for growth with regard to maritime transport - because there is no doubt that there is enormous potential to grow further with regard to maritime transport , but this has to be in conjunction with a reduction in CO2 emissions if we want to bring about a situation which makes maritime transport even appear to be much more consumer friendly .
To do this , it is important to underline the fact that , since we are dealing with a global industry , initiatives should be taken first and foremost on the international front .
Therefore , there should be an international effort and the European Union would be prepared to take the lead , within the International Maritime Organisation , in order to set standards with regard to CO2 emissions .
In the absence of progress , the Commission would consider other options in order to bring about a situation whereby CO2 emissions are effectively reduced .
One can also mention the fact that there are cases where , because of the existing discrepancies , there is , in a way , an incentive to increase CO2 emissions .
For example , in berthing , since there is taxation for the use of electricity in a port , many vessels end up leaving their engines running in order to save on costs because there is duty exemption on fuel .
Therefore , if there is a measure whereby this discrepancy is removed , then there would be an incentive for vessels to make use of the electricity grid imports .
Concerning the question raised by Mr Matsakis concerning the embargo of Turkey on Cyprus , I would like first of all to underline the fact that , with regard to accession negotiations for Turkey , one or two of the chapters that have not been opened and will not be opened until Turkey remedies , relate to transport and fisheries , which is my area of responsibility .
Therefore , we are doing our utmost in order to convince Turkey to reconsider its position .
Obviously , we are looking into this in order to see how one can work closer with Turkey , in order for it to apply - and also in preparation for its eventual accession - the Community acquis on suchlike measures .
I would also like to say that with regard to the question raised by Mr Stevenson concerning spatial planning and who will pay for spatial planning , what we are proposing is not that there would be a communitisation of spatial planning , but that spatial planning should be the responsibility and the function of the Member States .
However , we would like to see and encourage Member States that have not adopted the spatial planning system to introduce it as other Member States have done .
We can quote examples of spatial planning that have been introduced by certain Member States as examples of this practice for other Member States to follow .
We will try to see that there is a certain congruency of the spatial planning measures that are introduced by different Member States so that we do not end up with the situation with regimes which are significantly different from one another .
So we will incentivise the formation of spatial planning systems ; we will help build the necessary tools in order to be able to operate spatial planning in a more effective way and we will try to set guidelines in order to establish a common pattern for spatial planning , but it is ultimately the responsibility and the function of Member States to introduce spatial planning with regard to their own waters .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I can only welcome wholeheartedly the European Commission 's desire to bring together what were previously separate and sometime rather incoherent sectoral policies within an integrated policy .
I welcome the stress placed on the sustainable use of resources , the desire to develop maritime expertise , promote sustainable employment and maximise the quality of life of coastal communities .
All this is heading in the right direction .
The future maritime policy should do more to integrate the specific features of the ultraperipheral regions as well as their assets .
The ultraperipheral regions benefit from protected fish stocks .
This needs to be taken into account .
But above all , these regions could be a real laboratory and a fantastic place for trialling and developing marine renewable energies .
Is the Commission planning to make the most of the exceptional land offered by the ultraperipheral regions , and that makes up the European Union ?
( PT ) Mr Commissioner , my warmest congratulations , since this document does indeed achieve harmonisation , which is what we need with regard to the two major issues on fishing .
There is the need on the one hand to safeguard fishermen 's working conditions and on the other to harmonise fisheries by ecosystem-based management .
In the meantime , I would like to ask the Commissioner if he can confirm the report in the Financial Times , according to which a study commissioned by the Directorate-General for Fisheries bitterly criticised the effects of the micro-management of ecosystems from Brussels , delivering a disastrous review of the Common Fisheries Policy over the past twenty-five years and stating that fisheries subject to the CFP suffer a much higher rate of overfishing than occurs on average worldwide .
Does that report exist , is it to be submitted to the European Parliament Committee on Fisheries and what does the Commissioner think of the criticisms ?
( FR ) Madam President , I am also going to add my congratulations to Commissioner Borg for the work done .
He concluded with ' believe and trust ' and it immediately made me think of ' believe and dare ' , which was a lovely motto at one time .
Believe and dare !
You have dared .
I think the vision you have now developed particularly clearly in the communication before us is obviously a step in the right direction .
I would like to ask one question which has been a particular feature of the concerns - and there are some - of the fisheries sector in this matter .
The implementation of Integrated Coastal Zone Management will of course draw some of its credits from the European Fisheries Fund .
The concern is that this European Fund , about whose inadequacy we have already had much cause for complaint , is the only fund used .
I would like the Commissioner to reassure us on this point and confirm that the Structural Funds , of course the funds necessary for the development and protection of the environment , will also be contributing to the implementation of this policy .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all with regard to the question put by Ms Sudre concerning the ultraperipheral regions : there is no doubt that in a maritime policy we do not intend to formulate - as is clear , I think , from the blue paper , which has just been adopted , and the action plan - a one-size-fits-all policy .
Therefore , the specificities of peripheral regions and ultraperipheral regions in particular need to be taken into account .
The other side of the coin is that the ultraperipherality offers the European Union enormous advantages .
It gives us a reach into other oceans to which we would otherwise not have had direct access .
And , if I can quote fisheries as one example , the fact that you have ultraperipheral regions in the Indian Ocean , for example , like La Réunion , is an example whereby we have a direct voice in the regional fisheries organisations that already exist and the ones that we are trying to promote for that sea .
So , I certainly would encourage looking at the specificities of ultraperipheral regions .
We also have to see to it that we maximise the advantages that these ultraperipheral regions can enjoy .
And , yes , where we can use them as a laboratory , for example , for the development of renewable energies , we should certainly try and promote and encourage that at the same time , seeing to it that their vulnerabilities are not prejudiced in any way .
Concerning the question put by Mr Casaca concerning the ecosystem approach , I would like first of all to say that , yes , we in the Directorate-General for Fisheries and Maritime Affairs had commissioned a study by experts .
It is a normal periodical exercise that we undertake , on how the common fisheries policy has operated , what the possible pitfalls are that have been encountered , in order that , from that exercise , we can learn from past experience and try to improve things .
First of all , I have no problem with making this study available to the Committee on Fisheries .
We know that it is very critical , but we accept that criticism because at the end of the day we are trying to implement the 2002 reforms of the common fisheries policy .
We are still , in 2007 , in the initial phases of real implementation of the 2002 reforms by moving in the direction of multiannual management and recovery plans , by moving in the direction of more ecosystem based management of fisheries .
We have inherited a large number of years of management of fisheries , in a way whereby it was overtaken by the scientific advances , by the enormous increase in the number of vessels that went beyond any limits of capacity so to speak as a counter to what can sustainably be caught .
And we have to see to it that we redress the situation and bring about a system of sustainable fisheries , measures and initiatives again which I hope will have the full backing of Parliament : like a discards policy ; measures and initiatives with regard to multiannual management of fisheries ; management of fisheries by having more closed areas , closed seasons - these are all measures which go very much in the direction of the ecosystem approach to fisheries and the maximum sustainable yield .
We have had the first example of a management plan on the basis of maximum sustainable yields in the plaice and sole management plan which was adopted in Council only last June .
So , we hope to continue moving in that direction in order to regain proper management of fisheries on the basis of the ecosystem approach .
On the question put by Mr Morillon , I would like , first of all , to assure him that the integrated approach towards maritime affairs will not be financed through the European Fisheries Fund .
The European Fisheries Fund for 2007-2013 has been committed .
We have received the national strategic plans and the operational programmes from virtually all Member States , we are looking into them and they are directed towards fisheries and aquaculture obviously .
However , with regard to maritime affairs , one has to look at other sources of financing .
I would say that the most logical source of financing could be through the Structural Funds , though the Regional Funds , because , at the end of the day , coastal areas are regions of the European Union .
Therefore , one needs to create more focus on the specific needs of coastal areas and of the surrounding seas so that , in that way , one would redirect , as necessary , funding for initiatives and projects , which would very much go in the direction of establishing the proper tools for the management of an integrated maritime policy .
( PT ) I would like to add my congratulations to those already offered here to the Commissioner on his presentation today of the document on the action plan for the development of a maritime policy for the EU and I would like to say that the document presented today contains a series of initiatives worthy of mention , including the proposal for a European Strategy for Marine Research , support for an integrated approach to national maritime policies , plus the recommendation that Europe should operate as a network at the level of maritime surveillance as well as the proposal to set up multi-sectoral maritime clusters with the relevant financial adjustment at European level , among many other features , of course .
Finally in this public debate , I would like to put the following questions to the Commissioner : a large part of the action plan presented can be pursued and encouraged by the Commission itself , but obviously it will not have the support of the Council and the Member States .
We heard the Commissioner say here that it is important to obtain such support in the European Parliament 's December part-session .
So , the question is : is it hoped that there will be effective support which would lift this strategy to the front line of the Union 's priorities and keep it there , or support purely as a matter of form ?
I would like to end with the following , my second , question : how can it be ensured that a European maritime strategy will result in greater cooperation and coordination without sliding into communitisation of maritime policy , and in particular of national maritime resources ?
( EL ) Madam President , the Commission 's communication on a future common maritime policy for the EU takes the same anti-worker line .
It includes new measures to reinforce competitiveness and increase profits of large maritime business groups , and it is indicative of the intensity of the attack on workers .
Its basic goals are : increasing the speed with which vessels and capital become concentrated in the hands of the large maritime business groups ; full liberalisation of maritime transport and related services ; the assumption of a strategic role by EU bodies so as to express completely the full interests of capital in international organisations ; sweeping changes to employment relations ; devaluing and privatising maritime education to produce a cheap work force ; imposing on dockers multiple duties , bureaucratic directives and regulations which do not improve safety conditions on vessels or the protection of human life at sea .
Commissioner , the international agreement on the codification of legislation on maritime workers is pending .
What is the Commission 's position on this issue ?
What measures does it intend to take - and I am just finishing , Madam President - with regard to a situation for which perhaps you do not have exclusive responsibility , i.e. the encroachment by monopolistic tourist groups and individuals on the coastline of the Member States ?
Madam President , the Commissioner made some nautical historical allusions , so I would like to do the same .
Most people are familiar with the chorus of the anthem ' Rule Britannia ' , but people sometimes get one word fundamentally wrong .
The correct version is not ' Rule Britannia , Britannia rules the waves ' ; it is ' Rule Britannia , Britannia rule the waves ' .
The word ' rules ' makes the meaning a bombastic assertion .
The correct word , ' rule ' , makes the meaning an exhortation and a warning .
It used to be understood that Britain had to rule the waves in order to maintain her freedom and independence .
Now the British do not even rule themselves , with over 80 % of our laws made by the European Union .
The common fisheries policy has ruined Britain 's fishing industry and caused an ecological disaster in British waters .
Given the EU 's record , why should we think that the EU maritime policy should be any less disastrous than the common fisheries policy ?
There is much interest among the Members in putting another set of questions , and I believe that we ought to use this important debate to the full .
Commissioner , I would like to ask whether you can give a brief reply so that we can give the floor to other Members and then close there .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , on the question put by Mr Queiró , let me underline the fact that we are expecting substantive support .
We will be having an informal ministerial meeting on 22 October in order to get the views of all the Member States on the package that we are proposing .
We hope that this package will be endorsed by the European Council in December .
That is a first stage .
However , we need to be careful not to try to overstep what is achievable in the short term .
If this proves successful and if the first initiatives that are being launched prove successful , then we can go to the Member States to see whether there is a willingness to proceed further in the direction of greater integration of maritime affairs .
However , it is important to underline the fact that this is a policy which is based not on the legislative approach but on incentivising , on facilitating and on creating the necessary tools in order to bring about more coordination , more cooperation and more stakeholder involvement .
So , if one looks at the plan of action , one can clearly see that the underlying principle is establishing certain cross-sectoral tools which are needed to develop an integrated approach to maritime affairs and also starting to look at sectoral measures in a more holistic way , therefore taking into account what impact there would be , for example , if fisheries decisions are taken on other sectors as well as vice-versa .
On the second question , I would like to underline the fact that , with reference to maritime policy , we have in actual fact today also adopted a communication from Commissioner Špidla which launches the discussion as regards the exclusions that workers in the maritime sector - in maritime transport and in fisheries - have from the normal labour law legislation .
We need to look into this to see whether there is a possibility of reducing these discrepancies , to start with , so that the differences between land-based workers and sea-based workers are reduced without , however , creating problems of competitiveness , given that we are dealing with an international sector .
We must , therefore , do this hand in hand with the operators so that , in that way , we can incentivise them and promote the elimination of these discrepancies between land-based workers and sea-based workers .
On the question raised by Mr Batten , I would like to say that a maritime policy , an integrated approach towards maritime affairs , is not a case of the European Union reinventing the wheel .
It is something which has already been done by countries like the United States , like Canada , like Australia and now by Japan , and we are , in a way , lagging behind .
We need to step up the momentum so that we are on a par with our international partners on maritime affairs .
May I remind Mr Batten that the problems with regard to the UK and fisheries date back to before the introduction of the common fisheries policy .
We all recall events like the Cod Wars between the UK and Iceland , which happened in particular before the introduction of the common fisheries policy .
We are talking about a problem with regard to overfishing and fishing rights that already existed and which we are trying to redress through a more rational approach towards the management of fisheries under the reformed common fisheries policy .
Madam President , I join in the congratulations to Commissioner Borg on this very important integrated policy document .
I agree with what President Barroso said today : that a great part of our future lies in the untapped potential of the oceans and the seas and that this policy will generate growth and jobs .
We must seize all opportunities that the seas and oceans offer us , while always acting in a sustainable way .
Commissioner Borg , I fully support your work on marine science technology and innovation and your commitment to the Aberdeen Declaration .
I would like to acknowledge the contribution of Ireland , especially through the Irish Marine Institute , in helping to form this policy .
I welcome your announcement of the package of documents to be launched during the mandate of this Commission but , as you have only two years left , I wonder , is this more in hope than expectation that the entire list of the concrete actions will actually be implemented by you ?
Commissioner Špidla 's presentation today on the review of labour law exemptions in the maritime sector and Commissioner Piebalgs ' report on the interlinkages between the EU energy policy and the new integrated maritime policy are a very good start , but how many of the other items in the package that you announced today will require separate legislative proposals ?
( RO ) I also want to congratulate the Commissioner for the integrated approach .
I would like to draw the attention to the fact that , following Romania 's and Bulgaria 's accession , the European Union now borders the Black Sea , a new sea , and it is important for us to promote the common maritime policy in this region .
I would also want the delta and estuary areas to be protected and to be part of the common maritime policy ; also , I would like the measures for combating sea pollution to be extended to internal waters that flow into seas and oceans and to the industrialized areas along the coasts as well .
I believe the Commissioner 's communication is important as regards the work conditions for sailors and for those who work in the shipyard areas and I also consider it important to maximize the financial support for developing infrastructures and activities in the coastal areas .
( ES ) Madam President , I would first of all like to express my disapproval at the way in which this debate is being conducted today in Parliament .
I was the first MEP who raised a hand to ask for the floor , the first , and now I am condemned to be last , or among the last , and not to speak for more than a minute .
Having said that , I would like to congratulate the Commissioner and the Commission , both for this Communication and for all the work that they have been doing for a year in consulting the parties concerned , in an attempt to develop an integrated maritime policy for the whole of the European Union , taking into account the importance of the marine environment and the attacks that it constantly suffers due to human activity .
In this respect , I would like to ask the Commissioner whether the military sector , whose activities sometimes interfere with and affect the marine environment , is going to be taken into consideration in Community policy in this field in order to prevent encroachment on the environment .
In addition , there is the uncontrolled dumping that is constantly taking place .
When are black boxes going to be introduced in order to monitor all movements of liquids in the bilges and in the liquid in the tanks of the vessels ?
Mr Ortuondo , as I was not present at the beginning of this debate , I am not aware of the order of priority that you set .
( FI ) Madam President , the EU 's Maritime Policy is one of the most important initiatives which the present Commission will remember with good reason , especially if it understands how to take advantage of its expansion and the sort of political muscle given us in enlargement to rescue our marine environment .
I now appeal to the Commission to take special action to save one of the EU 's very special seas , the Baltic .
I would like to ask this .
Could the Commission see the Baltic Sea not just as an environmental challenge , but also a political one ?
If that dying sea can be rescued we can show the public that the Union provides a genuine benefit and that together we are in a stronger position to save our environment than we are alone .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , with regard to the question that was raised by Ms Doyle : yes , I would like to reiterate the fact that we have received significant support from the scientific community .
The Aberdeen Declaration was very welcome , and Ireland itself was extremely supportive .
On the remark that was made , I would like to stress that this is not my initiative : it is a Commission decision that has been adopted and , irrespective of the persons involved , there will certainly be continuity .
If , in the first two years , we manage to register some success , I am sure that the new Commission will be more than willing to take up those successes .
So it is a crucial two-year period , where we need to see that the initial seeds for a future maritime policy do actually start to grow .
In that way , we can guarantee that future Commissions , with the support of the European Parliament , with the support of the Committee of the Regions and , I am sure , with the support of the Council of Ministers , will be able to bring this maritime policy to fruition .
On the second question that was raised regarding inland waterways , there is no doubt that inland waterways are a very important part of the whole concept of a maritime policy , just as the coasts and the coastal areas are a very integral part of a maritime policy .
In fact , next week Vice-President Barrot is going to present a package which covers internal waters , including a ports policy and therefore going into internal ports as well .
So the whole parameters concerning waterways and ports - even inland ports - are part of this package that will be presented next week .
On the question raised by Mr Ortuondo Larrea concerning military activities , whether they are to be included in the Community policy , one needs to underline the fact that , here , we are entering into a very sensitive area concerning the sovereignty of Member States .
Therefore , one needs to be careful .
If you want this maritime policy to succeed , we should do it hand in hand with the Member States .
Where Member States are willing to take steps in the direction , for example , of joint activities with regard to national coastguard services , concerning questions on the environment , questions with regard to fisheries , questions with regard to illegal immigration , questions concerning drug trafficking and trafficking of human beings , then in those instances I think that there is a lot of scope for having a system of national coastguards coordinated in a more effective and efficient way by , for example , sharing the assets that different Member States enjoy , by exchanging data and by creating necessary tools , including for example sea mapping , which could be an asset for coastguard and other activities .
But , on the other hand , if we go into very sensitive military aspects , then that could be more difficult to handle .
My underlying message is , if we want an integrated maritime policy to succeed , we have to do so hand in hand with the Member States , who , after all , have the primary responsibility for ensuring that the necessary instruments are in place for such a policy to succeed .
On the question concerning the Baltic Sea , there is no doubt , as I said in a previous reply , the maritime policy needs to take into account the specific features or characteristics of the different maritime regions of the European Union .
Therefore , if there are particular problems , as there are , with regard to the Baltic Sea , then the maritime policy has to create the tools in order to tackle those problems of the Baltic Sea .
Therefore , if there are particular ecological problems in the Baltic Sea that need to be addressed and that can be addressed in some way or other , then we should do our utmost in order to do so .
For example , with regard to fisheries , we are taking measures in order to try to attain , against various odds , sustainable fisheries in the Baltic .
We are also taking measures with regard to the Baltic in order to try to reverse the problems that there are concerning maritime transport traffic routes through the Baltic Sea .
Therefore an integrated approach to maritime affairs would certainly mean that we look at all these problems and try to bring about more coordination between the different stakeholders , between the different Member States and also third countries like Russia , with regard to the Baltic , so that in that way we can achieve a better result with regard to the management of the different sectoral areas concerning the Baltic .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I apologise to the Members who were not able to speak ; it seems that we ought to set aside more time for debates like this one .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 11 October 2007 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PT ) The Commission has presented its proposals on a ' vision ' and ' action plan ' for a future ' integrated maritime policy ' at EU level .
Although it has not been possible to carry out the analysis required ( not forgetting that the devil is in the detail ) , my initial reactions are as follows :
Any initiative in this area must safeguard the Member States ' competence as regards spatial management , in particular its territorial waters and exclusive economic zones ( EEZ ) , as represented for example by : resource exploitation , transport , research , border controls and security , regional planning , the environment , or economic activities such as fishing .
That is , we should not have a Trojan horse , under the guise of the so-called principle of subsidiarity , posing a threat to the sovereignty of the Member States .
The ' sound financial basis ' mentioned for the ' maritime policy ' should not be created at the expense of the European Fisheries Fund , since new and increased financial means should be allocated to meet the new priorities .
Aquaculture should not be promoted , since that would not achieve optimum results in the fisheries sector in view of its strategic importance for various countries like Portugal ; the relevant socio-economic sustainability should be secured by means of suitable policies and financial resources .

in writing . - ( FR ) With this ' Blue Paper ' , the European Union is taking a step forward .
Though it is regrettable that on certain points - like the issue of European coastguards and a European flag - the European Commission has had to scale down its ambitions because of a lack of support from certain Member States , this document is a good basis to start from .
I hope it will keep all its promises .
However , the issue of finance will be decisive , something the Commission itself recognises .
Will our ministers shoulder their responsibilities ?
For the rest , I am particularly delighted by the Commission 's decision to address the revision of social legislation in the maritime sector , to which traditional employment law and its protections do not apply .
It was about time !
This decisive factor in making maritime careers attractive should therefore help Europe to protect its maritime expertise .
Murder of women in Mexico and Central America
The next item is the debate on the report ( Α6-0338 / 2007 ) by Raül Romeva i Rueda , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the murders of women in Central America and Mexico , and the role of the EU in fighting this phenomenon ( 2007 / 2025 ( ΙΝΙ ) ) .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , although the murder of women is a global problem , there are areas of the world that , due to both the magnitude and the complexity of the phenomenon , have become paradigmatic cases .
Those places are also , very regrettably , mirrors that reflect many of the problems that , to varying degrees , affect societies governed by social patterns based on a patriarchal culture .
This is the case , for example , with Mexico and the countries of Central America .
In fact , it was in Mexico where the concept of feminicide began to take shape , especially when the Special Prosecution Service for investigating and prosecuting cases of feminicide in the Republic of Mexico , chaired by the congresswoman Marcela Lagarde , established that the concept referred to , and I quote , ' the sum total of crimes against humanity consisting of criminal acts , kidnappings and disappearances affecting girls and women in a context of institutional collapse ' .
In short , it is a breakdown in the rule of law that promotes impunity .
Although the concept is in the progress of being developed , some advocate the use of the term ' feminicide ' in order to contrast it with the term ' homicide ' ...
I would like to ask for a little quiet in the House .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Thank you , Madam President .
I will continue .
I was saying that , although the concept is one that is constantly evolving , in fact some feel it is necessary to talk about feminicide in order to contrast it with the concept of homicide , and it is significant that what it highlights is the existence of one of the most alarming phenomena of our time : the murder of women for the simple reason that they are women .
Over the last two years the European Parliament has done a great deal of work on this issue , and there will be an important milestone in this process when tomorrow , 11 October , the Plenary adopts the report on the murders of women in Mexico and Central America and the role of the European Union in fighting this phenomenon .
The report is also the result of a long and intensive process of dialogue with all the sectors involved and numerous compromises between the political groups .
I would like to take this opportunity , in fact , to thank all the shadow rapporteurs for their support and inform you that also present here today are Marjo Searle and Arsène Van Nierop , the mothers of Brenda and Hester respectively , who were both murdered in Mexico .
With the adoption of this report the European Parliament will be in line with other institutions that have already expressed their positions on the issue .
This has been done by the Council of Europe and the United Nations , and of various parliaments and governments all over the world .
Its content will represent considerable progress , both in defining the problem and in various parties taking responsibility in the fight to eradicate it .
One of the principles that comes out of the report is recognising , as a starting point for any analysis , the multiple causes and forms of this type of crime that exist .
It is certain that , for example , the highly publicised case of Ciudad Juárez - more than 400 women murdered since 1993 - has a great deal to do with the fact that it is a border city with the typical problems of such areas .
However , there are also many factors that require efforts to be concentrated and integrated public policies to be implemented .
These policies include : prevention , investing in education for equality and reversing the patriarchal culture ; improvements in data collection and forensic investigation ; facilitating and speeding up reporting of crimes ; training police , judges , prosecutors and doctors in this type of crime ; monitoring of local businesses and multinational companies that operate in the area , many of which subject female workers to incredibly vulnerable conditions ; legislative reforms and transposition of regulations at the appropriate levels of society ; and finally , placing a special emphasis on support for victims and their families .
Regarding the latter issue , however , I would like to report here and deeply regret the fact that , on many occasions , the victims are despised and even criminalised ; and their families are persecuted and even accused of harming the good image of a city or country simply because they want to raise awareness of the problem and because they want to demand , and do demand , justice .
Obviously those with the main and biggest responsibility for implementing all the measures proposed are the governmental institutions of the countries directly concerned , and in this case it is obvious that they are Mexico and the countries of Central America .
However , bearing in mind that the European Union has an association agreement with the former , which , moreover , includes a clause for democracy and respect for human rights , and that , in addition , a similar agreement is being negotiated with the Central American region , it is more than justifiable for the European institutions to take sides and make specific commitments regarding this problem .
Nobody should see this as interference by the European Union in the internal affairs of another country , especially given that , even though considerable progress has been made , as acknowledged in the report , especially from a legislative point of view , the magnitude of the problem requires greater effort and commitment from the whole world , especially Europe .
In short , I hope that after all these months we have achieved the necessary level of agreement and consensus so that tomorrow , in the vote , this resolution will be adopted by a majority of the House and we will finally send a clear and firm message about what it means to fight violence against women , in particular in the regions concerned .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , as a woman and also as a member of the Commission , first of all I would like to thank the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality for the defence of women in Europe , but also worldwide .
This report , presented today , is indeed to be seen within this context of a global fight against gender-related violence .
This is how we see it , and I thank the rapporteur very much , Mr Romeva i Rueda , for what he said .
Feminicide is a tragic issue which covers a much broader problem , that of violence against women , which we must fight at all levels : at local , but also at global levels .
And I would like to talk to you about what we as a Commission are doing to address the question of gender violence in general , again , and also in particular . To promote it through our external relations policy in Mexico and in Central Asia .
Also , if you allow me , I would like to say a few words about my recent visit to the region , because I was there just last week ( but not in Mexico ) .
I visited Panama , El Salvador , Honduras and Nicaragua .
I had already been in Mexico and I will go there most probably next year .
I can tell you that the Commission is on the frontline in the effort of preventing violence against women .
Let me remind you that , on 8 March 2006 , the Commission issued what we called a ' road map for equality between men and women ' , outlining the eradication of all forms of gender-based violence as a priority objective .
In March of this year , we adopted a communication on gender equality in development cooperation , stating that gender-based violence in all its manifestations violates women 's human rights and is indeed a serious obstacle to the achievement of equality , development and peace .
The Commission also supports projects on education and on awareness-raising interventions aimed at engaging all adolescents in programmes aiming at changing their behaviour in relation to violence against girls and women .
For instance , as I said , I was just in El Salvador , and I visited a programme that is called ' Pro Jóvenes ' , which is for girls and boys - but especially for girls - who have either already been in the so-called Maras , or who could enter into the Maras , in order to prevent them from doing so .
I was most impressed by this programme .
The New European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights also provides a wide scope for activities in the field of gender equality .
Concerning the situation in Mexico , I would like to point out that EU-Mexico relations are based on our 1997 global agreement , in which Article 1 identifies human rights as a fundamental element of EU-Mexican relations .
On that very basis , both parties have established what I think , in the mean time , is a fruitful cooperation in the fields of human rights and justice , a cooperation which is then carried out through our different Commission programmes implemented by the Mexican federal authorities , as well as through projects carried out also by non-state actors and by NGOs .
The Mexican authorities also keep us informed about gender-related violence in Mexico .
So we learned that a number of cases had been resolved and many others were under investigation .
My last personal conversation with the new Mexican Foreign Minister - who is , as you know , also a woman - was in Santo Domingo , where we mentioned this question of feminicide and where I got some relevant information about what the Mexican Government is doing .
They have also a special human rights adviser , another lady who is also working particularly on this issue .
In the case of Central America , as a region , the country where the issue is most critical is Guatemala .
Our approach has been to confront the issue , both in our dialogue with the authorities and through , again , a number of activities on the issue of violence against women .
This includes the mainstreaming on the gender dimension in all the cooperation programmes .
The Commission also organised , in March last year , an important communication campaign targeted at young people and decision-makers on how to stop violence against women .
In the same period we also welcomed the creation of a national commission on feminicide , composed of officials from the executive , the judiciary and also the congress , and a total of 18 state institutions .
Recently , we also noted the creation of an international commission against impunity in Guatemala , which we also strongly support .
As a part of this Commission programme supporting the judiciary , a specific component is dedicated to feminicide . In particular to activities carried out by the so-called CEPROM .
This is the presidential office in charge , with whom we have a memorandum of understanding on cooperation .
Let me also mention our support for the preparatory work for the revision of the law against feminicide , now before Congress , with a view to the revision of the penal code .
Finally , let me say that I found a lot of goodwill and pro-European spirit in this trip to Central America on this issue .
I was really positively surprised by the interest in enhancing regional integration , and cooperative attitudes also towards the forthcoming negotiations of an association agreement .
I must say it was very important to see that even the interest in Panama was much higher than I expected . I am looking forward to the possibility of everybody there being included .
The first message that I passed on there was the importance of achieving progress on the negotiations that will finally start at the San José Process in Costa Rica .
This is important because , naturally , it will be a political dialogue there ; there will be a cooperation programme , and there will also be free trade negotiations .
But it will be a compact programme .
Social cohesion will be among the most important issues in the whole of Latin America , including Central America , and there this programme also has a very great importance .
Indeed , juvenile violence and violence against women are issues that we find have to be there because we have to all do everything in order to diminish violence in society .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot ignore the reality of feminicide in Central America .
In many regions of the world , women make an essential contribution to the most worthy societal structures of humanity .
Thanks to their feminine intuition , women enrich our understanding of the world .
They help to make human relations between people more honest and authentic .
The time has come to condemn and severely punish all forms of violence perpetrated against women , not only in Central America but also in several countries of Europe .
In this regard , the participation of women in managing material aid and assistance given to the victims of this violence could be of fundamental importance .
Ladies and gentlemen , if the EU Member States can bring their experience to resolving problems , we should not withhold our expertise .
That is why I remain convinced that bilateral cooperation between the Member States and the states of Central America can be effective .
I bear witness here to a frankly sensitive job within the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
I thank the rapporteur , Mr Romeva , for his political sense and cooperation .
We have tabled some amendments by common agreement .
If these amendments are adopted , we can take pride in a job that may improve the situation of women and thus of the whole of Central American society .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur for the excellent work done , for the ongoing dialogue with the shadow rapporteurs , and for the openness and receptivity to suggestions presented to him .
Many people took part in the process and I think that is quite exemplary .
The Socialist Group will therefore support the content of the report and the proposals for amendments tabled .
We know that when there are problems of any kind it is always the women who suffer most throughout the world , Europe , America , Asia , Africa , everywhere .
Poverty and social exclusion are the lot of women , as are violence , psychological and physical violence and extreme violence resulting in death .
This report deals with that extreme violence , with the death of many women in Central American countries and Mexico .
I had the opportunity to visit Guatemala , along with the rapporteur under the umbrella of the European Union-Central America Delegation , and to hear the amazing accounts and reports of many non-governmental organisation officials .
We know that many feminicide murders are committed in Guatemala and in Ciudad Juárez .
Feminicide , as the report mentions , cannot be explained purely in terms of a general climate of violence .
Account must be taken of the context and of the discrimination which still continues against women and it is an absolute tragedy that many cases go unpunished .
There is , moreover , the case referred to in the report of two Dutch citizens who were also feminicide victims .
Therefore , although some progress has been made and some measures have been taken , these are not enough ; we need to go much further and , above all , we need to create effective protection measures for witnesses and victims , so that the perpetrators may be punished and the European Parliament 's missions to those countries can always place that item on their agenda .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , violence against women in Mexico and Central America has , in recent years , reached dramatic proportions , with thousands of women having been the victims of violent deaths , which on many occasions have been extremely cruel in nature and often accompanied by sexual abuse and torture .
Although in many cases the perpetrators of such atrocious crimes are sick-minded individuals , in many situations organised criminal activity is very much involved , and the implication of human trafficking , prostitution and drugs is largely in evidence .
It is very sad that in Mexico and Central American countries the functioning of the rule of law in certain cases leaves a lot to be desired , either because of real organisational deficiencies in the police and judiciary systems , or because of corruption and impunity .
The rapporteur , Mr Romeva i Rueda , is to be congratulated for making sure that this report is strong enough to send the necessary message not only to the governments of the countries concerned , but also to the world as a whole , about the totally unacceptable high level of femicides in the aforementioned states .
The small number of final amendments - which incidentally have the rapporteur 's full support - are useful and make this report more complete .
My group fully supports all those amendments .
It is to be hoped that this report will be voted through this House with a very large majority , so as to give a very clear signal to all concerned that the problem of the killing of women in Central America , as indeed in other parts of the world , is a matter that should attract our full attention and necessitates the taking of very drastic and effective remedial measures .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , as a member of the Mexico delegation , I would particularly like to thank the Committee on Women 's Rights and specifically the rapporteur for the fact that this problem , which has also cast a shadow on many discussions with our colleagues in Mexico , has been dealt with .
I am hoping for a very broad majority tomorrow , which expresses one opinion and which emphasises how seriously we heave dealt with this problem .
In view of the appalling figures , the reports on the harassment of witnesses and solicitors , death threats and threats of torture , harassment of families , of situations which can in no way be accepted , it is the European Union 's duty to speak out and it is also its duty to point out the peculiarity of this phenomenon .
It represents a particularly dramatic development of a global phenomenon concerning the way in which women are treated , which must be quickly brought to an end in the 21st century .
It must be addressed on a very amicable basis with our counterparts in the countries concerned because a positive development is only possible in a society when women are able to live free of fear and aggression and when threats , which are made against them and from which they suffer because they are women , are prosecuted appropriately .
I therefore welcome all the positive measures being adopted here .
We need witness protection , we need a better legal system , we need education .
Then we shall be able - so I believe - to support women in Mexico , in Latin America , in order to achieve a level of protection for them that is acceptable to us .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Thank you , Madam President .
I would like to thank the rapporteur very much for his excellent work and also for his commitment and the knowledge that he possesses in this area , and I want to say straight away that our Group fully supports this report .
This form of feminicide that we are now discussing has grown , above all in areas where we have companies investing in subcontractor plants and where women are completely dependent on men , socially , economically , in all areas .
The young women employed in these assembly plants are not only likely to be affected by the increased violence but they also work under highly degrading conditions that reinforce the image of women as inferior beings who can be murdered , tortured , kidnapped and so on .
I note the measures stated by the Commission , but I would also want to see even tougher and stronger pressure being put on these countries by the European Union .
We must show that it is completely unacceptable to sign agreements on respect for human rights while murder is still going on .
We should be able to freeze trade agreements until we can see that the demands we have rightly made are being complied with , until for example the governments in the relevant countries invest sufficient resources in finding and bringing to justice the authors of the crimes .
This wide-scale brutality against women has now been going on for almost ten years and rather than being reduced , it has actually grown , so it is high time to take action .
Thank you .
( ES ) Madam President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur for his work and , in particular , for being willing to express Parliament 's inescapable and unwavering commitment to the serious and urgent problem of violence against women .
I welcome the fact that , since it was in committee , this report has become more balanced , less paternalistic and has gained the right perspective , as , sadly , violence against women is not confined to one region , one country or one continent , but is global and universal , and we should take this into consideration for future work done by this House .
Unfortunately , and perhaps under different circumstances , it also happens in the European Union .
I would like to say , without going any further , that in my country the statistics are devastating : 166 000 cases reported to the courts , 48 000 people detained last year ( one every twelve minutes ) and almost 70 women murdered ; the last one yesterday , her throat cut by her partner .
I think that these terrible statistics , Madam President , should lead us to think profoundly about the role of our Parliament , which I do not see as a court that punishes and pontificates , but as an institution that has its own effective strategies for seeking , by mutual agreement with our partners and on the basis of dialogue , cooperation and good practice , solutions for eradicating this process .
The case of Mexico , which is very significant and is cited in the report : this is a country that has a high level of violence to start with , which European Union citizens have been victims of , and whose families we stand with .
However , we also have to recognise that it is a society that is fighting , which is not happy with the situation and is valiantly struggling to overcome this problem , by mobilising the State authorities , the federal authorities and the local authorities , and the whole of society and all its political parties , and therefore , Madam President , the report recognises the progress that has been made .
It is important , and I will conclude with this , to ask the Commission for the human rights action plan to be concluded quickly and ambitiously , Madam President .
I would like to finish by saying that violence against women is a problem of abuse , it is a problem of cowardice , it is a problem of intolerance and , above all , Madam President , it is a problem of fear and powerlessness , of fear of accepting the will of others and , above all , fear of peacefully imposing will and reason based on argument , peacefully and not through violence .
( HU ) Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Romeva i Rueda for his report , which takes a position on an important problem .
I am very pleased that , as a fellow member , he is taking the situation of women so seriously .
Violence against women is a violation of human rights that prevents women from exercising their fundamental rights .
It therefore counts as one of the greatest global barriers to equality of the sexes in society .
This phenomenon occurs to differing extents but is present globally , and so action must be taken against it globally , in harmony with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
States themselves , Mexico in this case , are responsible for respecting and creating the freedom and safety of their citizens , so they must guarantee the instruments necessary to prevent , shed light on and punish violence against women , even if the violence occurs within the family .
I think it is very positive that Mexico has taken legal steps towards equality for men and women .
Nevertheless , the fight against violence against women cannot merely be restricted to the use of legal instruments , since this is a complex phenomenon that requires complex treatment , legal , administrative , preventive , advisory , victim-support , dialogue and monitoring tasks and obligations for the state in question .
The European Union - which has committed itself on several occasions to ensuring global equality , and which has defined the road map for equality for the period 2006-2010 published by the European Commission , and to which the Commissioner referred as one of its main priorities , as well as the halting of violence against women - cannot remain silent in the face of such atrocities .
When forming external relations , developments in human rights and the equality of women must be considered as emphasised criteria .
The report is excellent , and I recommend that it be adopted .
( PT ) We cannot stay indifferent to violence committed against women in any part of the world , in particular in our own countries .
We are therefore paying particularly close attention to this serious problem in Mexico and some countries in Central America , where there is still feminicide which cannot be attributed solely to a general climate of violence .
We know that it is also necessary to take account of discrimination within the local social and economic context which is unfavourable to women and is even worse in the case of indigenous women living in serious poverty and economic dependence , with the additional problem of the activities of criminal gangs .
Here too , we therefore proclaim our solidarity with the women who are victims of such violence and add our voice to the call to see women 's rights upheld , and their dignity respected ; we naturally support the report of our fellow Member , Mr Romeva .

( ES ) Madam President , firstly I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
I would like to highlight a few issues from it and also point out one aspect that I think perhaps is missing .
In order to win the battle against murders of women and against impunity we need to attack on a variety of fronts .
In the short term , we need to eliminate all discrimination in legislation , facilitate reporting of crimes and protection measures for victims , witnesses and family members , and improve the judicial and prison systems .
In this field , I agree that there is a need for the European Union to offer its full cooperation to these countries in order to overcome the difficulties and delays in the implementation of women 's rights in legislation , to encourage the ratification of international agreements on the protection of human rights and to support the revision and updating of national legislation in this field .
I will therefore support the Obiols-Estrela amendment along those lines .
Improving the situation in the long term requires that we promote education in values through gender equality and education campaigns and awareness-raising from childhood in schools , in order to promote a social conscience that will bring an end to violence against women and the stigmatisation of the victims by the authorities .
Perhaps a more specific mention of the issue of education is what I think is missing .
I think that all the efforts that we are making in this direction will do little to put an end to this blot on society that should not have a place in 21st century societies .
Madam President , many thanks for this truly important debate , and in particular my sincere thanks once more to the rapporteur .
As I said a little while ago , as a woman and as the Commissioner for External Relations and European Neighbourhood Policy this issue is of course particularly important to me , and it is absolutely correct to say - as indeed I did at the start - that it is a general issue , one that unfortunately affects all of us in all countries .
This includes the European Union , but it is of course much more the case in poor countries , countries without the proper socioeconomic conditions , countries lacking , in particular , an effective police system - meaning that difficulties arise even at the detection stage - and also , in most cases , an effective judicial system .
After all , that too is crucial .
We are also aware that , in many of the countries that have been mentioned here , such as Central America and Mexico , along with many others , the phenomenon of corruption still exists , and mafia organisations work together with leading figures in the judiciary in some cases , which means that the detection rate is still very poor .
I agree with much of what has been said today : firstly legislative measures and secondly implementation measures .
In addition , I can reiterate that the Commission already has programmes in place and is working on these matters .
However , the time factor also has to be taken into account , of course .
Unfortunately , this phenomenon is not one that can be eradicated overnight ; it can only be brought under control gradually in the context of socioeconomic development .
Sadly , it is something that we shall all have to deal with for some time to come .
Preventive measures must be taken , of course ; I have just highlighted the example of ' Pro Jóvenes ' as it is such an interesting programme .
Ladies and gentlemen , if you ever return to El Salvador - or even Guatemala , but particularly El Salvador - I would recommend taking a look yourselves .
This is at least a dash of good news .
I can only affirm that we shall of course continue our programmes , and shall also continue to conduct our assuredly critical dialogue with Mexico , but I readily admit that , as Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra said , Mexico itself must be prepared to tackle this issue and take up the cause .
The thing is that , when a crime has been detected too late , it is very difficult to determine all aspects after the event .
Consequently , it is also very important to draw on all the relevant methods of modern police technology , as detection is the first factor and justice the second , and of course the question of general non-discrimination in society is also decisive .
I can only assure you that I am most certainly on your side in this matter .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 11 October 2007 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( SK ) On 8 March 2007 on the occasion of International Woman 's Day , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality in the European Parliament began its campaign for the eradication of violence against women .
This report on feminicides in Mexico and Central America is part of the overall initiative , the aim of which is the global eradication of violence against women .
It is in these countries in particular that the number of violent deaths has grown significantly in the past years .
According to the official Mexican statistics , 6 000 girls and women were killed between 1999 and 2006 .
The most alarming statistics come mainly from countries that have deep-rooted economic inequalities in society , and in particular where women traditionally are economically dependent on men : countries such as Guatemala , Salvador , Honduras - the third poorest country in South America - and Nicaragua .
Feminicides in Ciudad Juárez and Guatemala are particularly alarming , and for this reason I welcome today 's debate .
I believe that only through in-depth analysis of these issues , which should take place prior to the 2008 EU-LAC summit in Lima , will we be able to assess the measures adopted , including the experience of the Mexican authorities , which will help to combat violence against women both in the EU and South America .
We must step up our efforts to protect women from all types of violence .
The problem of feminicide and the impunity of the perpetrators in Mexico and Central America has not improved in spite of massive efforts .
Therefore , the governments of Mexico and Central American countries should continue to step up their endeavours towards the prevention and detection of feminicide and other cases of violence against women .
In this connection , I would ask the governments of Central American countries to intensify their monitoring of the exercise of corporate social responsibility by the maquiladora ( sub-contractor ) companies .
In addition , the European principles of equal opportunities and equal rights for women and men must influence the proactive human rights policy of the EU more strongly .
Consequently , I call on the Commission to make a proposal concerning how the various European initiatives designed to combat feminicide can be better coordinated with local authorities and institutions in future .
All the available external policy instruments must be used .
In this connection , I would ask the Commission and the Member States to step up activities to verify compliance with the democracy and human rights clauses of existing and pending agreements .
When negotiating the association agreement with the countries of Central America , an assessment of the impact on gender equality should be carried out as part of the assessment of the impact on sustainable development .
The European human rights policy , and in particular women 's rights , must on no account be up for consideration as a result of economic and geopolitical interests .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 144 )
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
Madam President , 7 October last year will be remembered as a dramatic wake-up call to what is going on in Russia .
On that day , Anna Politkovskaya , considered to be a living symbol of honest journalism , was brutally murdered .
President Putin dismissed Anna Politkovskaya 's role as marginal and her case still remains unsolved .
Last October in this House parliamentarians called on the Commission and the Member States to honour the legacy of Anna Politkovskaya by making the restoration of free media in Russia a primary condition for the further development of our relations , because , only if we send a clear signal that we value Anna Politkovskaya 's quest for truth and freedom more highly than oil and gas , will conditions in Russia start to change .
There is no question that we in Europe share the values for which Anna Politkovskaya gave her life .
Sadly Mr Putin does not seem to share these values .
Respect for Anna Politkovskaya commits us to make this clear to President Putin in forthcoming summits .
( RO ) I will speak about the issue of zoological parks in Romania .
According to the assessments performed by some nongovernmental international organizations of this field , the transposition of the Directive regarding zoological parks into the Romanian legislation is considered one of the best in Europe .
Nevertheless , bringing the 41 Romanian zoological parks up to European standards within the established deadline , namely by the end of this year , seems to be almost impossible to achieve .
Under the pressure of this deadline and the conditions of an existing public-private partnership , I support the importance of immediately implementing the common action plan , which comprises the next priority steps : to conduct a national study for classifying the existent zoological parks , to organize an emergency rescue team and to temporarily prevent the reproduction of animals .
I also consider it is necessary to offer some time for implementing this plan , before making the decision to close the zoological parks that do not meet the legal requirements .

( PL ) Madam President , despite the numerous remarks that have been heard in this Chamber in respect of Mr Schulz , he has not ceased his attacks and insults on European Union members , which are not worthy of this House .
As someone who holds an important position in a Community institution , he is interfering in the internal affairs of a Member State and constantly insulting its representatives .
Most of those in this House would never dream of interfering in the democratic elections of peoples of the EU .
I am curious to know how this gentleman would feel if an MEP called on the German people to change their Chancellor , because there are organisations legally acting to spread Nazi thinking and to undermine the borders between European states .
I think this gentleman is sorry he was born so late , in the wrong historical epoch .

Mr President , earlier today Mr Pöttering made a statement on the World / European Day against the death penalty and said he rejected the death penalty ' in any form ' .
He seems to assume that we all agree with him .
I do not .
Last Sunday , just a mile from my home in London , an innocent boy of 17 , Rizwan Darbar , was stabbed to death in West Ham Park because , it is reported , he attempted to stop a friend 's mobile phone from being stolen .
This is not an unusual occurrence in Britain .
Innocent people are being shot , stabbed and beaten to death with increasing frequency .
Why is this ?
It is because the thugs and criminals do not fear the law .
Even if they are caught and convicted , they often receive very lenient sentences .
Personally , I would like to see the reintroduction of the death penalty in Britain for perpetrators of these kinds of murders .
Of course this could not be done unless we were outside of the European Union , which is yet another good reason for leaving .
Mr President , we have already had mention today of Libya , and I want to give it another billing .
Libya , quite properly , was made to pay for the Lockerbie terrorist atrocity , but Libya as a global sponsor of terrorism has yet to make full reparation .
The IRA 's vile campaign of terror reached its most deadly when equipped with Libyan Semtex and weaponry , permitting Martin McGuinness and its other army council leaders to unleash the most vicious phase of their campaign .
Without Libya , hundreds of innocents would not have died .
Thus , tonight in this House , I want to back the present campaign by the victims ' group in Northern Ireland - by the name of FAIR - to bring Libya to international account by forcing it to pay compensation , as occurred with Lockerbie .
Just as the EU pressurised Libya over the Bulgarian nurses , so it should support justice for IRA victims by pressing Libya to settle the litigation now issued against it by FAIR in the United States of America .
( RO ) Through the Committee on Budgets , the Parliament has made an extremely important decision .
Through the 30 % reserves established from administrative expenses for the European Social Fund , the European Fund for Regional Development and the Cohesion Fund as well , we send a strong signal to the European Commission .
The approval of operational programmes should be done within the time specified by the European directives , in this case four months .
Although Romania was one of the first countries that submitted these documents as early as in January , at present , two of the most important operational programmes have not been approved yet .
I am talking about the operational programme for administrative capacity development and the operational programme for human resources .
Taking into consideration the fact that we are not the only Member State in this situation , I would like to know the reasons , if they are not bureaucratic , that cause the Commission to postpone their approval to November .
According to the common statement we adopted together with the Council following the conciliation of July 13th , the Commission should ensure the rapid approval of the Member States ' programmes and projects and submit a roadmap for their adoption .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to raise the report on industrial relations in the postal sector , which has just been published by the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions .
Indeed , I wish this report had been available before we voted on the postal services .
But even now , it is a timely wake-up call for all governments that will be privatising their postal services over the next number of years .
In the EU we are committed to the Lisbon Agenda , more and better jobs .
Unfortunately , this report tells us that privatisation of the postal sector so far has delivered fewer but , more critically , worse jobs with poorer working conditions .
The report states that since the beginning of the liberalisation process , sectoral pay developments in all but three countries have been below the average .
But crucially , in all countries , a pay gap exists between employees of the main providers and those of the new entrants or the alternative providers .
If left unchecked , the situation will , and I quote from the report , ' erode employment conditions and lead to more conflictual industrial relations ' .
So far , postal privatisation has failed the Lisbon test .
( PL ) Mr President , during the present term of the European Parliament I have already appealed several times for an end to discrimination against Poles , especially Catholics .
This time too we are viewing the demand being made by certain media to withhold the subsidy for the University of Social and Media Culture as a blatant expression of discrimination and of a motivation driven by criteria other than intrinsic merit .
The accusations levelled against that institution by certain media are no more than slanders formulated by people who at one time enslaved Poland and the Poles .
Nowadays , in democratic times , they cannot come to terms with the loss of absolute power .
The University , which is appealing for financial support , provides education and training in a universal value system , and particularly for students from poor families .
A tightening of criteria and refusal to allocate funds resulting from the media witch-hunt , particularly in the Year of Equal Opportunities for All , would , in our view , be not only a manifestation of discrimination in respect of religion and outlook , but actually a symptom of the application of totalitarian methods , which stands in contrast to the declared values , standards and requirements of European law .
( PL ) Mr President , I wish to draw attention to a very important problem in the European Commission , and one which is constantly neglected here in the forum of the European Parliament : it concerns transport communications .
The shortest transport route from Scandinavia , the north of Europe , to the south - to Turkey , Greece and Bulgaria - lies via the Central European transport corridor .
This is a corridor that would begin at Ystad , in Sweden , would run through the Polish cities of Szczecin and Wrocław , the Czech city of Prague , the Slovak city of Bratislava , Vienna , and on through Constanţa , Thessaloniki and Trieste .
This route continues to be ignored , and in my view , its inclusion on the list of European road and rail routes would speed up and shorten transport routes along this line , and would also give a boost to the whole Central European corridor and to all the cities and regions that lie around this line .
Mr President , earlier today we had the publication of the European Transport Safety Council report on EU progress on reducing road deaths by half by 2010 .
It contains some good and some bad news .
Yes - countries have made improvements , and that is to be welcomed , but overall road deaths are still too high and the EU will not , on current trends , achieve its road death reduction targets .
In fact only three Member States - Luxembourg , France and Portugal - will achieve the target set .
They have succeeded in reducing road deaths by over 8 % a year .
It is worth remembering that over 39 000 people were killed on the roads in the EU in the last 12 months .
Had we achieved our targets , 5 000 people would still be alive today .
I regret that Ireland , my own country , is still in the lower half of the league when it comes to making those necessary improvements .
We could take messages from the best performing countries .
They have put in a great deal of commitment and political will to improve enforcement in a number of key areas .
The EU has just three years left to put in place measures that could see us achieving our targets of reducing road deaths by half .
The experience shows it can be done but we need a fresh impetus at EU level to achieve that .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to draw Parliament 's attention to the problem of Kosovo and , particularly , to the need for the European Parliament to be able to answer for this European internal matter and to ensure that the right of the people to determine their own future can , quite rightly , be respected .
Many political elements are appearing and exerting pressure to bring about the partition of Kosovo , which is not an answer .
This is very clear to us , particularly in relation to the problems associated with the Palestinian Territory and the division of that territory in 1946 .
Strong pressure should therefore be brought to bear , with the European Parliament , to prevent a partition , to prevent conflict from being generated in this way and to enable the people to decide their own destiny , making sure that the European Parliament can be present , present on the European stage , and also present throughout our territory .
Mr President , unfortunately , by the time I have finished this speech , two people will have killed themselves .
This is because worldwide one person commits suicide every 30 seconds .
A staggering one million persons , many of them young men and women , end their lives every year .
Suicide is very relevant to the EU because five out of the top ten countries in terms of suicide rates are EU Member States : Lithuania , Estonia , Hungary , Slovenia and Latvia .
In fact , Lithuania has the highest suicide rate record in the world .
These are very sad statistics for the EU as , in most cases , the cause of suicide is preventable .
The EU has a duty to its citizens to urgently reduce suicide rates in its Member States .
I request you , Mr President , to address personally all EU Member State governments and national parliaments , especially those of the five aforementioned countries , and urge them strongly to redouble their efforts to prevent suicide amongst their citizens .
By so doing , many thousands of lives may be saved each year .
( RO ) A recent study shows that , in Romania , approximately 170,000 children in the 5th-8th grades have one or two parents that have left to work abroad .
The large number of children left with their grandparents or families increases every day in the European Union new Member States , as well as in the candidate countries .
For this reason , I would like to emphasize the need to create adequate structures , which would help children and parents be together , as well as the need for a social policy that would focus on solidarity .
I consider that the facilitation of family reunion , as a factor of economic and social integration , should constitute an essential aspect of the legal immigration policies .
At the same time , I request the European Commission both to draw up a strategy regarding the situation of children who remained in their countries of origin after their parents left and to provide support for creating adequate structures in the Member States , in order to help children and parents adjust to new family situations .
That concludes the one-minute speeches .
Financing the common agricultural policy
The next item is the report by Jorgo Chatzimarkakis , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1290 / 2005 on the financing of the common agricultural policy - C6-0116 / 2007 - .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to say a few words about the report on Regulation 1290 / 2005 on the financing of the common agricultural policy .
First of all , I would like to thank Mr Chatzimarkakis and the committee members for their efforts .
The Commission proposal contains two items which are of political importance .
First , to provide for the necessary follow-up on the relevant part of Article 53b on the Financial Regulation , which stipulates that the transparency obligation and ex post publication of beneficiaries by the Member States must be ensured by sector-specific legislation .
Second , to reinforce the mechanism by which financial discipline is safeguarded through a new reduction-suspension mechanism of agricultural aid , which is more structured and more transparent than the current mechanism already laid down in the Regulation , and by introducing the possibility for the Commission to make financial corrections for failing ex post controls .
The Commission is very much in favour of openness and transparency .
One element of this is the right of the public to know what is happening with the Community aid and to see who is receiving what amounts .
Article 53 of the Financial Regulation sets out that there should be an ex post publication of beneficiaries by Member States .
The follow-up to this general obligation is , as far as EAGGF and EAFRD spending is concerned , to be found in the Commission 's proposal .
The Commission insists very much on the Member States publishing this information , as , under shared management , they are the contact for the farming community and are therefore in a much better position than the Commission to validate the information to be published .
I am very grateful for you support on this issue .
The Commission will take inspiration from some of the amendments proposed when it adopts the implementing legislation , but it would not be in line with better regulation and simplification if all the - sometimes very technical - details were put into the Council regulation .
However , let me make one thing clear .
Beneficiaries are to be informed beforehand of the fact that certain information needs to be published , and publication will take place only within the context of the full respect of the privacy legislation applicable .
As you know , there is already a reduction-suspension mechanism in Regulation 1290 / 2005 .
In comparison with that mechanism , the proposed provision offers a new transparent and effective mechanism allowing a further simplification of the existing possibility to reduce or suspend payments to a Member State in case of serious and persistent deficiencies in the national control systems .
This new provision has the advantage that certain elements are determined in advance , so as to ensure a more efficient use of such an instrument .
It goes without saying that the reduction mechanism already in place will continue to be applicable for other types of cases .
However , amendments aimed at diluting the reduction mechanism are not acceptable to the Commission .
Finally , I have noted quite a number of amendments aimed at further reinforcing the overall system for the management of agricultural expenditure which are not related to our proposal .
On these , I think that the present text strikes a good balance , and we should give all actors time to put it into practice before considering any changes to the rules which , after all , just entered into force less than a year ago .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks for finding the time to be present here this evening despite the late hour .
Indeed , the issue under discussion is not just some unimportant , marginal one - it is the common agricultural policy .
I would like to start by reminding the House what this common agricultural policy actually means to the vast majority of our nearly 500 million citizens .
After all , it is with these citizens in mind that such plenary debates are held .
Nevertheless , it can be noted in this regard that many citizens see the common agricultural policy first and foremost as an advertisement for the EU - but unfortunately an extremely bad one .
Export subsidies , supposedly unfair trade with ' third world ' countries , feed scandals , farmers ' protests , excessive subsidies , genetically modified plants - the number of negatively perceived issues relating to the common agricultural policy is immense and unfathomable .
Misdemeanours in the common agricultural policy have contributed significantly to the EU 's poor reputation in many parts of Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , this reputation is not something that can be dismissed out of hand this evening .
This report , however - provided the Council supports it - could put the common agricultural policy on a new course , one that is closer to the ideas of the majority of citizens .
I should like to start by discussing the Commission proposal once more .
It essentially comprises four elements : transparency , i.e. the publication of the names of the beneficiaries of agricultural payments ; introduction of the possibility of suspending payments to Member States under the first pillar in the case of serious breaches in their management and control systems ; shortening of the periods of time for Commission auditing if Member States fail to comply with their control obligations ( exceptions to the so-called 24-month rule ) ; and adaptation of implementing powers .
In political terms , the proposals on transparency are certainly of outstanding importance to the EP .
With these , the Commission is finally implementing the decision of the Council and Parliament on the 2007 budget .
In general I warmly welcome this project , although the Commission proposal is rather late in coming , probably partly owing to the incorporation of further facts into the text .
Commission implementing regulations on the EAFRD are already envisaging publication of the names of all beneficiaries of payments under the second pillar .
The other funds too ( European Regional Development Fund , European Fisheries Fund , Cohesion Fund ) now all contain publication rules .
The budgetary decision has meant that , in essence , transparency has ceased to be controversial : it is no longer a case of if but only of how .
Eleven Member States are already publishing all payments comprehensively .
We need more transparency , therefore .
The absence of transparency has allowed the emergence of rumours and campaigns of disinformation , which have harmed the CAP more than the odd actual error .
The only problems are with the how : after all , the Commission gives no details of the procedure and wishes to lay down all the more detailed provisions in implementing regulations .
As we are looking at an intrusion on the right of self-determination over personal data , my report proposes some clarifications regarding which data are to be published and under what conditions .
These expressly follow an opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor .
In spite of the desire for speedy implementation , data protection must be taken very seriously - and the European Parliament is doing so .
The objectives of this report are as follows : greater transparency , and at the same time clearer data protection requirements .
In addition , the general public must be informed .
How can this balancing act be achieved ?
In my view , it is essential to inform those concerned in advance , and there is no transparency unless the figures mean something .
Therefore , I propose differentiating more clearly , for example according to intervention purpose .
My report proposes name , payment and place of residence / registered office .
Nowadays , transparency means publication on the Internet .
We are talking about the creation of a general Internet platform with links and references by the Commission .
It is up to Member States to make the information comprehensible by means of the relevant explanations .
Member States are permitted to publish the information at regional level , too , if they consider this appropriate .
Different databases must be linked .
In the Council , the issue of who publishes the information was very controversial .
The financial management is mixed , so the Member States have clear responsibility - including under Article 53b of the budgetary decision .
In addition , publication by the Commission would give rise to problems of legal protection , as persons affected by incorrect publication would have to go straight to the European Court of First Instance .
This is neither citizen friendly nor particularly transparent .
The Commission proposal is simpler , more transparent , less cumbersome to administer and more citizen friendly , and therefore has my support .
It is in line with the provisions in all the other fields ( the Structural Funds and the rules applying hitherto to the second pillar ) .
As the publication of the information is to be seen in the context of budgetary control , my report proposes a ( moderate ) flat-rate fine for cases of failure to publish information .
On the subject of penal reductions in funding , I would say that I am broadly in favour , but there are some points where I should like to see greater regard for the principle of proportionality .
In the Committee on Budgetary Control , my fellow Member Mr Mulder made proposals concerning the budgetary dimension of the dossier , which I can wholeheartedly endorse .
In the Opinion of the Committee on Budgets , the committee expressed its views on the transparency aspects , and these largely correspond with my proposals .
Ladies and gentlemen , and particularly members of the Council , this report was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I hope for a large majority in tomorrow 's vote , too .
I implore the Council and the Commission to take this vote by the representatives of the European people seriously .
There will also no doubt be a correlation between this report and the way all those involved deal with it , and the expected Health Check .
We will undoubtedly return to this subject when we deal with the Health Check .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am much obliged to my colleague Mr Chatzimarkakis , who has presented a report that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats can endorse in all respects .
It is a legitimate question , however , whether this regulation was even necessary .
It will provoke intense covetous discussion , as it is difficult to explain the context to citizens .
Therefore , I think it a good thing that farming businesses are to be given an explanation of the reasons for the payments when details of these are published .
Our farmers do indeed make a valuable contribution to our society , supplying us with food day by day , taking care of our cultural landscape and making a large contribution to the functioning of rural areas .
Transparency cannot be a one-way street , however - it has to apply to both sides .
For this reason , my group supports the report 's call to make users sign on or register when using the information .
As my colleague has just mentioned , it is also important that this directive does not invalidate data protection provisions , particularly those of Member States .
In the interests of equal treatment , however , I would ask the Commission to present a regulation ensuring transparency also in non-governmental organisations , for example .
I am convinced that more EU funds are being channelled into shady projects in the case of NGOs than is happening in the agricultural sector .
This report gives us the opportunity to show the public why taxpayers ' money is being spent on agriculture .
Using the report appropriately will facilitate success in demonstrating to the public the great importance of European agriculture , in which case this Transparency Directive will have served its purpose .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , concerning the first objective of this Regulation , which is to comply with the obligation to publish information on the beneficiaries of Community funds , I think it is quite right that we should finally know who receives what from the CAP .
This is a long-awaited measure , though it is not a question of stigmatising farmers but of creating transparency in finance , which concerns us all as taxpayers and consumers , and over which we have a right of information .
I even think that this publication could be utterly beneficial and improve citizens ' opinion of farmers and the payments they receive for services to the community in terms of supplying quality food that meets high production standards and in terms of maintaining the land and the countryside , for example .
The publication of an explanatory statement for the payments made and the farm income , as the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is requesting , will also be very useful .
I fully agree with the practical procedures for publication , defined in the report by our fellow Member , Mr Chatzimarkakis , which consist in setting up a European Internet platform linked to the Member States ' Internet platforms on which the names of regional aid beneficiaries and where they live are put online .
In the case of public limited companies or private limited companies , the names of the investors and members of the management board must also be known .
I also support the evaluation reports requested of the European Commission in the years following the implementation of this regulation , which will be very useful , the assessment of the benefit of the centralised publication of information by the Commission , and the evaluation of the distribution of the funds , possibly accompanied by legislative proposals to achieve a more objective distribution of funds in the first and second pillars .
On the other hand , as regards the methods for accessing these data , I do not agree at all with the proposals for confidentiality or a barrier to entry which , in my view , would completely diminish the transparency effect of this regulation .
If transparency is being introduced , particularly regarding public funds , I feel that everyone should be able to access the information , without restrictions .
In practice , because the data are first published by each Member State then taken up at EU level , it also seems almost impossible to introduce a registration system , and in any case thirteen Member States have already made these data public without any restriction .
I therefore ask you to reject , wholly or in part , amendments 4 , 20 , 21 and 23 , which require registration of the identity and motivations of the users of the public data .
As regards the second objective - the tool to reduce or suspend agricultural payments when certain key elements of a national system of control fail or are ineffective - I think this is a useful means of taking action for the European Commission .
But obviously it must be used in proportion to the nature , duration and seriousness of the offences .
In the same way , the reduction percentage is cut if the Member State has gone some way towards remedying the shortcomings and increased if it has not applied the recommendations previously made .
I also hope that the requirement will be retained for Member States to inform the Commission on the way they have decided or plan to reuse the cancelled funds following irregularities .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for his excellent work .
This regulation will have positive outcomes , in that it will ensure greater transparency and accountability .
This is needed because that should be a requirement in itself for all European funding , but also because it will help to dispel some of the exaggerated myths that abound about the CAP .
Indeed , Court of Auditors reports tell us that in recent times the checks on agricultural expenditure have greatly improved .
This needs to be brought to the attention of the general public .
I agree with the rapporteur 's suggestion that there should be a similar requirement for structural funds .
It should not only apply to the CAP .
This transparency initiative should relate to other areas .
As we await the so-called ' health check ' on the CAP , it is important that we deal with this issue now , to get it out of the way , as it were .
The CAP often comes in for bad press but very often these comments focus only on negative aspects and totally ignore the hugely positive benefits which consumers have gained from the CAP .
Since the introduction of the CAP , food price inflation is way below overall inflation .
The CAP has delivered cheaper food for EU citizens , but the CAP has also delivered safe food and traceable food .
The phrase ' from farm to fork ' means just that .
The CAP is improving our environment and animal welfare continues to improve .
Furthermore , the CAP has ensured food security for the EU .
Many people deride the idea of food security as if such an idea belongs to the dark ages .
The world has enough food to feed itself .
For how long ?
A week maybe .
Just consider the pressure that will come about when we really begin to grow fuel as opposed to food .
Just consider the pressure that will come about when emerging economies like India and China compete with the EU for food and for fuel grown instead of food .
Then we will look to the EU and the CAP for food security .
The CAP , like any policy , has its problems , but it has delivered for EU citizens and this regulation will ensure that it continues to deliver in an open and transparent way .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I entirely support both Mr Jorgo Chatzimarkakis 's report and the draft regulation itself .
This is an important step in the right direction ; we are introducing greater transparency in accountability relating to European Union expenditure .
The most valuable provision of all is the one that makes it possible to publish , or rather makes it a duty to publish , information on who made use of these funds and in what context , as part of the Common Agricultural Policy .
Public opinion has been demanding this information for some time , and so has the press , so it is a very good thing that this particular principle has been introduced .
Anyone who has benefitted from public aid should not be ashamed of information to the effect that he has received such aid ; and farmers in particular have no reason to be ashamed of it , because after all the aid is clearly due to them and is for the good of the whole of society .
The regulation is aimed at exerting stronger control over EU expenditure , and a very good thing too .
I would like to take this opportunity to say two sentences about a problem that cropped up when the Committee on Budgetary Control visited Poland , at the beginning of October .
The problem relates to the detection of irregularities by national control agencies .
This is a solution that would enable us to avoid the consequences of restrictions on expenditure in a situation where irregularities are detected by a national control agency .
It is about these agencies cooperating properly with the European Court of Auditors , and them being motivated to identify such irregularities without consequences for their own country .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , transparency is necessary in agriculture .
Mr Deß said that money is going into shady projects .
It is true that we want to expose this , too , through such transparency , but perhaps he will also agree with me that not much money is finding its way into European agriculture and Europe 's rural areas ; some of it is flowing into the wrong channels .
Billions of euro have been earmarked for farmers in the budgets of past years but have failed to reach farmers .
All the export subsidies in favour of farmers , the EU 's whole practice of intervention involving storage - these have swallowed up billions of euro but have not helped farmers .
At best - as Mrs Harkin from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe said - it has kept prices down by means of downward stabilisation of the market , which is a kind of brake on inflation .
Naturally , it is the general aim to keep prices stable , but it cannot be in the interests of farmers to be the nation 's or Europe 's lackey in order to ensure this .
The rapporteur was right when he talked of the need for a frame of reference : publication alone is not enough .
I should like to give a frame of reference : even after the reform of the CAP , at a rate of EUR 300 per hectare , a rationalised business where one worker takes care of 400 hectares - that is , the highest level of rationalisation - receives approximately EUR 120 000 per worker .
80 % of farmers do not even receive a tenth of this .
Therefore , we also need to explain what happens to this money .
This frame of reference must be created by politicians - it will not automatically come with publication .
When the Commission states in its proposal that these payments may have to be graduated , that modulation into the second pillar must be introduced - as here the funds produce better results in terms of workers , the environment - then this is a foretaste of what lies ahead , namely the discussion following the publication of this information . And then we shall have to give politics free rein once more .
However , the figures must first be allowed to speak , they must be published , and we must be patient , and if they prove incorrect , the policy will have to be changed so as to put them right .
Many thanks for your report - we shall be supporting it .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Many thanks , Mr President .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for his work .
European taxpayers want to know how their taxes are spent .
Publishing the names of those receiving agricultural subsidies is absolutely necessary in the interests of a transparent European policy , particularly given the enormous proportion of the EU budget represented by these subsidies .
More importantly still , however , this publication can be the start of a very necessary , genuinely thorough reform of the common agricultural policy .
When subsidies were made public in the Netherlands in 2005 , we realised that a disproportionate share was going to a small , wealthy group .
We are providing large subsidies to multinationals and large landowners whilst thousands of ordinary farmers can scarcely get by .
To begin with , there must be a cap on the subsidies that one person or business can receive - and not EUR 300 000 , as Commissioner Fischer Boel recently proposed .
I would suggest no more than an average annual salary .
After all , most subsidies are intended to supplement income .
Member States failing to ensure the correct transparency should receive less EU funds as a penalty .
It is also important that , where Member States have poorly functioning control mechanisms , this be made known so that farmers and the organisations representing their interests are able to call those authorities to account if they suffer damage as a result .
Of course , this should be only the beginning of a whole series of transparency initiatives by Parliament .
The distribution of the Structural Funds should also be made public .
I hope for the broadest possible support from Parliament for this report , as it would make our primary supervisory function , in particular , so much easier .
A transparent agricultural policy is the first step towards a fair agricultural policy .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
I , like my voters , think that the EU is too closed and bureaucratic .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal , which seeks greater openness and transparency in the institutions ' expenditure .
Support for agriculture is a debatable issue .
It is therefore important for the citizens to be allowed to see who their taxes are going to and how much .
It is regrettable that the committee 's amendments run counter the EU 's role as a transparent institution .
The committee 's demand for registration in order to have access to information is a serious infringement of privacy for all citizens , whether they are a farmer , a journalist or a pre-school teacher .
Permitting registration of citizens who wish to consult public documents is a development we do not want to see in the EU .
I therefore urge all members to vote against Amendments 4 and 23 from the committee .
Thank you .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Chatzimarkakis , we are short of cereals , we are short of milk , the price of maize and butter are soaring , and what are we doing ?
We are discussing putting premiums per cow , per ewe or per hectare on the Internet and , while the world is about to go hungry , like teenagers we are playing at organising farming and financial emails on the Internet .
Of course , there are good reasons : transparency , the right to find out and control what is being done with the billions being paid to farmers .
However , in a democracy , control is exercised by Parliament in the Chamber , and not by surfers on the Web .
Also , if transparency applies to agricultural credits , why not also , in a spirit of populism , have transparency over the pay of the EU 's senior officials ?
If we are putting premiums for dairy cows online , why not also put the premiums being milked by senior officials online too ?
That is the first injustice .
There is a second .
Small farmers will be transparent , but large commercial agricultural companies will not be .
That is because the real objective of this regulation is not transparency .
It is a diabolical machine of war , which has two hidden aims .
The first is to divide farmers into large and small and destroy their unity in the trade unions .
The next , and most important , is to stir up public opinion against farmers through the press , particularly the British press which will highlight the premiums received by Prince Charles and Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth , by the trade union leaders , the large farmers , and perhaps even the husband of Mrs Fischer Boel , who is a pig farmer .
Using these few examples of large landowners fed on hormones from Brussels , public opinion will be made to believe that farmers get a huge boost , particularly because the public does not know that farmers are paid against their will because they are banned from producing .
They are forced to leave land fallow .
Once public opinion against farmers - paid not to produce because of decoupling - has become white hot , in 2013 , at no political or electoral risk , it will be possible to remove the aid and recover about EUR 20 billion to finance other non-agricultural activities .
In the guise of democratic transparency , this regulation is a moral ignominy that is using the odious motivations of envy and jealousy to serve the Commission 's strategic plot since the 1980s : to do away with agricultural exports as part of a major worldwide agreement .
Agriculture for the southern hemisphere , and financial , banking and energy services for the northern hemisphere .
That is the truth about this regulation !
Mr President , it can be a fine line between transparency and infringement of privacy .
Many farmers - in my view , quite rightly - will resent the details of their single farm payment being posted over the internet because of the distorted perception of free hand-outs which it creates .
The reality , of course , is that for most the single farm payment is in fact subsidising our cheap food policy .
Take the beef sector .
A task-force report in my constituency demonstrates that in that small area beef producers are losing EUR 260 million per annum .
Only their single farm payment keeps them going by subsidising production .
So , when it is publicised that a farmer has received EUR 20 000 , it misleads for there is no mention that at the same time he is losing EUR 40 000 or more in his production operation .
To be fair , publication should be accompanied by typical profit-and-loss statistics from the commodity sales in each sector .
( EL ) Mr President , I was pleased to note that we all want both transparency and control : we all want the EU 's money contributed by taxpaying citizens to be protected and to go to those who are genuinely entitled to assistance .
Where there are irregularities or illegalities the specified sanctions must be imposed and I think that on this point we are all united and determined .
It goes without saying , however , that the proposed measures ought to be put into force after the relevant regulation has been passed and ought to relate to the following financial year .
We believe that this clarification is absolutely necessary , and that is why we have tabled the relevant amendment .
We want this amendment to make it clear that the measures for suspending monthly payments laid down in Articles 17a and 27a of Regulation No 1290 / 2005 , concerning the funding of the common agricultural policy , will not be implemented before 16 October 2008 .
Thus we believe it right that the measures should not have retroactive force .
To conclude , let me emphasise that we all want :
firstly , protection of taxpayers ' money ;
secondly , the money to go to those who are genuinely entitled , as my fellow Member very rightly pointed out ;
thirdly , lawbreakers to be punished ;
fourthly , let us be fair , as happens throughout the world ; the laws do not have retroactive force , nor should they .
If these conditions are met , we will wholeheartedly and gladly endorse and vote for the report by Mr Chatzimarkakis .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the institutions of the European Union are making up for long-standing neglect .
If there is anyone who is interested in having us sort out European agriculture and make it transparent , it is the European agricultural sector .
The rapporteur , Mr Chatzimarkakis , whom I would like to congratulate , put it very well in saying that the European Union does not have a good image in the eyes of European citizens , and they have most often made European agriculture a scapegoat .
Therefore , at this late hour , I would like to quote General de Gaulle , who said that we must stand on the brink of the inevitable .
Yes , we , to whom the Common Agricultural Policy is so important , must stand on the brink of the inevitable , of transparency .
It is a big problem for the Common Agricultural Policy - and I agree wholeheartedly with Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf - that the whole European Common Agricultural Policy is a tangled mess , hardly transparent and , in many respects , unfair .
Both of us , and , I think , those sitting in this chamber , would like to safeguard the future of the Common Agricultural Policy , but at the same time we would like to protect it .
My dear friends , what does it tell us when the Common Agricultural Policy has its favourite , spoiled children , such as the cereals , sugar and tobacco sectors , and that it has hostile sectors , such as the fruit and vegetables , grapes and wine , pork and poultry sectors ?
Nobody in his right mind could explain this to a European citizen .
Often , nobody in his right mind could explain to a European citizen either that a whole heap of aid does not go to the producers , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf said , but is creamed off by commercial organisations .
Nowhere has a report yet been produced , and it would be good if the Commission and the Council were finally to prepare a report on the amounts that go out of the agricultural sector .
Enormous amounts .
This report is therefore very important for showing clearly who receives aid , and how much , so that it does not come about that the media give the negative example that 200 head of cattle have been on a sixth floor in Rome for years , while several hundred thousand Italian peasants are going honestly about their business .
My dear friends , transparency and data processing are therefore very important , and the European Union has to do this in other areas , so I support the report by Mr Chatzimarkakis .
Thank you very much .
( FI ) Mr President , I also right away wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Chatzimarkakis , on this report .
We might well ask , of course , what sort of a report could be expected of a rapporteur who has the common sense of a German , the heart of a Greek , and even a bit of the Finnish landscape in his soul .
We might say in such a case that the report might turn out to be rather good in many respects , and that happens to be true with this one .
My congratulations once again .
It is true that , when we speak of agriculture and the system for financing it , it is very important that we stress the importance of transparency .
Transparency is the basis of everything .
Of course , another factor that has to go hand in hand with transparency , with regard to financing programmes , is fairness .
In my few years here in the European Parliament , however , I have come to see that fairness , if anything , is a relative concept , and that the way we perceive it varies .
In any case , I hope that increased transparency will also boost the confidence of the public in our decision-making system and in the notion that we here want to make the right kind of decisions on the financing of agriculture as much as in any other area .
I would nevertheless like to mention my concern about agriculture in a broader context .
In mentioning fairness , I hope that in future we will pay attention not just to transparency but also to fairness .
Now , with the Commissioner present , it is very important to ensure that the small Member States also get treated properly .
In the future too we could make sure that any sort of national self-sufficiency can be preserved .
We in Finland have some serious examples of this , with the decision on sugar taken very recently by the European Union and the decisions on agricultural payments too .
They do not treat the small and the big Member States in the same way , and in this respect I hope there will be greater attention paid to fairness in future , now that this matter of transparency has been sorted out in the context of Mr Chatzimarkakis 's report .
We must ensure that the European Union and our decision-making system are open and something which our citizens can trust in and which they feel they can support in the future .
( PL ) Mr President , today 's report on the financing of the common agricultural policy , and especially the matter of its transparency , are of huge importance for social acceptance of residents of the Community , and primarily for European farmers .
By publication of the beneficiaries of public aid , we will be able to see in detail in what context the division of funds is taking place ; and particularly in the countries of what are known as the old and the new EU .
One very important proposal made by the rapporteur is the mention of a requirement concerning comparability of data between Member States .
This will enable false accusations between EU members concerning the size and methods of support for individual markets in given countries to be avoided , and will enable action to be taken with the aim of levelling out farmers ' opportunities in the sphere of public support .
As a general point it should be stressed that suitably clear financing of agricultural policy , along with a suitable quantity of such products , guarantees food security for European consumers .
This is why European farmers should have long-term security and financial prospects with reference to investment in farms .
The voices that are currently being heard calling for a speedier review of the common agricultural policy are irresponsible and bring with them a threat to the EU 's food security .
Nor should we forget the guarantees that have been given that subsidies for farms will be levelled out for all EU members by 2013 .
To end , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
( NL ) Mr President , I too would like to thank our fellow Member for this thorough report , which on the face of it concerns very technical rules , budgetary rules .
In reality , however , these rules are capable of affecting the work of our farmers - who are after all the legitimate and indispensable producers of our daily food .
I would like to discuss a couple of these in greater detail , without starting a very wide-ranging debate about the Health Check or anything else .
I do just need to get off my chest , however , that it puzzles me where my highly respected fellow Member from the Dutch Socialist Party ( SP ) found the large landowners of whom she spoke in a country as densely populated as the Netherlands .
Anyway , I digress .
First of all , I would like to express my support for the Commission proposal to make it possible , in the event of shortcomings , for the Member State concerned to be penalised - to have deductions applied - more efficiently , possibly by suspending or reducing its intermediate payments .
In my opinion , the Commission should look not only at the gravity and nature of the non-conformity , as it wrote , but also at its duration .
For example , in the event of sustained breaches the Commission should increase the percentage reduction every year .
We must also ensure that the new rules we are now introducing do not lead to an increase in the administrative burden .
I should like to conclude by discussing the tricky subject of the publication of the names of those receiving support from the European Agricultural Fund .
My country is doing this already to a great extent , and the Commission is now proposing to introduce it throughout the EU with a view to transparency and the legitimacy of this expenditure .
I can endorse these efforts , but with two brief comments , which are also expressed in the form of amendments .
First of all , the publication of this data may infringe the rights of those involved .
We must thus ensure adequate data protection to prevent the data falling into the wrong hands or being used to benefit the actions of radical animal-rights activists , for example : a phenomenon with which several Member States are already confronted .
Finally , I would like to say that the Commission believes that this proposal will also enable it to improve budgetary control .
This may be the case to a certain extent , but I take the view that it is of even greater benefit to budgetary control to introduce national declarations concerning the budgetary resources managed at national level .
Therefore , I would just like to devote my last second to calling on the Commission and the Council to speed up the process of introducing these national declarations .
( HU ) Increasing the transparency of the Common Agricultural Policy is an important Community objective , and so I support the report by my fellow member , Mr Chatzimarkakis .
But since the Common Agricultural Policy is already being discussed , I would like to draw your attention to one of the most important issues in environmentally conscious farming , the Natura 2000 programme .
As you know , those who farm in a manner that sustains protected flora and fauna receive aid from the Community and Member states , within the framework of Natura 2000 .
Nearly 1 / 5 of the territory of the European Union , and 21 % of the territory of Hungary , comes under the protection of this programme .
Farmers expect this aid , since sustaining natural interests requires financial self-restraint on their part .
However , it is crucial for a sustainable future that we protect as many natural interests as possible .
This is why it is important that we put as much money as possible into aid for areas affected by the Natura 2000 programme .
At the time , I was the shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group for the Natura 2000 programme .
Unfortunately , since then it has not been possible to bring about the amount for which we pressed at the time , EUR 3 billion a year .
However , it is the eleventh hour if we want to stop the obliteration of nature , particularly in Europe , which is already over-populated .
It would be useful to have the planned Internet list of how much aid is given to farmers within the framework of Natura 2000 , thus popularising practices that point forward .
This openness will hopefully also stimulate environmentally friendly farming and the protection of our unique natural interests .
Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , we are talking about the common agricultural policy , but in reality there is no common policy .
I can say this because that aid for agriculture is differentiated not only in individual regions , but the differences are very clearly to be seen between the old Member States and the new ones .
In order to talk about a common agricultural policy , we must have common and standard principles , duties and potential to obtain support for production .
It is my view , however , that the report is very welcome and necessary , because at the end of the day who gets what must be disclosed , as well as how these funds are utilised .
An improvement in statistics will not directly provide an increase in the funds for agriculture , but it will improve thrift , there will be transparency , greater trust in people , and we as parliamentarians will be in a position to draw our own conclusions and to search for common solutions , which would in fact build a common agricultural policy on the same democratic and partnership principles for all countries of the European Union and for farmers , regardless of the region where they happen to work and live .
( RO ) Limiting payments made from the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund and the European Fund for Agriculture and Rural Development should be done only in exceptional situations .
In this respect , the Commission 's proposal does not clearly define the situations which require the reduction or suspension of agriculture payments .
The Regulation , in the form proposed by the Commission , only specifies that the suspension is required when the key components of the national control system are not efficient due to the gravity or persistence of identified deficiencies .
I consider that this criterion cannot be used arbitrarily and may have dangerous effects for certain Member States .
It is true that we should have extremely good Community control over the expenses of funds , but it is also important to take into consideration the progress made by the relevant institutions in the Member States that are responsible for this control .
This is why I consider that the instrument we provide today to the Commission should be used very cautiously , under very clearly delimited conditions and doubled by a rigorous parliamentary control .
Moreover , the Regulation should not have retroactive effects .
The year 2007 is a year of enlargement for the European Union and it would be unjust for the provisions of this regulation to be enforced as of the present , as the European Commission proposes .
This is why I support the variant of granting an additional year until the regulation becomes effective .
As regards the publishing of the names of European funds beneficiaries , as well as of the global amounts they have received , I consider this to be a measure that obviously contributes to the transparency of the allocation system .
This might stop from the start any potential fraud attempts or attempts to grant the European funds for rural development according to political criteria and proves responsibility in spending public money .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Commission 's initiative to impose on Member States the duty to publish information on the beneficiaries of EU funds obtained under the umbrella of the common agricultural policy is worthy of support in every respect .
Publication of such information on the Internet using standards that ensure comparability of data between individual countries will not only do much to improve the transparency of budget expenditure and the efficiency of the budget control process , it will also shed a bright light on at least two serious problems linked to agricultural expenditure in the EU .
To begin with , a very large proportion of direct subsidies in individual countries goes not to farms but to large concerns like Smithfield , or large landholdings like the Crown Estates of Elizabeth II .
Perhaps data like this on the scale of the whole EU will make it clear to the decision-makers that there is a need to limit subsidies allocated to a single farm so that these subsidies help family farms more than large estates .
Secondly , there is a very large disproportion between the support per hectare of agricultural land utilised in the old Member States and in the new Member States .
In the period 2007-2013 , this indicator will be a little over 60 % , and when Romania and Bulgaria are taken on board it will be even lower .
So for each Euro paid out in the old EU there will be barely 60 cents in countries of the new EU , even though agriculture in the new countries has to catch up with the more developed agriculture in the old Member States .
Mr President , I wish that a group of farmers who I spoke to this afternoon from the North West of Ireland were here to listen to this debate because they might even want to contribute .
Let us be honest : no one wants their financial affairs made public , and I think there are Members of this House who are talking about openness and transparency who would run a mile from it themselves .
I liked the point made by someone else this evening that it may be right that we publish the payments of everyone who gets money from the public purse .
Having said that , I believe we are going to have publication of payments and I believe generally in this term ' openness and transparency ' , but it is a two-way street .
I also would question the notion that information is equal to understanding and it is because of that question that I think you do need to have clarification about what the payments actually mean .
The group of farmers I met today were in beef and sheep farming , and many of them were using their single farm payment to subsidise their production .
Perhaps they are silly to do that .
Maybe they should stop farming and let the farms go to rack and ruin and continue to accept the cheque .
Some comments have been made here about the failure of policy as though it were farmers ' fault .
But I think it is the policymakers of Europe who should take the rap for the failures that have been identified .
Those who talk about intervention and export refunds must have forgotten about the 2003 reforms .
We now have a problem of shortages within the European Union .
We import beef .
Global demand is rising for dairy products , and grain is in short supply so we have moved on a great deal .
Yes , publish , but explain .
Protect people and make sure that they are not ridiculed wrongly for the payments they receive .
Do not use this as a weapon to beat farmers with .
The Commission are doing it already in the health check , where they have talked about how , now that publication will be made , we could look at cutting back on payments .
Perhaps we need to do that at the higher level , but let us be honest in how we debate this topic .
I think we do need to review the use that the information is put to .
( PL ) Mr President , we are debating an important report concerning the financing of the common agricultural policy .
A policy to which we devote some 45 % of the EU budget .
The European Commission 's proposal is aimed at increasing the transparency and credibility of expenditure for EU farmers and rural areas .
By the same token it is supposed to improve the way the policy is accepted and assessed by EU citizens .
But people keep on popping up who are not well disposed towards the common agricultural policy , people who wish to deprive our farmers of support at any cost and expose them to open and unequal competition with farmers from third countries .
The question is - what would then happen to food security in the EU ?
I am sure that MEPs from the Committee on Agriculture will share my view that no cuts can be made in the envisaged budget for the common agricultural policy .
This budget is steadily shrinking , and in 2013 it will constitute only 33 % of total budget expenditure .
Let us hope that the new rules will help to simplify legislation in line with the slogan of ' better regulation ' promoted by the Commission .
Our citizens will be able to check and find out for what purposes we are handing out EU money .
In November of this year the Commission is to present a communication on the matter of a health check .
I am of the opinion that the EU direct payments system should be very much simpler and also transparent , and that the level of subsidies should be standardised for all Member States , in other words be fair and understandable .
I also hope that our colleagues from Romania are coping with the current problems connected with their payment systems .
We cannot allow Romanian farmers to be harmed and punished by a drop in subsidies .
They are just as necessary in Romania as in other Member States .
Instead of punishing Romanian farmers , we should be helping to sort out the system of subsidies .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , I thank you for your interesting remarks .
I am very happy that I have an opportunity to participate in this discussion because , when the Commission started discussing the proposal to have more transparency concerning the beneficiaries of EU funds , the information was published only in two countries : in Denmark and in Estonia .
Now it is 13 , and finally it will be in every country .
This , in terms of Europe 's decision-making process , is very fast .
I would like only to say some factual remarks .
First of all , what was mentioned - the disclosure of beneficiaries - will be done in full respect of Community legislation on data protection .
It is already laid down in the proposal .
Several people raised the issue of the publication of information on structural funds , but absolutely the same logic applies to the Structural Funds , to which the same Article 53b of the Financial Regulation applies .
So there is no difference .
All benefits which will be paid out from the European budget will be open , including the salaries of the highest officials and Commission members .
This is totally public .
So there is nothing - and this has been public since the adoption of the staff regulations .
I would like to ask Parliament to endorse the Commission 's approach as reflected in its proposal .
We have sympathy for the substance of some of the amendments proposed , and some of these will be mirrored in the implementing legislation or in the final text to be adopted by Council following the Presidency 's compromise text .
I am confident that the innovations now on the table will make Regulation 1290 / 2005 an even more effective instrument than it already is .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 11 October 2007 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) I support the Commission 's recommendation for several reasons .
Firstly , it will become transparent who is benefiting from the CAP , and the scale of agriculture grants among EU Member States will become comparable .
Secondly , it will increase the legitimacy of all the EU institutions and of all Union policies towards European citizens .
Thirdly , this initiative will extend not only to agricultural grants but also to grants in all sectors of the EU , and may thereby also increase the effectiveness of budgetary monitoring .
I agree with the second point of the recommendation , which recommends that , if the monitoring systems of the Member States are wanting , the rules relating to sanctions should be made more stringent .
In Hungary , at the expense of great effort , we have managed to develop the institutional system so that it works as effectively as possible and complies with the Commission 's stipulations .
I support the rapporteur 's recommendation , which would prescribe the publication of data on the Internet as a compulsory requirement .
The Internet sites of the paying agencies in the Member States would be connected to the Commission 's websites , or to a common network of websites within a Member State .
Naturally , such data provision must comply with the stipulations of the European Data Protection Supervisor .
Among other things , it is crucial that the relevant parties receive advance notification of the publication of data , as soon as possible and where possible , even when the data is collected .
in writing . - More transparency means less unfounded anti-EU propaganda .
Therefore it is easy to support the rapporteur 's approach welcoming the Commission 's proposal to improve transparency and implementation of European agricultural expenditure .
We have to keep in mind that agricultural expenditure constitutes one of the largest shares of EU spending .
Therefore it is a question of legitimacy for the Union .
The lack of a clear view on all expenditure , not only agricultural , results in a distorted picture of EU spending .
At the same time we know that management of agricultural expenditure has steadily improved .
Data on Community expenditure should be easily available on the internet .
Full transparency is essential for budgetary control .
Therefore I am happy to note that Mr Chatzimarkakis received 100 % support in the committee .
Combating cigarette smuggling ( EC-Philip Morris agreement ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Bart Staes , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the implications of the agreement between the Community and the Member States with Philip Morris on intensifying the fight against fraud and cigarette smuggling and progress made in implementing the recommendations of Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry into the Community Transit System
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reports by the Committee on Budgetary Control often contain fairly bad news - it is the EP 's anti-fraud committee , after all .
This often concerns weaknesses , irregularities , trickery - sometimes even fraud and deception .
I am glad , ladies and gentlemen , that today I have something positive to report , a success story , a story that demonstrates how the cooperation between the European Commission , the European Parliament and the Member States can ensure the resolution of problems .
What is the context ?
At the start of the 1990s , fraud involving cigarette smuggling was found to be big business .
Hundreds of millions of ECU - in those days we still spoke in terms of ECU rather than euro - disappeared into the pockets of criminals at the expense of the budgets of the European Union and the Member States .
Back in 1994 the then UCLAF - the predecessor of OLAF - set up a Cigarettes Task Force .
In 1996 and 1997 an EP Committee of Inquiry - which , incidentally , was the very first Committee of Inquiry launched under the Treaty on European Union - examined all aspects of transit fraud .
The Committee of Inquiry found that the monitoring system in the transit sector was archaic .
Lorries in transit had to have a document stamped at the customs office where the goods entered the Union , then drive through the Union and have the same document stamped again at the customs office where the goods left the Union .
The document then had to be sent back to the customs office of import .
A great many problems arose in this connection .
The documents arrived back much too late : sometimes three or four months .
There was the problem of forged documents , and also of forged stamps .
Consequently , one of the most important recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry was the replacement of this whole archaic system , based on paper and stamps , with a computerised system .
This New Computerised Transit System ( NCTS ) was gradually introduced and is now operational in all Member States .
It helps the customs services detect in real time whether goods are illegally escaping customs supervision - and thus represents tremendous progress .
This does not , of course , rule out false declarations still being made , and that is why we are asking the Commission to set up a system for this , too , to prevent the false declaration of goods .
We also ask that OLAF be given direct access to this computerised system .
As has been said , the Committee of Inquiry concentrated on the problem of cigarettes .
Cigarettes were transported across the territory from one border point to another , but very often those goods , those cigarettes , ended up on the black market .
In addition , those goods were very often smuggled back into the Union .
This led to immense problems , even sometimes to violence .
In Italy , for example , two agents from the financial police were even murdered .
The overall investigation also revealed that some tobacco companies were in league with the smugglers , and on the basis of that information the Commission , together with a number of Member States , brought an action against Philip Morris before a court in New York .
It gradually became clear that Philip Morris would find it particularly difficult to win the action , and in 2004 a deal was struck with the company .
In exchange for USD 1.25 billion , to be spread over a 12-year period , the Commission and the Member States refrained from proceeding with the action before the New York court .
In fact , the second part of the agreement with Philip Morris was perhaps even more important .
It comprised provisions on cooperation between Philip Morris and the European Union in tracking and tracing cigarettes .
If the customs services found cargoes of cigarettes , and the provisions of this agreement had not been followed , Philip Morris was bound to pay the evaded customs duties immediately - and the figure in question can be up to EUR 1.5 million per container of cigarettes .
To reiterate , this is a success story : it demonstrates how Parliament and the Commission can work together .
I do have a few criticisms , however .
When the USD 1.25 billion was distributed among the Commission and Member States , only 9.7 % went to the Commission , and the lion 's share to the Member States .
I do not think this fair , particularly as OLAF and the Commission do the lion 's share of the work .
A second criticism is that , according to the spirit of the agreement , this money was to be used in the fight against fraud .
The Commission has done its work .
It has spent a proportion of that money on the Hercules II programme .
The Member States , on the other hand , have simply let the money flow into their treasuries , when they should really have been using it better to equip their investigative services , for example their customs services , and to step up the fight against this kind of fraud .
To recap , Mr President , this is indeed a success story , one that it may well be possible to apply to other products , such as alcohol and certain agricultural products .
I also hope that this report has added a positive note to the important work being carried out by the Mr Kallas and the Commission and also our Parliament in the fight against fraud .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I must thank Mr Staes for this own-initiative report and the European Parliament for its support of these issues and finding solutions to these difficult issues .
In my statement I will speak first about the Community transit system , for which my colleague Lázló Kovács has responsibility .
The European Parliament applauds the successful introduction of the new computerised transit system .
It is indeed an enormous change compared to the archaic paper-based procedure .
Full implementation of the upgraded system will take place by 1 July 2009 .
Risk management is a modern control tool .
The Commission is actively implementing the customs risk management framework to better target the checks .
We are currently establishing criteria , priorities and the IT platform with the Member States .
The new system will also provide for the possibility of regular monitoring of the effectiveness of the risk analysis made .
The planned development of the anti-fraud transit information system will strengthen the capacity to analyse and counter risks in transit fraud , first with regard to sensitive goods and later for all kinds of goods in transit .
This is conditional on Member States granting wider access for the Commission to the NCTS movement data .
However , freezing further financing for the NCTS , as proposed in the report , would be counterproductive to the necessary further development of more effective transit control .
A few words on value added tax fraud .
In its report , the United Kingdom 's House of Lords pointed to many factors behind the phenomenon of missing trader fraud .
However , we do not see any proof that weaknesses of the transit system led to carousel fraud .
I would like to clarify that , even though transit was not a priority during traditional own-resources inspections between 2001 and 2006 when change was ongoing , nevertheless it was not being ignored .
As a result of many inspections , payments of own resources and interest were demanded .
This approach represents efficient use of the Commission 's inspection resources and avoids falling back on ex ante audits .
I would like to turn now to the anti-fraud agreement with Philip Morris International , which comes under my portfolio .
I must thank the Parliament for its continued strong support .
The Commission has consistently stated that it hopes that the agreement can serve as a model for similar agreements with other companies .
With regard to the funds coming from this agreement , the new Hercule Programme has received in Greece funding devoted to combating cigarette smuggling and counterfeiting , which are newly added objectives .
We are considering whether the programme could be used to fund the establishment of a laboratory which would verify the authenticity of cigarettes .
But I must also say - and Mr Staes knows this very well - that the distribution of money was a real nightmare and it will be a nightmare in the next financial periods as well .
Of course I am very happy about the support and the constant interest expressed by Parliament in the use of this money because I am also interested in having this money used for the purpose of fighting cigarette smuggling and other kinds of fraud .
With regard to seizure statistics , most Member States inform the Commission of the amounts on a quarterly basis .
However , not all Member States indicate the brands they have seized and there is therefore no complete data available .
Moreover , the notifications of seizures by the Member States do not always differentiate between genuine and counterfeit cigarettes , partly because it is not necessary for the purposes of the prosecution of offenders and the collection of duties and taxes and partly because it is sometimes extremely difficult to distinguish between counterfeit and genuine cigarettes .
We continue to encourage the Member States to provide more complete figures .
Finally , the Commission is willing to prepare an OLAF report on this topic , as suggested by Parliament , but I consider that it would more beneficial to wait until 2010 for a comprehensive overview .
This is due to the fact that many significant changes are in the pipeline in the customs area and a report in 2008 could only be an interim one , reflecting the state of play at that point in time .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my first words will be to congratulate the rapporteur , Bart Staes , who has managed to produce an excellent report on the difficult subject of the flaws in our Community Transit System .
I am also most grateful to the European Court of Auditors which , in its report in December 2006 , highlighted the scale of the problem very clearly .
I am disappointed , in this regard , that we are confusing the repercussions of the Philip Morris agreement , which we must remember is an agreement to drop legal proceedings and not a partnership agreement , with the serious problems of Community Transit .
That is the reason for the amendment I tabled on behalf of the PPE Group , which aims to prevent the confusion .
On the subject of the industry , I propose that the European Union and the whole of the tobacco industry jointly finance a programme to combat cigarette smuggling and counterfeiting .
However , I want to focus my comments on the flaws in our Community Transit System .
The European Commission tells us that it has strengthened the customs transit system by introducing a modern , robust computer system .
It is forgetting that , though a computer system is necessary , it is never sufficient , and the reality is that it is the system itself that is flawed .
It is flawed because it is conducted under the authority of the Member States , which means - as our rapporteur and the European Court of Auditors quite rightly pointed out - that the Member States are applying the new Community Transit rules with serious weaknesses .
In 1997 Parliament set up a Committee of Inquiry , which clearly stated that the EU should set up a framework to enable the customs services to function as one .
We are a long way from this .
In 2005 our fellow Member Herbert Bösch highlighted in his excellent report the scale of the problems and the need to fight fraud and errors .
The reality is , ladies and gentlemen , that this report invites us to think much more widely about the quality of our customs system , our financial circuits and , more generally , about the protection of the financial interests of the European Union .
In this , Commissioner , you have the full support of MEPs .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we expressly welcome this report , which is excellent .
The term ' own-initiative report ' is not quite accurate .
What we are doing here is persevering with the subject of Parliament 's first Committee of Inquiry - and we shall continue to do so .
I do not want to complain , but it is a shame that we have to do this at such a late hour .
I note with interest on the list of speakers the groups that have asked to speak on this subject today .
It seems it is always somewhat easier to complain about the scandals in the EU than to work on specific , positive solutions .
The road there is sometimes long - we are talking about cigarettes - but it is a good one to take .
We are making progress , and the Staes report shows this very clearly .
Of course , we have the incompleteness of European integration to contend with in this field .
Various Ministers for Finance still cannot resist simply raising the tax on tobacco a little when the treasury is starting to look a little empty , wrongly earning praise from some health politician or other in the process .
I say ' wrongly ' because consumers of cigarettes simply switch to smuggled cigarettes or , increasingly , to counterfeit cigarettes .
The profit from this kind of fraud goes directly to organised crime .
The fact that there is cause for us all to celebrate progress this evening makes me even more inclined to remind the House of an episode that does less credit to Europe , and particularly the Commission .
There is evidence that , in the period 1992-2001 , approximately 10 000 lorry-loads of cigarettes were smuggled into the EU via Montenegro , particularly heading for Italy .
This is probably the biggest fraud against the EU budget of all time .
The public prosecutor 's office in Augsburg , Germany , has made 60 requests for legal assistance in this connection .
There have been confessions , convictions and all such things in Switzerland .
Yet the European Union has not submitted any claims for recovery of own resources against the Republic of Montenegro .
Commissioner , I should like us to be able to stand before our taxpayers and say , ' We have looked into this matter , too ' .
There are petty customs officials in Germany , Austria and Central Europe who have done great work in this field , but who it seems have been rather let down by the European Commission .
We must deal with this mammoth affair , for which the limitation period is not yet at an end .
That would be my wish in connection with what is by and large a very pleasing occasion for today 's debate .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the House much prefers dealing with expenditure to revenue - and so it is to Mr Staes ' great credit that we are today turning to the trifle of revenue for once .
All the same , this is a matter of EUR 17 billion in VAT and own resources and EUR 14 billion in customs duties - which is almost 30 % .
In my opinion , it is good that we are addressing this issue today .
Evidently , there are only winners here , and the Commissioner , too , deserves our congratulations for this .
We are pleased that we have managed to find a way -in cooperation with the Member States .
It is essential to shore up the future of OLAF , the European Anti-Fraud Office , to enable it to play its role within the EU even better and more efficiently .
Congratulations are due for what OLAF has shown us so far and what we are seeing before us now .
We are all very proud of these successes , as it was these experts , of course , who made them possible .
It was not a foregone conclusion , particularly given the subject , that we would make real progress with the counterfeit tobacco products dossier or that the Member States , too , would cooperate .
We should like this scenario to be replicated in the case of other dossiers concerning the protection of the financial interests of the Union , for example the fight against VAT fraud .
Then we would have true winners : the European taxpayers who sent us here and have certain expectations .
I believe that continuing the fight against cigarette smuggling is an important task , that there is an urgent need to call in an investigator from OLAF in Beijing , and that we need to strengthen the anti-fraud presence worldwide .
The question to the Commission now would be how to step up the pressure on other cigarette manufacturers to induce them to subscribe to the agreement between Philip Morris and the Community in the Member States .
In my opinion , we must consider very specifically how to follow this up and how to continue working on this issue , as failure to do so would endanger our own credibility .
( PT ) Our rapporteur , and in this case also the European Commission , deserve all our congratulations .
This was the biggest success I can remember the European Union achieving to date against smuggling and tax fraud .
The message already announced by our rapporteur and supported now by all speakers is , however , that we must also take this fight to other fields .
It is fundamentally a case of ensuring that the movement of any kind of substance throughout the whole customs system should manage effectively to protect the financial interests of the European Union and of all the Member States and , from that point of view , I think there is still a lot to be done .
I should therefore like , above all , to invite the European Commission to pursue the matter more assiduously .
( RO ) The agreement between the European Commission and the Philip Morris company is a very good example of a Community financial instrument that simultaneously aims at several objectives .
First of all , the free access of the manufacturing industry to the market is not restricted , while the tax evasion of those who import counterfeit products is combated with a programme amounting to 1.25 billion dollars , entirely financed by the European company .
Nevertheless , a much bigger number of Member States should participate in the agreement signed .
The agreement was concluded in 2004 , and , in the meantime , Romania and Bulgaria , both situated at the European Union border , have become Member States .
Following the entry onto the market of products that are not licensed in all the Member States of the Union , the European budget has recorded substantial losses from excises , and national budgets from unpaid profit taxes .
The fact that those who try to introduce counterfeit goods into the Community choose the European ports that are not equipped with advanced technologies , such as scanning and registering the pallets of merchandise , is a reality .
Since this situation affects the European Union 's tariff revenues , I consider it normal for the modernization of port facilities to be performed with Community financial assistance .
Due to the counterfeit products placed on the market at low prices , increasingly more young people have started to smoke , which , of course , in time , will cost the social insurance and health systems of the Member States considerable amounts of money .
The reports issued by the World Health Organization show that , in most cases , counterfeit cigarettes contain 75 % more tar , 28 % more nicotine and 63 % more carbon monoxide .
Since we examine the disastrous effects of smoking , in general , irrespective of the legitimate or illegal source of the cigarettes , we should also meditate on another subject : while the European Union promotes policies for combating smoking , on the other hand , it grants substantial subsidies to tobacco crops , which , in my opinion , is a contradiction in the European health policy .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Most esteemed Commissioner Kallas , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Staes is right , and I would hereby like to congratulate him on his work , which is solid yet willing to make sacrifices , and on this present report .
The European Union and its institutions - including the Commission , the Court of Auditors , OLAF , the European Parliament and not least the Budget Control Committee - regard the agreement signed with Philip Morris in 2004 and its subsequent life and follow-up as a real success story , and rightly so .
In the fight against smuggling and fraud , we have managed to achieve a serious result here , not only for the traders and consumers at the end of the process but also for a large international manufacturer at the beginning of the process .
This agreement not only compensates financially for past losses but also covers their future prevention .
We have managed to make Philip Morris understand that it also has an interest in preparing a joint strategy against smuggling and fraud and in ensuring the financial instruments necessary to bring it to fruition .
It is particularly pleasing and , for us newly acceded countries , very significant that the cooperation will cover not only the ten Member States in the agreement but also the new countries that are particularly threatened by smuggling and fraud , and thus also ensuring the financial and technical conditions for the fight against smuggling and fraud , albeit with varying degrees of success .
Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I accept and approve of Mr Staes 's report , which will first and foremost lead to contraband being limited as far as possible .
This is the strong point of this report .
Secondly , it provides important advice on how to collect duty with maximum efficiency .
As someone who comes from a country which has a very long eastern border , that is to say Poland , however , I would like to draw attention to external borders .
Herbert Bösch is entirely correct when he talks of using experienced customs people .
These people will actually be much more crucial than equipment and systems , and so , Commissioner , I would earnestly request you to have a reasonably thorough look at the proposals and recommendations and take them to heart .
Efficiency and effectiveness in combating contraband will be the indicative factor where the reputation of our Community is concerned .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for your constant support for these issues raised .
I must say the biggest problem is that all the competence in customs and value added tax is in the hands of the Member States .
I do not really understand why some Member States are so reluctant to give more possibilities to use the facilities which exist within the European Union institutions .
For instance , OLAF has been extremely operational in several cases , in the Philip Morris operation and in the Diabolo fight against counterfeit operations , and this cannot happen without cooperation at European level and cannot happen without support from specific Commission services .
But legally , this is fully in the hands of the Member States , as is the strengthening of customs providing necessary resources .
The Commission is doing whatever is possible to facilitate this cooperation .
I must say that , without cooperation between Member States , an efficient , effective fight against cigarette smuggling , and especially value added tax fraud , is impossible .
I think that we have common interests here , and we should raise this issue constantly to increase cooperation .
Also - and perhaps I understood incorrectly from the interpretation - the Philip Morris agreement was between 10 Member States and the European Commission on the one side and Philip Morris on the other side , which is quite unique .
It was the Commission , its legal service and OLAF which achieved this agreement , and , with Ms Gräßle , this is continuing .
So I think that we can tell something in the future .
But the main issue is really the reluctance of some Member States to accept the mutual administrative assistance proposal which has been put forward , which can serve as a platform .
We are offering a platform for cooperation , and there are still some Member States , some of the bigger Member States ( I myself have tried to convince certain ministers of the biggest Member State to be more open to this proposal . )
Somehow , there is a lot of suspicion ; but , at the same time , being a former finance minister , I know that to fight value added tax fraud and customs is possible only with cooperation between Member States .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 11 October 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) As rapporteur on combating fraud in the EU , I welcome the important agreement with Philip Morris on combating cigarette smuggling at customs .
Customs fraud is one of the main sources of damage to the financial interests of the Community , and fraud relating to cigarettes is one of the most vulnerable sectors .
OLAF 's recent operations - such as Operation Diabolo ( 135 million cigarettes seized , estimated loss of EUR 220 million ) - have demonstrated that customs fraud can and must be combated : it is important to strengthen the operational capabilities of the European authorities .
The agreement with Philip Morris may serve as an example not only in the field of tobacco , but also in other fields of combating counterfeiting .
The proceeds of the compensation owed by Philip Morris , amounting to approximately EUR 1 billion , ought to be used to step up the fight against counterfeiting in the EU .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
EC-USA air transport agreement ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr El Khadraoui , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a decision of the Council and the representatives of the governments of the Member States of the European Union , meeting with the Council , on the conclusion of the Air Transport Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , on the one hand , and the United States of America , on the other hand [ 8044 / 3 / 07 - - C6-0210 / 2007 - .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr El Khadraoui , Parliament played a major political role in helping us sign the first EU-US air transport agreement on 30 April in Washington .
By backing the agreement on 14 March , even before the Committee on Transport and Tourism had made its announcement , Parliament played an extremely decisive role in modernising the arrangements regulating transatlantic aviation and offering new possibilities to European citizens .
The agreement will enter into force in March next year , and European and US businesses are on their starting blocks for new transatlantic connections .
The Joint Committee which is to operate the agreement has already met in June .
It is due to meet again in November to ensure smooth application and start work on important issues such as competition or security .
You make a number of key points in your formal discussions on the agreement today , which I share .
You emphasise the importance of a second stage agreement to move forward access to the US market , especially as a means of taking European investment to the United States .
You emphasise the importance of converging our regulations , particularly with regard to security , in a bid to obtain ' one-stop security ' .
You emphasise the importance of the environmental aspect , and CO2 emissions trading in particular .
Lastly , you also emphasise the importance of informing and consulting Parliament .
I also share your political priorities .
I welcome the agreement between our two institutions on items so politically sensitive in both Europe and the United States .
I am also extremely pleased that Parliament is conveying Europe 's voice to the United States through continuous dialogue with the US Congress and Government .
We must work relentlessly together on items posing a problem with Washington .
The International Civil Aviation Organisation 's Assembly in Montreal in September was a disappointment .
As you are aware , the EU and its European neighbours , 42 countries , were compelled to voice their reserves concerning the resolution on CO2 emissions trading , for we are in opposition with respect to the US and the rest of the world .
The House of Representatives also adopted an amendment to restrict the possibility of US businesses coming under foreign control .
Although the amendment has not yet been voted by the Senate , this casts a shadow over negotiations towards a second stage agreement , due to commence in the spring .
The European Parliament has made Congress and the US Government aware of this matter , as I have , and we must continue to deploy our energies to prevent any movements that are at odds with normalisation of the aviation sector .
However , if these events point to the difficulties to be overcome , we must not forget the most important part .
We now have a solid work base between Europe and the US to treat each other as equals .
This was not the case six months ago .
We must , therefore , build on this achievement , which is the result of four years ' work .
Obviously , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr El Khadraoui , I wish to let you know I am ready and willing to meet the political objectives of both Parliament and the Council , and that I am extremely pleased with European unity on this issue , with the union of Europeans .
Madam President , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , when this afternoon we finally give the green light to the air transport agreement between the EU and the United States , that will not only mark the end of a procedure that has lasted for many years and that progressed with great difficulty , it will also mark the beginning of a new chapter in the history of air transport and the consequences - while not entirely predictable - could be immense .
At the same time we know that this is only an interim phase and that there is still a lot of work ahead of us to get to the more or less integrated transatlantic aviation market for which we are aiming .
Some members believe that we have already made too many concessions to the Americans in this first phase .
They believe that the mind to negotiate will melt away , especially as airlines from the US already have de facto stand alone cabotage to fly from one Member State to another , which we cannot do on US territory .
Both parties get what we call the fifth freedom of the air , which offers American airlines the opportunity to fly on to Africa or Asia via Europe .
The other way round is also possible but is less important on account of the geographical location of the US .
What is more , from March of next year the restrictions that still exist on access to certain airports will be lifted : just think of Heathrow , which only two American airlines are allowed to use at present .
In some senses , therefore , there is no real balance but , on the other hand , Commissioner , the agreement is obviously a step forward and an improvement over the present situation .
First , the agreement puts an end to the legal uncertainty created since the judgments of the Court of Justice in 2002 , which pronounced that the existing bilateral open skies agreement contains elements which are unlawful and which must be amended .
Second , consumers will feel the difference .
Whereas up to now only national carriers and American airlines have been able to fly from the Member States to the United States , in future all European carriers will be able to fly from any point in Europe to any point in the United States , with the possibility of then flying on to , for instance , Mexico or South America .
Now , this will undoubtedly mean more choice for the consumer and probably lower prices too .
Third , with the setting up of the Joint Committee - to which you also referred , Commissioner - with representatives from both sides , we are creating an institution which will discuss issues relating to the agreement , as well as issues concerning social , environmental and safety regulations , and so on .
This is an instrument , therefore , that could boost confidence and understanding on both sides .
That is very important because , parallel with this opening of the transatlantic market , it is , of course , essential that the regulations are gradually harmonised and aligned with one another at a high level .
As the authorities come to be on better terms and as the benefits of close cooperation become clearer , the Americans may also become more willing to make new concessions on access to the internal US market .
After all , there are still many unresolved issues : you have already referred to them .
I am talking about cabotage , right of establishment for European airlines , rules relating to control and ownership , and all manner of other restrictions that are still in place .
Knowing , therefore , that the negotiations for stage two will start very soon - next summer , in fact - it is necessary for the Commission to think about a good negotiating strategy now .
What in fact do we want to achieve ?
What are our priorities ?
How can we persuade the Americans to take new steps ?
Where can concessions still be made without disadvantage to us ?
I do not need to tell you , Commissioner , that the context is highly problematic .
There are presidential elections next year .
There is a general mistrust in the United States , which goes right up to Congress , about allowing third parties control over strategic industries such as aviation .
The American trade unions also fear losing their grip on the sector through foreign interference , chiefly because it is felt that they could be successful and because there is an assumption that the European airlines are better organised and will easily be able to grab chunks of that market .
Then , of course , we also have the European elections .
Then there are the problems that already exist today .
You refer to the attempt of our US counterpart , Congressman Oberstar , to put a different interpretation on a number of elements of the agreement .
However , having said this , as rapporteur and as Parliament we are going to give it the green light this afternoon .
We are going to vote ' yes ' wholeheartedly .
Of course , we will follow the preparations very closely indeed .
We hope to be very closely involved , as we have been in the past .
We are counting on that .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , this Parliament and in particular my group , the PPE-DE , will vote for this agreement today with a large majority , because we ultimately achieved a good interim result .
It is , however , only an interim result ; as both Vice-President Barrot and our rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui , have said , we still have important questions to resolve in connection with the Open Skies Agreement : issues such as cabotage , the right of establishment , ownership , State aid and various other matters as well .
Apart from the fact that we have managed to produce a reasonably good interim result , the agreement reveals a number of weaknesses in our system .
These , too , have already been pointed out .
For the future , we must make efforts to ensure that our Parliament - like our counterparts in the US Congress who , one could argue , have arrogated various rights to themselves over recent centuries - has more opportunities to exert influence on the substance of this agreement .
This time , we have managed to make progress , to some extent , by tricking the system - by intervening before the Council spoke out - but in the long term , we need better rules for shaping the content .
At this juncture , I would like to draw attention - yet again - to an important issue in air transport , especially between Europe and the US .
Safety provisions and security checks are important so that passengers have peace of mind when using this important mode of transport .
However , security measures should not be misinterpreted as tokenism that causes nothing but inconvenience for passengers without actually increasing their safety .
For that reason , for the umpteenth time , the rules on the carrying of liquids on board need to be changed !
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , first of all I would like to make an apology to you , to the Vice-President of the Commission and to honourable Members , because after I have made my speech I will have to leave the Chamber to do an interview .
It is not my habit to do so , and I apologise for not staying for the rest of the debate .
I would like to thank my colleague , Mr El Khadraoui , for his report and warn him that he perhaps may beat my record of being the longest-serving rapporteur in parliamentary history if he continues with this particular dossier !
Let us be honest .
The marriage entered into between the European Union and the US in the form of the initial civil aviation Air Transport Agreement is a marriage of convenience , with the EU being the eager bridegroom and the US the very reluctant bride .
Now , when we come to consummate the marriage , we find that the US bride finds that her EU bridegroom is not very fanciable , and , seeing as she has got all the best bits out of him on their wedding day , the US bride now cannot be bothered to consummate the marriage , because Representative Oberstar is standing over the couple , shotgun in hand .
Great differences exist between the EU and US on aviation policy , and I for one would not be surprised to hear , in the weeks and months to come , that negotiations on the second stage agreement have broken down because the US would not move on key issues .
My fear is that the EU bridegroom is so desperate to consummate this marriage of convenience that we yet again give in to the reluctant bride .
What about ETS and security , where the EU and US are worlds apart ?
What about foreign ownership of US airlines , or fifth freedom reciprocals ?
What about passenger lists and Chapter 11 protection ?
These are all issues that divide us , and , whilst I accept that there is a willingness to sit down and negotiate , it is always , it would appear to us , on the terms dictated to us by the Americans .
I wish everybody well in their efforts , and the PSE Group will vote in favour .
However , I sincerely hope the negotiations are successful , and that a more balanced , reciprocal , fair agreement is forthcoming at the end of the road .
But I question whether that will happen , because of US attitudes , and I ask whether the road that we are actually on will lead to this marriage of convenience ending in a Las Vegas-type divorce .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I am substituting for my colleague , Ms in ' t Veld .
I bow to the knowledge of other people on the technicalities of this agreement .
As an MEP representing London , which includes the major airport of Heathrow , I am certainly encouraged by the fact that this agreement will grant more benefits of competition to passengers and , to that extent , it is good that it has been concluded .
I want to address the security aspects of the agreement , understanding from the report that this is largely left to regulation by the Joint Committee .
I agree with the report 's welcoming of cooperation between the EU and US authorities responsible for aviation security .
However , as the report says , security measures should be based on a proper risk assessment and should not be excessive or uncoordinated , and the privacy of European and US citizens should be respected when personal passenger data are exchanged between the EU and the US .
Members will be aware of the considerable controversy surrounding the Passenger Name Records ( PNR ) Agreement .
The European Parliament has expressed itself very forcefully on the fact that it has not played the major role that it would have wanted in that agreement .
Certainly , the opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisors is that safeguards under the new agreement have been considerably weakened in comparison to previous agreements and that the new agreement leaves open serious questions and shortcomings .
While Commissioner Barrot welcomed the major role Parliament has played in modernising the regulatory framework for other aspects of the aviation business , I am afraid we have to express disappointment that we have not succeeded in having the input we wanted on privacy and the enforcement of personal data safeguards .
The data under the PNR Agreement will be retained for 15 years , which , I put to you , is excessive and which this report says we do not want .
The US will be able to have access to sensitive data and even to use it in cases of petty crime , which is not fighting terrorism .
All in all , while welcoming this agreement overall , I am afraid to say that the aspirations of this report that security measures should be properly assessed for their contribution to combating risk , should not be excessive and should protect privacy have not been secured in the area of the exchange of passenger name records .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , this was not the first time that you faced a negotiating partner who is very difficult , to put it mildly , because based on experience , he assumes from the outset that Europe will always give in , in every instance .
As before , if you read through this document , it is clearly to the advantage of the US .
Whether there is anything in it for the European Union remains to be seen , for a joint committee is no more than an opportunity ; it is not yet a success , especially given that the US is already calling the outcomes into question .
I see no balance yet , and very little concern for our demands .
The comparison drawn by the previous speaker about the rather bizarre marriage of convenience is very apt .
The issues of aviation security , environmental protection and ownership rights are still unresolved .
On the question of security , we have still not achieved what we need to achieve .
On the issue of data protection in particular - the protection of European citizens from overzealous measures - we have still not achieved the result that we need and that we must achieve .
In addition to that , the contribution of aviation to our failure to achieve the Kyoto target is still massive .
With the present rates of growth , Europe will face major difficulties unless we have a common agreement with the US , and I see no sign of that at all at the moment .
At most , I see initial faltering steps , but Europe must be much more self-confident and speak with one voice in this negotiating process , for what has happened so far gives us opportunities .
We have not yet reaped the benefits , however , and I can say with confidence that the European Parliament and the Committee on Transport and Tourism will be scrutinising the outcomes produced by this joint negotiating committee very carefully .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the heart of the EU 's foreign policy on air transport lies the establishment of an open aviation area between the European Union and the United States of America .
This policy is wholly in the interests of capital .
It is being used to create through pressure and threats two or three monopolistic aviation business groups within the EU .
They will also have the pick of international air transport , while the remaining aviation companies - those that are left - will be regional in nature and their activities will be restricted to within the Member States .
The strong pressure and threats experienced by staff at Alitalia , Olympic Airlines and other aviation companies in the Member States are typical of what is now happening .
Conflicts were evident in the negotiations with the United States .
The resulting agreement and signs of friction can be inferred from the state subsidies to Airbus and Boeing , the prevention of sabotage on internal US flights and the US Government 's refusal to permit the participation in or even the buying out of US aviation companies by European air carriers .
The agreement shows the level of compromise between the EU and the United States .
This is far from meeting the needs of the people ; it will contribute to the increased rate of concentration through buy-outs and mergers of aviation companies .
In all these areas , severe problems remain with regard to the protection of personal data as well as that of the environment .
For these reasons , we will vote against the proposal for an Air Transport Agreement between the United States and the European Union .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , reciprocity is an important value in interpersonal relations and all the more so in relations between states , even commercial ones .
I did in fact attempt to introduce a few amendments to the El Khadraoui report , in a fruitless effort to make our Commission colleagues aware of this point and others .
In an age when communications are crucial , and when communications by air afford previously unimagined travel opportunities , air transport agreements between nations are clearly necessary and desirable .
What is not clear , however , is why in this report - as in all other acts adopted by the European Union - we seem incapable of demanding reciprocity , which also means equivalent conditions of competition .
We ought to reason like citizens , especially we Members , given that ours is the only EU institution effectively endowed with a direct popular mandate .
Therefore , if Parliament wished to demonstrate an independent capacity to guide the other institutions ' policies , it would have to demonstrate in its acts and its ( albeit limited ) codecisions that it is not easily swayed by non-European interests .
This is the case of Mr El Khadraoui 's report today , which is otherwise excellent in many respects , and I should like to take this opportunity to thank him for his work .
As on so many other occasions , however , the report lacks the capacity to state clearly that , if there is to be free competition , there absolutely must be equal conditions for cabotage and compliance with social and environmental standards .
Nor does reciprocity apply with respect to safety or passengers ' rights .
Moreover , the report recognises that the aviation sector has many negative effects which contribute to climate change .
I therefore fail to understand why my fellow Members did not support the amendment I tabled on the adverse impact of the compounds contained in aircraft vapour trails and the likelihood that these effects will increase with the growth of aviation , and hence calling for aviation to be included in the European emissions trading system .
Finally , as concerns the application of international social legislation , European and US carriers do not seem to me to be on an equal footing , and so there are no bilateral rights here either .
All of this , I believe , is sufficient to justify voting against the report .
( DE ) Madam President , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to reject the points made by Mrs Lichtenberger and Mr Romagnoli in their statements .
Of course , there is no total reciprocity of rights , but compared with the previous situation , this is a balanced agreement , which is why we will be voting for it .
If you take the view that this is not a balanced agreement , then by all means vote against it , but we agree with the rapporteur that this is a balanced first step and we also agree that a second step must follow .
I of course support the rapporteur in his demand - as my colleague Mr Rack has said - that we should proceed to this second stage quickly .
We should , quite simply , make use of what has now been agreed .
I therefore urge the European airlines to utilise the new opportunities afforded to them by this agreement as regards their ownership and control rights , and to set up licensing operations and engage in branding policy and in part to participate in the US Government 's programme .
They should not be waiting for the second stage ; they should be using the first stage now , so that when we enter the second stage of the negotiations we can benefit from initial experience and identify the areas where there are still deficits as regards our European companies ' rights in the US market .
We must also call on the Administration and our own Commission to capitalise on the opportunities afforded by this agreement and , for example , agree one-stop security on a more permanent basis .
This can be achieved through the Joint Committee and in cooperation with the Administration , and we can show citizens that this agreement is beneficial for them , especially if they do not have to undergo a second security check at airports .
My colleagues and I would like to thank the Commission for its good cooperation in this instance , but we must insist on similarly good cooperation in the second stage of the process .
I warn the Americans to adopt Mr Oberstar 's motion , for if they want to undermine this agreement with all their unilateral amendments , we will react sharply .
Therefore , let us say to the Americans that we will gladly continue the talks between Congress and the European Parliament , but that they must not undermine the agreement with their biased interpretation .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his clear depiction of the situation and the position taken .
First , the positives , which have also been mentioned by the previous speaker .
With the open skies agreement between the US and Europe , we now finally have the opportunity to establish airline routes from the European Union via the United States to third countries such as Mexico and South America .
It also offers the opportunity for any carrier based in the European Union to fly from anywhere in the EU to anywhere in the US without any restrictions on capacity or prices , and I agree with the previous speaker : these opportunities must be utilised .
In the area of investment in US airline companies , too , progress has been achieved with this agreement .
The Open Skies Agreement thus takes the first important step towards an Open Aviation Area without any restrictions on either side .
It can thus create useful new air routes and a large number of new jobs .
On the other hand - as has already been said - it must be made clear that this is only the first step and cannot be regarded as a final agreement .
We expect the Commission , in a second stage , to negotiate unresolved issues such as cabotage , right of establishment , ownership and State aid with the US .
The potential for conflict has already been made very clear by the Commissioner , but I hope that the work in the transatlantic committee will make progress so that we ultimately have reciprocal rights which can be implemented and an Open Skies Agreement which is worthy of the name .
In parallel to this , the committee should push for the inclusion of flights from the US in emissions trading , for we know that we did not achieve very much at the ICAO meeting , as you have mentioned .
Of course , it should also give emphasis to our demand for one-stop security .

Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome and give the floor to Mr Georgiou , who is a new Member of the European Parliament .
- ( EL ) Madam President , during recent years I have observed a desperate attempt by Europeans to sign an air transport agreement with the United States .
Despite a great willingness on our part , I have also noted the reluctance of the Americans .
If they want to achieve a major agreement , we should alert Europeans to the fact that they should be ready to hand over a blank cheque .
These agreements , Madam President , do not , however , merely concern machines , interests and companies .
These agreements concern people - people who travel from Europe to the United States .
Some are Greeks , who are treated differently from other Europeans .
They have much to say about the hardships they undergo in order to obtain a US visa and about what they also put up with when they arrive , and they are subject to checks and searches as if they were potential terrorists .
You will obviously understand that this is stressful , at least for Greeks , who , in any case , are part of Europe .
Madam President , if these agreements signed between governments or parliaments do not touch the hearts and souls of the peoples and citizens of Europe , they will be exceptionally short-lived and completely unsuccessful .
I should like this to be included in our instructions when we again attempt to negotiate .
The agreements ought to be founded upon equality , probity and reciprocity .
Madam President , first of all I welcome the principle of the agreement .
The agreement between the United States and the EU will be , when it is finally negotiated , a major and historic development .
For EU airlines it means more transatlantic flights to the United States .
It is also good from the point of view of airline passengers , with more airlines , more competition and lower air fares .
We have already seen within Europe the positive impact that low fares airlines have on the aviation sector in terms of the huge increase in passenger numbers .
I pay tribute to the EU negotiators for successfully pursuing what are very difficult negotiations .
These are not yet concluded and are taking a lot of patience and diplomacy , but when this eventually happens the net outcome will hopefully have been worth waiting for .
I sincerely hope that the outstanding problems with the agreement can be overcome .
I agree with all the previous speakers with regard to the problems .
We have to dig in to ensure that this is a 50 : 50 agreement and that , at the end of the day , we fly the flag for Europe in terms of insisting that , whatever they look for , we look for too .
I believe that the restrictions by the United States authorities in relation to demanding personal details for security reasons are most unreasonable .
We have got to ensure in fact that this is not a deterrent to EU passengers going to the United States , because if we do not solve this particular problem it will be a major deterrent .
I am now going to be very parochial and provincial .
I have another problem , which is that the first international transatlantic airport in Ireland was Shannon airport .
It was the gateway to Europe for many a long day , but the mandatory stopover in Shannon will now go , under this agreement .
That will effectively undermine the viability of Shannon airport and have major consequences for the Mid-West region , which is a very disadvantaged region .
However , that is not a matter for Europe but for the Irish Government .
Again , at the end of the day , the EU badly needs an agreement and passengers need an agreement - but not at any price .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I wish to thank all the Members who have spoken .
First and foremost , in reply to your rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui , it can nevertheless be said that the first stage produced a balanced agreement .
A commitment was also obtained from the United States to negotiate the second stage .
There is even an obligation to commence negotiations within 60 days of provisional application .
The European side approved retaliatory measures .
It is possible to go back on certain concessions if the second stage does not meet European interests .
This is certainly quite an important point .
The Commission has already begun a debate with the Member States in relation to the special negotiation committee to define negotiation strategy for the second stage .
You insisted , as did Mr Jarzembowski , on the need to define a good negotiation strategy .
I obviously intend to involve you and Parliament to allow us to truly negotiate as effectively as possible .
What is true , as Mr Jarzembowski said , is that there are now opportunities for European businesses which must be snapped up .
This agreement provides a wider range of services and lower prices , it creates jobs , and has allowed us to establish coordination for measures that could affect passengers : problems relating to safety and security , and ' one stop security ' in the long run , in addition to environmental issues , obviously .
I wish to answer Mrs Ludford by saying that the PNR is not part of the aviation agreement .
Any decisions or measures in relation to PNR must be compatible with the terms of the agreement .
The PNR issue , however , must be reviewed in context , and Mr Frattini is aware of your concerns on that score .
It is true you have placed much emphasis on the problem of security and it is true that this dialogue must genuinely form a part of the agreement 's Joint Committee in order to produce solutions in a positive manner .
Both parties are working to obtain a high level of security that will not penalise air services or passengers .
Obviously in relation to this agreement the Transportation Security and Coordination Group must be able to produce specific responses to your concerns , and evidently I take due note .
I would also like to say that we do seem to have two problems here , which ought to produce some improvements and solutions : a security problem and an environmental problem .
In relation to the environmental problem , it is obvious we are keen to see an integrated global approach in order to take up the challenge of climate change .
Also , as I said before and say again , at the ICAO Assembly in Montreal we all defended the emissions quotas exchange system together , a method that uses market instruments and would appear to be the most effective solution .
For the moment we have come up against a refusal by the United States and certain Asian nations .
Nevertheless , we feel that this does not prevent cooperation .
You know that in the CleanSky project , cooperation with the US is also making progress .
The Atlantic Interoperability Initiative to Reduce Emissions is a most interesting idea .
This involves new landing procedures that may help us improve the consequences of CO2 emissions .
I wish to say , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that obviously we must succeed during the second stage .
Substantial pressure and unwavering commitment are required from Europe to bring off this second stage , which is obviously much more important since it would certainly produce the open skies agreement .
Rest assured that Parliament will be closely involved in the negotiations , which will certainly be difficult but , as I said before , will commence in due course as we only signed the first part of the agreement because it had this second stage .
In any case , I wish to express my thanks to Parliament for what would appear to be wide-ranging solid support : we will need its support again to complete the agreement and succeed during the second stage .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11 a.m.
Airport capacity and ground handling ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Mrs Jensen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on Airport capacity and ground handling : towards a more efficient policy .


Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the strain on Europe 's airports is currently so great that even the smallest delay at one airport can mean considerable delays at others .
In addition , the continuing increase in air traffic will increase the problems at airports , and this will have adverse effects on effectiveness , competitiveness and the environment .
The capacity problems at Europe 's airports are not only a national problem but also a European one , and consequently I welcome the Commission 's action plan and 14-point plan as an initial step towards improving capacity at Europe 's airports .
The Commission 's proposals are insufficient , however , and so my report proposes that the Commission draw up , by 2009 , a master plan for enhanced airport capacity in Europe .
Of course , it is ultimately the responsibility of Member States to build and expand airports .
The master plan is to be an instrument , or method , to ensure that Member States coordinate their initiatives to promote and expand airport capacity .
The problem needs to be examined from a cross-border angle .
Airports have different characteristics , different strengths , but interaction is important .
This goes not only for interaction between airports , but also for interaction with other modes of transport and infrastructures surrounding airports ( ' co-modality ' ) .


I should like to thank both the Commission and the spokespeople of the other political groups - Mr El Khadraoui , Mr Jarzembowski , Mr López-Istúriz White and Mrs Lichtenberger - for their extremely constructive cooperation on this report , and I am pleased that Parliament is able to present a clear message showing widespread support in the matters of both capacity and liberalisation of the ' ground handling ' Directive .
Of course , airports are both loved and loathed .
They create growth and prosperity , and provide a link between regions , but they also generate noise and pollution and take up space .
It is important , then , that problems be handled in a way appropriate to all parties concerned .
Firstly , we propose promoting environmentally friendly capacity expansion .
Airport congestion itself can have a negative impact on the environment if aeroplanes are left in a holding pattern , resulting in unnecessary CO2 emissions .
Consequently , I also welcome the Commission initiative to incorporate aviation into the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme .
I should like to emphasise , however , that it is important for us to have things implemented at global level , too .
Secondly , it is important for the Commission to follow up on countries ' implementation of the common rules for the allocation of slots .
In this context , the report also requests that the Commission lay down a timeframe and deadlines in order to enhance cooperation between neighbouring Member States as regards the building of functional airspace blocks ( FABs ) .
There must be substantial improvements in this area by 2008 - this is a high priority for Parliament .
Thirdly , it is a pipe dream to imagine there can be any expansion of an airport 's capacity without thorough involvement of and cooperation with regional and local administrations .
It is important , therefore , to establish a dialogue among those European regions with an airport on coordination of capacity expansion .
The regions can exchange experiences and learn from one another ( What environmental impact does the airport have on the neighbouring population ?
What are the spatial development plans ? What significance does an airport have in general for growth and employment in the area ? ) and perhaps develop good practice from this .
I hope the Council will support the basic ideas in this report , namely that the Commission 's action plan is insufficient , that guidelines must be developed for optimising and developing airport capacity , that additional capacity is nevertheless required , and that words must be accompanied by action .
The second part of my report concerns ground handling - that is , all the handling surrounding the aeroplane and in the airport , from fuelling and baggage handling to the check-in procedure .
Here , the Commission is preparing for a revision of the existing Directive on access to the groundhandling market at Community airports , which , as we know , is a thorny issue .
I should like to reiterate my thanks to the spokespeople for the constructive cooperation we enjoyed .
We agree that the Commission should carry out an updated analysis of the implementation and impact of the current ' ground handling ' Directive before we put any new liberalisation on the agenda .
We must have a full overview of the impact on users , passengers and staff , and a future directive must ensure quality in ground handling and decent working conditions for staff .
We must ensure that there are no monopolistic conditions and that there are clear rules for calls for tender in order to involve users . I hope that this report will inspire the Commission to proceed with both the ' ground handling ' Directive and the 14-point plan .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you , Mrs Jensen , and the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Thank you for supporting the Commission 's action plan and for your commitment to Community air transport policy .
One of the challenges of aviation policy is to prevent congestion at European airports .
Our action plan focuses on developing a coherent global airport policy .
It involves optimising the output of existing airport capacities , and improving the planning of new infrastructure by avoiding juxtaposition of purely local solutions and the formation of bottlenecks .
As the EP understands only too well , optimum functioning of the European airport network can only be guaranteed if local actions form part of a coherent global policy .
The course of action proposed by the Commission is meant to be realistic , since it considers the economic and environmental constraints that must be taken into account .
That is why , Mrs Jensen , priority is initially given to better use of existing airport capacities , thanks to development and harmonised implementation of new technology .
It is patently obvious , if we obtain a Single Sky with functional air traffic control blocks , that we will be able to use the existing infrastructure much better .
It is true that building new infrastructure will cause even more problems , especially in large urban areas with a heavy demand for air transport .
Our action plan , however , deals with the problem of creating new infrastructure , which is frequently essential , and we wish to plan the new infrastructure for a better appreciation of its utility and location in order to make it more environmentally-friendly .
On 2 October the Committee on Transport and Tourism adopted conclusions , Madam President , that are less ambitious than the conclusions of Parliament .
A large number of the Member States , perhaps too prone to listen to those in charge of their own airports , are loath to take up Community coordination and prefer to continue giving priority to local solutions implemented at each airport .
This kind of reluctance makes it more difficult to implement the action plan , but EP support will allow the Commission to work specifically towards initiatives on the basis of Mrs Jensen 's contributions here .
I thank her , and I also wish to thank the Committee on Transport and Tourism for the quality of its work and for helping us move forward on this issue , which is so important in terms of the harmonious sustainable development of the entire air transport sector .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Madam President , advances in the aviation industry have contributed massively to economic progress and general well-being , and they can continue to do so .
This industry does not deserve the environmentalist hostility which is often heaped upon it .
This attitude is also politically unwise , as all our constituents benefit enormously in both their work and their leisure .
Aviation has done much to meet its environmental obligations by developing and adopting new technology and improving operational efficiencies .
It rests with the political authorities and the administrative and regulatory authorities to play their part in permitting and enthusiastically encouraging continuing improvement .
Ms Jensen 's excellent report incorporates much of what my committee proposed .
But there are three matters which the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs put forward in its opinion and which did not find their way into the final report .
Firstly , with the advent of quieter aircraft , it should be possible to relax limitations on airport opening times and move towards 24-hour operation almost everywhere .
This would greatly enhance capital and capacity utilisation of airport infrastructures and of the aircraft themselves , facilitating better productivity and cheaper services with less than proportionate environmental impact .
Secondly , the selection of efficient ground handlers can also enhance productivity by improving utilisation of airport infrastructure , notably where they speed up aircraft turnarounds and contribute to good timekeeping and passenger satisfaction .
Thirdly , we advocated applying market forces by the open auctioning of airport slots , moving away from grandfather rights while retaining a defined proportion of slots at hub airports for those vital regional feeder services .
Those bodies responsible for providing the environment in which airlines operate must facilitate greater productivity by providing adequate and efficient infrastructure and imposing only appropriate regulatory conditions .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , many of you will have flown here to Brussels via my home airport , Frankfurt am Main .
Rapid handling is a key factor in the quality of ground services , which are responsible for loading and unloading , cleaning and refuelling of aircraft , and easing passengers through the system .
However , these work processes must fit together seamlessly .
In order for good professional standards to be maintained at all Europe 's airports , the European Parliament adopted a decision back in 1996 to the effect that besides the airport operators , only those service providers which could operate efficiently on a lasting basis would be licensed to work in airports .
However , the number of these service providers is limited .
Then , as now , I was the draftsman for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and was able to prevent unlimited liberalisation of these services .
While fully appreciating the need for competition , this can only be accepted if it is fair and is not to the detriment of the workers or security .
Not every supplier can guarantee the requisite high level of training , appropriate wage levels or good service .
Tough competition on prices means that more and more permanent jobs are being replaced by poor-quality temporary and agency contracts .
I would like to express my thanks to Anne Jensen .
My Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and your Committee on Transport and Tourism have joined forces and called on the Commission to ensure that , first and foremost , the 1996 Directive is implemented properly in all EU Member States .
The data we have been given are out of date .
They only report on experience in 15 Member States .
We want a careful analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of liberalisation , both for workers and for passengers .
Ground handling services make a key contribution to aviation safety and security .
Sensitive infrastructures like the European hub in Frankfurt am Main and elsewhere are completely unsuitable as a playground for those individuals who compulsively champion the cause of harmonisation in Europe .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , I should like to congratulate Mrs Jensen on her excellent work .
Technical and organisational issues are very important in relation to airport capacity .
A holistic approach to the issue should be adopted , however , with reference also to the local and regional environment of airports .
Air transport has helped to improve territorial , economic and social cohesion , especially in the case of areas far from the centres .
The existence of such links is often decisive when it comes to placing investments and receiving tourists .
In a nutshell , these links are vital to a region 's development .
Airports are also important in terms of job creation .
The Member States , regional and local authorities must ensure that airports , regardless of their governing bodies , are included in regional spatial planning plans and national development strategies .
There should also be coordination at European network level .
Airport location should be determined not so much by the ambitions of the authorities involved as by the logic of each situation .
There are cases within the Union where fairly large conurbations located less than 100 kilometres apart each have separate airports .
It would be sensible for a single airport to serve both towns .
The location of airports should be chosen to enable them to serve neighbouring and border regions .
Where possible , intermodal solutions should be put in place , because fast rail connections between airports significantly increase their capacity .
It is of course also essential to provide good transport links between airports and city centres in their hinterland .
The maintenance and extension of existing airports and the construction of new ones must be subject to the relevant territorial impact assessment .
This is particularly necessary in connection with the natural environment , in terms of noise , emission of pollutants , road traffic density in the vicinity of the airport , the proximity of fuel tanks , and also in relation to meteorological factors .
Finally , I should like to say on the basis of my own experience and my constituents ' statements , that issues relating to airport capacity involve much more than technical matters , air traffic control systems and coordinating take-offs and landings .
The organisation of the tasks concerned is also relevant , and all too often it is very poor indeed .
Personal checks on passengers are one example .
Mr Mann referred to Frankfurt airport , where passengers are checked twice , whereas once might be sufficient .
A good deal of time is wasted at baggage collection too .
Even in the case of reputable airlines , delays are constantly being experienced supposedly for technical reasons .
Perhaps the real reason is plain incompetence ?
It is not unusual for passengers at an airport to feel they are unwelcome and a nuisance .
They are given the impression that they are simply getting in the way of the staff and upsetting working arrangements by their presence .
People need and want to fly , however , the disabled included .
Air transport services offered by carriers and airports should be provided safely and punctually .
Passengers should be treated with respect at all times .
Both sides would then be happy .
The Commissioner 's statement gives me reason to hope that this will one day be the case .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - Madam President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I have only one point to make in this debate , and that is in regard to the Commission proposal on radio identification tagging .
The original proposal to tag both passengers ' baggage and the boarding pass of each passenger to me poses a significant breach , or potential breach , of civil liberties .
I can see little benefit in being able to tag passengers ' movement around airport terminals and would also call into question how much it would cost for airports to implement such measures .
There are clear benefits in being able to quickly identify where certain pieces of baggage or luggage are at any point in time with radio frequency identifiers , and this is where I draw the line .
My amendment to restrict the tagging of baggage , which was adopted in both the Civil Liberties Committee and the Committee on Transport , to me strikes the right balance between being able to reduce delays to flights and to respect the personal freedoms of passengers as they circulate through airports and terminal buildings .
With this in mind , I can therefore fully support the text before us today .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I believe that we should be pleased with the agreement reached in this report .
It is clearly a balanced report , which is the result of consensus and an in-depth examination of the matter .
I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Anne Jensen , in particular on her willingness to engage in dialogue and consensus when drawing up this report .
Later today the European Parliament is going to vote on a report that clearly demonstrates its support for the Commission with a view to alleviating the problem of airport capacity crunch .
As the Commission itself warns - and Vice-President Jacques Barrot has said the same - this poses a threat to the efficiency , security and competitiveness of all those involved in the air transport sector .
According to the statistics , by the year 2025 there could be nearly 4 million extra flights per year and , as a result , more than 60 European airports will be at full capacity .
From the first contacts in relation to the preparation of this report , it was important to bear in mind that , as we know , the European Commission is not responsible for competition in relation to airports and unfortunately it cannot , therefore , require the Member States to take a series of measures on airport capacity .
However , the members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , together with the Commission , understand that it is vital to implement a master plan for air traffic management and to propose to the Member State measures that are needed to optimise the capacity of European airports , thereby minimising the problems created by a capacity crunch .
The report proposes measures including : improving the use of ground handling services ; promoting ' co-modality ' ; improving operational planning ; optimising departure sequences ; and above all , in relation to the famous slots , ensuring coherence between slots and flight plans .
With that in mind , we have supported the creation of the European Air Capacity Observatory under the auspices of the Commission .
I sincerely hope that this proposal moves forward .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Jensen .
I am not doing this just as a matter of form but in all sincerity .
She has produced an excellent and extremely balanced report .
It is clear that both of the topics it had to tackle are extremely important and will demand a great deal of follow-up work on the part of the Commission .
With regard to airport capacity , it is clear that we need a global outlook .
The spectacular growth will create problems , which is obvious now already , and they cannot be solved simply by building new airports here and there .
In the areas where they are most needed , that will be very difficult or even impossible because of population density and opposition from local residents .
The first thing , therefore , is to make optimum use of the capacity we have now .
There are many ways to do that but an integrated approach is absolutely essential .
A multi-track policy is needed in which we join forces at all levels .
It concerns infrastructure , such as connections to high speed rail lines , good links between cities and airports .
It concerns technology .
You have already referred to CESAR , to functional airspace blocks , to the unified air space , as well as to quieter aircraft that will enable local residents to tolerate more flights .
It is not simple .
However , taking all these measures together they are extremely significant Meanwhile an important step forward is the idea of mapping everything out and producing a master plan for airport capacity by 2009 .
We are counting on the Commission to do this .
With regard to ground handling , the evaluation of the first steps toward liberalisation , which have been underway for many years now , is not entirely positive .
It is clear that prices have fallen and that airlines have benefited from that .
On the other hand , the effects on the employees have clearly been problematic .
Trade unions throughout Europe complain about lower wages , poorer working conditions and reduced job security .
You know that there is a public call for tenders every seven years : the ground handling companies can be replaced by others , but the personnel have no guarantees that they will be taken on .
Trade unions report to us that wages have fallen by an average of 20 % .
The number of accidents at work is also reported to have increased .
These are matters that we really do need to examine more closely .
Consequently , it seems to me that we need a new study , not only to give us more recent figures to work with , but also to look at the number and quality of jobs .
In short , Commissioner , these are two fascinating issues that we will certainly want to return to many times in the near future and I think that this report is a good basis for future subsequent .
Firstly , I would like to thank the speaker for his cooperation and for keeping his ears open to various proposals .
In my speech I would like to present my thoughts on the ' ground handling ' Directive .
I am concerned because interested states blocked the reconsideration of the Directive a few years ago when the Commission even had a new draft proposal drawn up .
The concern raised by market participants and the content of the improvements proposed today demonstrate the need to revise the Directive as soon as possible .
Moreover , we cannot forget that after 2004 the EU aviation market was supplemented by the particularities of the new Member States which , unfortunately , have not been evaluated in the Commission 's document this time .
I would like to concentrate on some specific remarks .
The aim of the Directive now in force is to regulate the competitive conditions for third-party handlers and self-handling companies .
However , it is necessary to consider that a state monopoly of all ground handling services existed in the post-Soviet states until recent times .
Therefore , independent service providers inevitably appear when market conditions start functioning .
Airports controlling and using the infrastructure belonging to them at the same time continue their activities , providing the same services for airlines , and thus compete with their tenants .
Mostly , such competition infringes on the principles of equality of rights and transparency owing to objectively emerging conflicts of interest .
Conflicts also deepen because the Airport Users Committee does not establish areas for ground handling service providers .
To protect the principle of impartiality it is necessary to expand the rights of airport users : an airport should choose a provider that would meet not the expectations of the airport administration but those of the users , i.e. , the airlines .
The increasing cost of equipment that meets safety requirements increases the amount of investment that is necessary .
However , the seven-year period for choosing providers has forced service providers to recoup the increasing investment sooner , often economising on staff working conditions and payments .
Therefore , I think it is necessary to extend the period for choosing ground handling service providers .
I encourage the Commission to present a draft revised directive , considering the European Parliament 's proposals , as soon as possible ( during this term of office ) and thus save time on repeated improvements in the future .
Mr President , the Jensen report is a sound and thorough overview of the issues related to airport capacity and ground handling .
The dramatic increase in air traffic in Member States of the European Union necessitates the construction of new airports and the extension and modernisation of existing ones .
Mrs Jensen rightly points out that the choice of location for the construction of an airport involves difficult decisions in view of the area required and the need to comply with a range of technical , organisational and social conditions - such as the consent of local authorities and populations - as well as requirements regarding safety and environmental protection .
That is why the construction of large and medium-sized airports should be planned well in advance and included in the overall plan for the development of air transport within the Union .
The construction of airports of this nature is a very expensive investment .
Union support will be required in many cases .
It would appear that the accepted estimates for passenger air transport have not taken account of high-speed rail links .
For journeys of up to 500 kilometres , the latter are a very attractive option for passengers in terms of both fares and journey times .
The Brussels-Paris link is a good example .
It provides a direct connection between the city centres , enabling passengers to avoid additional journeys and all the checks related to air travel .
Taxes and aviation fuel surcharges resulting in price increases are also likely to have a bearing on the estimates .
It is important for the sector and for passengers to fully exploit the latent possibilities involving better and more efficient flight management and ground handling .
As we know from our own experience , the quality of airport services and carriers varies a great deal .
Certain minimum standards should be guaranteed and regulated for under Union provisions .
A good way to improve the quality of services would be for the Union 's institutions to take the initiative and facilitate the exchange of best practice between airports .
The report and opinions constitute a very necessary document .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report draws attention to some of the problems , notably congestion , which we , as people who have to fly fairly frequently , very often experience but which naturally affect aviation as a whole , not just business flights but holiday flights as well .
I would like to thank the rapporteur particularly for attempting to reconcile two positions which emerged in the committee on this issue .
On the one hand , there was unfettered euphoria about the prospect of growth , which appeared to rely solely on building new airports to relieve the old ones ; on the other hand , there was the concern about organisational aspects and , of course , the issue of responsibility for the protection of both the environment and local residents .
We face a situation in which the quality of life of people living around major airports or , indeed , poorly situated regional airports is severely impaired .
Here , too , we have a responsibility .
We cannot simply deal with this issue in terms of new growth prospects .
It is a question of organisation .
The system of hubs and slots which currently exists in European aviation is not as good as it could be .
We have such large hubs in some areas that the ensuing complexity of connecting flights means that one small mistake can potentially have massive consequences , not just for one airport but for the airspace as a whole .
That problem needs to be solved and the report makes some important suggestions here .
However , these solutions must not be implemented at the expense of passengers and especially not at the expense of the workers providing airport services , because they too have a right to quality of life .
Mr President , the aviation sector has been in the spotlight in the last few months .
The proposals to include the sector in the greenhouse gas emissions trading scheme , the agreement with the United States and the reform of landing rights are a few examples .
Mrs Jensen 's report adds a new dimension to that list : the organisation of aviation on the ground .
It addresses the services being provided , but also noise and available capacity .
As far as ground handling services are concerned , we will indeed have to wait for a new evaluation by the Commission in which all Member States are included .
I concur with the suggestions to the Commission for points which need looking at in the future .
I am a bit more critical about the sections dealing with capacity .
The text urges the Commission to take major action .
The master plan is intended to be the key to tackling the aviation capacity problem on the ground .
A master plan does indeed offer a good overview of the current situation and can indicate problem areas .
However , it does not seem to me desirable that the Commission , with such a plan in hand , should force the Member States to take certain steps or indeed stand in their way .
The main purpose of a master plan is to promote international cooperation between all parties concerned , so that integrated solutions can be found for specific problem areas through good consultations and with respect for existing authorities .
I am pleased that some sections contain sensible comments on this .
My conclusion , Mr President , is therefore that I am able to support Mrs Jensen 's report .
I very much enjoyed working with her .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , when it comes to the issue of airport capacity , we have to distinguish between two issues .
We want to mitigate the negative effects of aviation , which is why we agree on emissions trading for the aviation industry .
We may not agree about the methodology or timescales involved , Mrs Lichtenberger , but in principle , we agree that the aviation sector should make its contribution to mitigating environmental impacts .
However , we must also have the courage , Mrs Lichtenberger , to say that for economic reasons we need growth in the aviation sector , both internally and in respect of third countries .
When it comes to the economy , jobs and citizens ' mobility , adequate airport capacity is essential , and it is essential for environmental reasons as well , by the way .
If the aircraft did not have to spend so long on the ground waiting for takeoff and did not have to spend so long stacking overhead before landing , just imagine what this would do to help the environment !
We have to recognise the fact that we need to develop our airports .
Mr Blokland is quite right : we do not want to take responsibility away from the Member States or regions , but in our experience there have been difficulties with airport expansion in many parts of Europe .
That is why our approach is right : we are requesting the Commission to put forward a coherent proposal on how we can have a European master plan and how we can introduce best practice so that we can all learn from each other and pursue this expansion effectively .
My second point relates to ground handling services .
I think we should wait for the new impact analysis .
I think that the basic Directive was very successful as the efficiency of ground handling services has been improved in recent years and the costs for passengers have been reduced .
As to whether we need further changes , that is an open question .
I would not wish to decide conclusively today .
I think we should wait for the outcome of the Commission 's analysis , which is expected this winter , and only then should we decide whether or not there is a need for revision .
We should not rush into any decisions today .
( ES ) Mr President , I would to begin by congratulating Mrs Jensen on her excellent report .
I believe that it will be very useful in terms of improving the Commission 's proposals and improving airports , where European citizens are increasingly obliged to ' camp out ' ; of course airports are almost like a second home to Members of the European Parliament .
I would also like to congratulate , in particular , Mr Barrot and his services for this procedure to push forward the preparation of the legislation .
Normally , and increasingly because of its complexity , this legislation gives rise to conflict and can raise suspicions , and has come to be known as the ' vague method ' .
In other words , it is good to hold very rigorous broad consultations to identify the strong points and the obstacles to be removed while making the most of all the good ideas available .
Mrs Jensen 's report is full of such good ideas .
In particular , I welcome the strong cooperation of , and mandate given to , Eurocontrol in the preparation of the new measures .
It is important to do away with any hint of confrontation between the few bodies responsible for the organisation of air transport .
I also believe that it is extremely important to strengthen all the intelligence systems in this area , starting with the CESAR traffic management system , that are going to help us not only to improve traffic but also , as far as possible , to reduce its environmental impact .
I am very hopeful , too , that this future action plan will help to give a considerable boost to the Galileo system .
In addition , I am very interested in the role that territorial cohesion is playing through regional airports , although I understand - and share - the reservations concerning the large-scale creation of local airports that are not sufficiently efficient or feasible .
It is thus necessary , too , to ensure that we manage future conflicts with neighbours over noise , pollution , even spatial use , and I think that in this regard it would be very interesting to be able to assess the new demands : the types of shuttles , private jets , open-air leisure aspects , etc .
Moreover , I support the proposals to strengthen social standards in the area of ground handling services , because subcontracting , which is increasingly used in this sector , does not always ensure sufficient protection of this social standards .
I also welcome Mrs Jensen 's proposal to ensure that users are consulted so that competition in the area of ground handling is truly effective .
Of course , we support , too , the creation of the Airport Capacity Observatory because we believe that with the Commission 's support it will be a positive tool for the future .
In conclusion , I would simply like the Commission to include in its future work the logistical aspect and relations with cargo aviation , which is becoming increasingly popular and is a possible alternative in terms of the ' co-modality ' suggested by the revision of the White Paper .
Mr President , this report makes good sense in saying that there should be an overall EU approach as regards the need for extra airport capacity .
This might mean that there would be seen to be less justification for all airports which see themselves as major hubs to expand .
If you look at Paris Charles De Gaulle , Schiphol , Frankfurt and London Heathrow all together , the conclusion might be , for instance , that there was no justification for a third runway at Heathrow .
I would not , though , want the report 's call for a master plan for enhanced airport capacity to be misunderstood as Brussels muscling in and telling national , regional and local authorities where to build new airports ; obviously , it just means pooling information and objectives .
Subsidiarity rules on any decisions whether or not to expand airports .
But there is a second danger of misunderstanding .
The report cites forecasts of demand increasing by around 5 % a year and says that , in 2025 , the demand for flights would be two and a half times higher than 2003 .
This , I am sure , should not be taken as succumbing to the discredited ' predict and provide ' policy .
I am not sure that the call in the report to accompany the growth of air transport by measures limiting its external cost is quite enough , because we know there is a lot we can and must do to at least moderate aviation growth to a sustainable level - whether through emissions trading , proper and fair taxation , building high-speed rail alternatives and so on - in order to combat global warming and safeguard against the dangers of air pollution and noise nuisance .
I was surprised to see that there was no opinion from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , so I am sure - and I hope - that the risk of lack of consistency between this report and the resolution last year on reducing the climate change impact of aviation will be avoided .
This report must be seen in the light of that resolution , and not in any way - and I am sure it is not the intention , at least of the rapporteur - giving comfort to this idea that you simply build airports based on predictions , many of them from airlines , about increased demand , without all the other measures that we know we need to take to have sustainable aviation .
( SV ) The report on airport capacity and ground handling is an own-initiative report with high-flying plans as regards central planning on the part of the EU .
We therefore have to ask what kind of society we want : a market economy or a planned economy ?
According to the report , Europe is facing a substantial increase in airport use and there is a need to optimise existing resources .
The European Parliament considers , however , that the Commission has not yet fully investigated the possibility of a global approach as regards the need for extra capacity .
There is mention of planning future investments and setting strategic axes .
It is thought that it is possible to anticipate the risks of a capacity crunch .
The European Parliament urges the Commission to take a top-down approach .
If no significant progress has been made by Member States on this issue by 2008 , measures must be taken and so on .
I do not believe in this global approach in principle .
I think that such centrally planned projects are doomed to failure .
In the vast majority of cases there is national competition between countries to meet air transport demand .
Some countries will fare well , other countries will do badly .
The countries that are successful will attract tourism and business .
Let the countries stand up to one another .
I also know from my own experience that in many countries private investors are building airport capacity and they are guided by investment decisions that are completely different from those taken by state bodies .
In some cases decisions are also taken regionally .
It is impossible to coordinate these three types of decision , private , public and regional .
We should therefore allow developments to take their course and only regulate what it absolutely necessary , namely the air transport management needed in order to achieve organised air transport systems in the EU .
My experience is that the costs of expanded airport capacity almost never tally .
Costs are often three to four times higher than estimated and projects take twice as long as originally envisaged .
Technical developments are also a factor of uncertainty .
Demand is shifting quickly .
Suddenly entirely new regions want transport .
Suddenly we want new technology with high-speed railways which perhaps make air transport connections less interesting .
So let us not believe in a global approach .
I do not think that we should return to the kind of central planning that existed in the former socialist countries .
I will not therefore be supporting this motion .
( RO ) I also want to congratulate Mrs. Jenzan for this report .
Europe needs economic development and , obviously , air transport development .
This is why I believe that the European programmes , such as Caesar and Clear Sky , will bring important contributions to the development of the European air sector .
In the first eleven months of last year alone , 225 new routes were developed , which actually means 1800 new flights every week .
Therefore , air transport has developed and the development of new airport capacities is required .
Unfortunately , big airports are crowded , there are very many flight delays , there is waiting time either on ground or in the air , which , on the one hand , contributes to pollution and , on the other hand , has certain social effects .
Nevertheless , we should not forget that the development of airport infrastructures requires a lot of time , between 5 and 10 years , and substantial investments .
This is why I believe it is important for the Member States - and I also refer to the new Member States - to be assisted in using the structural funds , the regional development funds for developing new airports .
Also , a framework plan for new airport capacities in Europe should be approached , at least simultaneously with or , if not , after the development of an action plan regarding the appropriate and efficient management of the existing airport capacities .
The approach of the need for additional airport capacities in Europe should be part of a strategy for the development of the passenger and goods air transport , not only in a European and continental context , but also an a larger scale .
Also , directives and regulations regarding airports should remain within the standards established and accepted by Annex No. 14 of the Chicago Convention .
If the Commission has proposals to improve such standards , it should present and support them in ICAO as well .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President , and I would like to congratulate you on your award .
Air transport is developing spectacularly , and traffic has trebled over the last 20 years .
This trend can be expected to continue , and this makes it urgent to optimise the capacity of European airports .
The strategy for the capacity , efficiency and security of European airports prioritises the optimised use and development of current capacity , aid for combined transport and reducing the environmental burden .
The recommendation is a complex one that requires a pragmatic attitude and dialogue by the relevant professional parties and authorities .
It may be a milestone in the formulation of a standardised European regulatory framework .
In harmony with the Lisbon Strategy , European airports play an important role in maintaining the economic and social competitiveness of the Community , in regional development , and now , in contrast with previous experience , they will be able to apply standardised rules in Europe .
When optimising capacity , it is important to pay attention to airport facilities , vehicles that transport passengers and ensuring that disabled people can approach aircraft , since this is the only way to ensure equality in air transport .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Thank you , Mr President .
Obviously I have listened very carefully to everything that has been said .
I would first like to thank Mrs Jensen sincerely for her report ; I see that it has earned a great deal of support from the House .
Mrs Jensen , we will use your observations , which I found extremely interesting , to best advantage .
I wish to add that , as a number of speakers said , air transport is developing at a rapid pace , and even though in certain cases high-speed rail transport may take up part of the market share , air transport is a means of travel that will continue to evolve in years to come : I think that this is certainly the case .
We must , then , go along with this development in air transport , and actually increasingly adapt it to the needs and wishes of users .
I would also say that in the main the entire problem of better adaptation of airport infrastructures to our needs depends on three issues .
The first issue is obviously the infrastructure .
Evidently , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot let it be said that the solution is to centralise .
It is not a matter of centralising , but rather of coordinating and exchanging good practices .
I think all this is essential for all our citizens , and so we must make an attempt to optimise use of existing infrastructures before we can think of new investment .
What we need is better coordination and , Mr President , I wish to thank the various committees that delivered an opinion on this matter : the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , the Committee on Regional Development , and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I feel that all of their contributions shed some much-needed light on the report .
The first issue , then , is infrastructure .
The second , as Mrs Ayala rightly stressed , is the use of satellite navigation technology , the modernisation of air traffic control , and this is essential .
If we have functional groups for air traffic control , we will actually have a chance of reducing delays and planes going round and round in the sky unable to land .
This second issue is extremely important .
The third concerns ground handling services , which must be effective and productive .
On the basis of these three issues , we must try to optimise the facilities connected with air transport , which is a rapidly developing sector .
I intend to answer a few questions , Mr President , and I do apologise for not answering them all .
I wish to reply to Mr Bradbourn 's question on data .
Concerning the tags : use of these is restricted to the terminal area , there is no recording of data and , most importantly , the tags are used in full compliance with the common rules governing the protection of personal information .
There is no question of creating an exception to these rules .
In relation to your Committee on Regional Development , Mr Janowski , obviously major hubs cannot grow infinitely .
What is required is better use of existing capacities .
The role of regional airports will be enhanced .
You also insisted , and rightly so , on airport connections in their own region , their ' interland ' , through a number of rapid means of transport , especially rail transport .
Some of you asked me about ground handling .
Obviously today , as Mr Jarzembowski said , we cannot commit a new directive to cover ground handling services , since we have not yet received the impact analysis , and we prefer to focus on applying the existing Directive .
We are therefore focusing on monitoring proper application of the existing Directive .
In relation to the new Member States , we have requested precise information on an airport-by-airport basis in relation to the number of providers , their dependence on the airport and the conditions for the award of contracts , and if we are not satisfied with the replies we can always invoke the infringement proceedings that apply in such cases .
I must also say that , if we were in fact compelled to change this directive on ground handling services , we would pay close attention to the social effects of changes to the rules .
Some mention has also been made - by your Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - of the need for better use of infrastructures at night with quieter planes .
I would be tempted to say yes , but in the medium and long term .
We have not come that far yet .
I wish to finish by mentioned the environmental problems : as air traffic develops we must evidently do all we can to ensure that it does not impede our fight against global warming .
This is why Europe has adopted quite an avant-garde approach by supporting the idea of making air transport join the emissions trading system .
As far as airport infrastructures are concerned , we are also worried about all the problems that may be caused here , particularly the nuisance value for local residents and noise levels .
Mr President , such a productive debate has not enabled me to find answers for everything but , as a number of speakers said , obviously Mrs Jensen 's report forms an excellent basis on which to build .
I will follow Parliament 's requests with great interest in an attempt to provide an appropriate response .
I might also say that in any case I am glad to have worked in close cooperation with the EP for the benefit of our citizens .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at voting time , to be held in a few minutes .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) It is common knowledge that the environmental damage that goes with flying , excluding the emission of greenhouse gases , largely originates in take-off , landing and taxiing .
This primarily hits the area around airports and those who live there .
Their demands for reducing airport traffic are justified .
On the other hand , flying is part of our everyday life , and our way of life has changed with its having become accessible to those on low incomes , pensioners and students .
Even the European Union could not work if we could not get from Budapest , Athens or Helsinki to Brussels in a matter of hours .
The solution is therefore to reorganise airport traffic in an environmentally conscious way .
Unnecessarily long taxiing of aircraft on the ground and circling for a long time over airports must be stopped .
Pollution of the area around airports would be greatly reduced if millions of passengers used the train or metro system to reach the airport instead of cars .
Railway and metro lines to airports must therefore be built in parallel with airport development , and no new international airport should be built without suitable rail links .
in writing . - ( RO ) The tremendous increase in air traffic intensifies problems related to congestion in airports and overloads the traffic control systems .
There are big problems caused by the fragmentation of the European airspace , which causes delays and inefficiency .
The big airports are ever closer to the maximum limit of their capacities , some of them have already reached it and , under the present conditions , it is hard to believe that new airlines could enter the market .
Nevertheless , through efficient management and integrated development , we could ensure equitable and undiscriminating access of all existent and potential operators to airport infrastructures .
Solving these problems requires a long-term strategic approach , especially for building new capacities or extending the existent ones .
For this reason , it is very important to coordinate national and cross-border initiatives in order to optimize the existent capacities , improve the framework for building new airport infrastructures , develop new technical solutions , promote co-modalities by interconnecting various modes of transport and ensure safe transport by complying with all the legal provisions regarding security and environmental protection .
The extension of airport capacities is inevitable and should mandatorily be correlated with solid regulations on noise reduction , as well as on reduction of aircraft emissions .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.50 and resumed at 11.00 )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Conclusion of agreements under Article XXI GATS on the necessary compensatory adjustments resulting from the enlargements of 1995 and 2004 ( vote )
- Report : Helmuth Markov
2 .
Accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Convention on the law applicable to contractual obligations ( vote )
- Report : Cristian Dumitrescu
3 .
Collection and management of data on the Common Fisheries Policy ( vote )
- Report : Paulo Casaca
4 .
Financing the common agricultural policy ( vote )
- Report : Jorgo Chatzimarkakis
- Before the final vote :
( DE ) Madam President , in this House , neither the lift system nor the bell is working .
That is the reason why many of us did not manage to get here on time , so perhaps we could ask the relevant services to get the bell to actually ring , please .
The vote was scheduled for 11.00 and we have tried to start on time .
5 .
EC-USA air transport agreement ( vote )
- Report : Saïd El Khadraoui
6 .
Composition of the European Parliament ( vote )
- Report : Alain Lamassoure , Adrian Severin
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would just like to make a clarification , because several different terms are used in the report and in the amendments , and I would like everybody to know what we are going to vote on .
There are a number of amendments by Mr Tajani and others which , when speaking about ' citizens ' , have in mind national citizens and not European citizens .
When voting one way or the other on those amendments , please bear in mind that they are not talking about European citizens , but national citizens .
I am sure everybody understands that this is an important difference .
Thank you for your clarification .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like some clarification from the rapporteurs and Parliamentary officials .
I wish to know whether , if Amendment 1 , first signatory Mr Mayor Oreja , were to be adopted , Amendment 51 would fall .
I think this is a mistake , and that if Amendment 1 by Mr Mayor Oreja were to be adopted , Amendment 51 would not fall , but it would change the voting intention of the Italian delegation .
Mr Tajani , one of the co-rapporteurs will speak on that matter when we get to that point .
I think you are right but , for the moment , let us proceed .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to point out that , ever since Maastricht , European citizenship has coincided with national citizenship in all of the Treaties .
They are the very same , identical thing .
Is that fact clear to my colleague Mr Severin ?
( The vote was suspended for a few moments owing to technical problems )
Madam President , I kept the numbers of votes ' for ' and ' against ' for the last two recorded votes and they were identical .
That was when we had the first problem .
You may care to take the vote on amendment 21 by the IND / DEM Group again .
I think you are absolutely right .
I , too , was worried by what was happening at that stage .
( The vote was suspended again for a few moments )
( FR ) Madam President , we have no roll-call vote for the other reports .
Perhaps we could begin by voting on the reports that do not require a roll-call vote , if you do not mind , so that we can keep the sitting moving ?
The problem is , we are in mid-report , so I am afraid we do have to conclude it before we can take something else .
- Before the vote on Amendment 1 :

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , I do apologise to everyone for the question due to my inexperience : this is only my third term in the House .
If I have understood correctly , if Amendment 1 were adopted this would retain the text in the paragraph of the amendment and remove the figures corresponding to the number of seats in the report .
Is this how I should take it ?
I am asking the authors of the amendment : is that the way everyone understands it ?
This means I have made a mistake , and therefore I apologise to those involved .
I recommended a positive vote when drawing up the PPE-DE voting list , because I thought that the amendment concerned only the text .
However , where figures are concerned , for the PPE-DE Group the instruction changes to a free vote , and along with my co-rapporteur I invite all those who wish to support the proposals of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the rapporteurs to vote against Amendment 1 .
( Applause )
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is still not clear whether Amendment 1 is compatible with Amendment 51 .
If Amendment 1 is compatible with Amendment 51 , as I believe it is , the Italian delegation will vote in favour of Amendment 1 , but we do need this clarification .
This amendment will dispose of all the others .
Our congratulations to our co-rapporteurs , and our thanks to our technicians .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Welcome
I now have great pleasure in greeting here today a delegation of MPs and other visitors from the New Zealand Parliament and the Mission of New Zealand to the European Union , who are now with us in the distinguished visitors ' gallery .
( Applause )
The members of the delegation are in Brussels to meet with their counterparts from the European Parliament at the 14th European Parliament / New Zealand Interparliamentary Meeting .
They are leaving Brussels for West Flanders after their meetings this afternoon , where they will attend a number of events tomorrow commemorating the 90th anniversary of the Battle of Passchendaele .
I wish the delegation well for the remainder of their stay in the European Union .
1 .
The humanitarian situation in Gaza ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution : the humanitarian situation in Gaza
- Before the vote on paragraph 5 :
Madam President , I would like to add the words ' the State of ' before Israel in paragraph 5 .
The reason for this is that some Members , including Mr Davies , inform me that Hamas recognises Israel , but not the State of Israel .
It is the State of Israel that needs recognition .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
2 .
Murder of women in Mexico and Central America ( vote )
- Report : Raül Romeva i Rueda
- before the vote on Amendment 6 :
( FR ) Madam President , please allow me to table an oral amendment on behalf of the PPE-DE Group to its Amendment 6 .
We wish to add ' that sentence being the subject of a pending appeal ' at the end of recital R.
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on recital S :
Madam President , this is an oral amendment to Amendment 7 on Recital S , and it is to replace the words ' authors of crimes ' with the words ' perpetrators of crimes ' .
This is necessary , otherwise the sentence will have no meaning in English .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
3 .
Combating cigarette smuggling ( EC-Philip Morris agreement ) ( vote )
- Report : Bart Staes
4 .
Airport capacity and ground handling ( vote )
- Report : Anne E. Jensen
Voting time ( continued )
Explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) The harmonisation and reliability of data and information collected on marine activities is of critical importance for the fisheries sector and all efforts undertaken to improve their quality should be supported .
Given the sector 's current needs and ecosystem concerns , the European Commission has proposed that Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1543 / 2000 be amended while the European Parliament assesses a proposal for a Council regulation on a new Community framework for the collection , management and use of data in the fisheries sector .
It is therefore necessary to amend the existing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1543 / 2000 in order to prevent an overlap between the old and the new regulations .
The current Commission proposal makes these necessary and logical changes and was unanimously approved by the Committee on Fisheries .
It also now merits my vote in favour in plenary .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which approves a Commission proposal amending ( and preparing for the repeal of ) Regulation 1543 / 2000 ( a Community framework for the collection and management of the data needed to conduct the common fisheries policy ) .
The Commission aims to bring in a new , more comprehensive data collection regulation in 2008 ; this amendment allows for a better transition by removing current requirements to submit six-year national programmes for the collection and management of data from 2007 to 2012 .
Instead , transitional programmes covering the years 2007 and 2008 are to be drawn up .
in writing . - UKIP wish to see the common agricultural policy abolished .
Therefore , under no circumstances can we vote for a report that gives even more power to a Commission whose legitimacy we do not recognise .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the Chatzimarkakis report , which seeks to improve the CAP 's budgetary execution and transparency , in other words to identify the beneficiaries of aid for agriculture .
I feel the legitimacy of the CAP , one of the largest items of EU expenditure , is all too often called into question by the opacity with which agricultural aid is managed .
The merit of this report is that it clarifies the situation .
I am most satisfied by the Internet postings of all the national lists of direct beneficiaries of EU aid , and the links to be set up between the web pages of the Commission and the Member State payment bodies .
Monitoring of CAP financing , however , must be carried out in strict compliance with the regulations governing data protection .
That is why I voted against the amendments requiring the registration or recording of users consulting the data , since transparency must be guaranteed on both sides .
I also believe that the data on the payments of the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ought to be broken down in order to identify the major beneficiaries .
in writing . - ( PT ) We regard as essential the need expressed in the Commission proposal , and highlighted in the parliamentary report , to increase transparency , both in the financing of the common agricultural policy and in the provision of accounts in respect of the expenditure practices of the EU institutions .
It is also essential to improve budgetary control .
However , we are disappointed at the proposal 's limited scope and the fact that the European Parliament has not been ambitious enough in either its report or its amendments .
In our opinion , there are still some proposals of no practical use which in fact limit the freedoms and guarantees of citizens , such as the requirement for ' those using , or looking at , the data [ on the Internet to ] sign on or register ' .
In addition , there is some ambiguity , both in the Commission 's proposal and in the EP 's report , with regard to the continued publication of information .
It is proposed , from the start , to carry out ' an assessment of the advantages or otherwise of the publication of this data ' in the future .
Another debatable issue is the reinforcement of the Commission 's power of control over the Member States .
Finally , we consider that the best way of enhancing ' transparency and public understanding of the common agricultural policy ' - an objective expressed in the proposal - is through its complete overhaul .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Commission 's proposal to make certain amendments to Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1290 / 2005 on the financing of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is necessary in order to make this process more transparent .
I believe that improved transparency , together with better use of the agricultural funds , would help to eliminate the European population 's distrust of the CAP and the European institutions .
I am therefore voting in favour of Mr Chatzimarkakis 's report , which reiterates the Commission 's position and adds certain amendments that I regard as important .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which proposes a range of improvements to the transparency of the CAP .
It calls on national lists of recipients of EU direct farm aid to be published on the internet .
The UK already does this , and I would like to see other states doing the same .
The report also calls for better procedures to take when publication requirements are not followed , and for data protection to be included in the Commission regulation itself .
in writing . - ( DE ) Across the board , our small farmers , who are the salt of the earth , are being submerged in a sea of irrelevant bureaucracy and subjected to satellite surveillance , and woe betide them if their fence is standing a little too far to the right or the left .
It is time for some humanity again , instead of beating our hardworking small farmers senseless with bureaucratic cudgels .
The black sheep who fabricate entire fields and business activities and who cause BSE and other scandals should be named and shamed .
It is a mockery , however , to say that prices are rising so this could justify cutting subsidies .
Austrian organic farmers were getting around seven schillings - equivalent to around 95 cent - per litre of milk before accession .
Today , they get just 30 cent , which means that they are losing thousands of euros , and at the same time they are having to contend with ever-changing bureaucratic regulations that make their lives even more difficult !
The ' health check ' envisaged must therefore serve only one purpose : to create a better , more reliable and longer-lasting framework , not to bring about reform by brute force and cause our last remaining farmers to throw in the towel .
In view of the massive exodus from farming in Europe , the idea that unspent agricultural funding could be used for prestige projects such as Galileo must be vigorously rejected .
We must retain our self-sufficiency capacity at all costs , and should not offer ourselves as hostages to fortune to the genetic engineering companies .
in writing . - ( SV ) Jorgo Chatzimarkaki 's report further reinforces the Commission 's initiative to increase the legitimacy of EU policies through disclosure of full details of expenditure practices and improved accounting and budgetary control in the agricultural sector , among other things as a result of a number of changes .
I supported the parts of the report that sought to enhance public transparency regarding the use of Community funds and the publication of information on beneficiaries .
I likewise supported the need for Member States to ensure annual ex-post publication , via the Internet , of the beneficiaries of the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the amounts received per beneficiary under each of these Funds .
However , I opposed the provisions under which those using or looking at information are required to sign on or register because this runs counter to the Swedish principle of the right to anonymity in connection with the use of such public information .
My intentions to vote against Amendment 20 in view of the strong Swedish principle of public access to official documents have been entered in the minutes , after a vote on my behalf was cast incorrectly .
in writing . - UKIP abstained on this report as we do not recognise the legitimacy of Parliament .
This in no way reflects our views on the content of the report .
UKIP wish to see the common agricultural policy abolished .
Therefore , under no circumstances can we vote for a report that gives even more power to a Commission whose legitimacy we do not recognise .
in writing . - ( PT ) The negotiations conducted by the European Commission under a mandate received from the Council have the central objective of establishing an Open Aviation Area ( OAA ) between the EU and the US , going beyond the bilateral agreements that currently exist between individual Member States and the US .
The aim is to create a single liberalised market for air transport between the EU and the US , ' in which investment could flow freely and in which European and US airlines would be able to provide air services without any restriction , including in the domestic markets of both parties ' .
The EU 's aim is to ensure reciprocity by the US in the liberalisation of air transport , in particular with regard to removing ' the existing legal restrictions on foreign ownership and control of US airlines and on cabotage ' and also with regard to the ' right of establishment ' and ' State aid ' .
This is why we reiterate that it should be the Member States and not the Community concluding this type of agreement , all the more so as this issue is of such strategic importance and ' could serve as a model for further liberalisation and regulatory convergence worldwide ' .
We therefore restate our opposition to the pursuit of the liberalisation of this important public service in each country .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a decision of the Council and the representatives of the governments of the Member States of the European Union , meeting within the Council , on the conclusion and temporary implementation of the Air Transport Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , on the one hand , and the United States of America , on the other hand ( 8044 / 3 / 2007 - - C6-0210 / 2007 - .
Mr El Khadraoui rightly pointed out the importance of creating an Open Aviation Area between the EU and the US , thus allowing the emergence of a single market for air transport between the EU and the US .
I support the view that this would enable investment to flow freely and EU and US airlines to provide air services without any restriction , including in the domestic markets of both parties .
That represents a mayor step forward .
It was entirely appropriate to raise the issue of environmental protection in this context .
The aviation sector has several negative environmental effects , in particular as a source of noise and as a contributor to climate change .
I therefore agree with the provision calling on both the EU and the US to take effective measures to reduce the negative environmental impact of aviation .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , which endorses plans to liberalise air transport arrangements between the EU and the United States of America .
This levels the playing field for European airlines flying to the US , and should allow more rational construction of routes , leading to better services and more efficient routing of flights .
In increasing the number of possible transatlantic routes it may even lead to lower fares for passengers .
in writing . - ( PT ) The conclusion of this agreement is intended to meet long-standing needs on both sides of the Atlantic , with obvious benefits for consumers resulting from further liberalisation and regulatory convergence worldwide .
For the EU , it will also serve to guarantee compliance with Community legislation .
The work carried out to conclude this agreement must therefore be applauded as the new legal framework ensures wide-ranging agreement on the creation of an integrated transatlantic aviation market that will be to the benefit of both consumers and companies .
However , on reading this agreement , it is apparent that the removal of restrictions on foreign control of US airlines is somewhat disproportionate and , in addition , cabotage has not been included .
The European Parliament 's suggestion to include subsequent stages , deadlines for conclusion and consequences of any non-compliance in this phased approach to the agreement is therefore crucial and should be applauded .
Furthermore , conditions have been laid down for re-establishing full reciprocity in the EU-US aviation market if the negotiations do not achieve the balance desired by both parties .
To sum up , this is a good start towards objectives not yet achieved .
in writing . - I am convinced that there is a need for such an agreement but it has to be one which can be delivered on both sides .
Airports in south-east England have had to open ' aircraft slots ' for USA partner airlines and potentially many others .
The reverse is not true in the USA .
' Freedom rights ' are not granted to EU airlines for intra-USA flights .
This means that flights emanating from Gatwick to New York cannot fly to Los Angeles , but USA flights to Gatwick can fly to anywhere they want in the EU .
Similarly , there is no relaxation of the foreign ownership rules of USA airlines .
There is a clear lack of balance in the first stage agreement ; this lack of balance against the EU has to be addressed urgently in the second stage negotiations .
I will be looking to reinforce this effort within the Transatlantic Legislators ' Dialogue .
( NL ) Madam President , I am not going to go over yesterday 's debate again .
I explained then that for us the Lamassoure report is tantamount to putting the cart before the horse , as we still do not have a valid transitional treaty , we still do not have a new treaty .
The problem with this report it that it lets loose the typical Loch Ness monster of the Eurofederalists again , that is the spectre of transnational lists , on the basis of which some Members of the European Parliament would be elected .
Well then , I still proceed from the assumption that we here are representatives of our electorates in the Member States , of our populations in the Member States , and not just abstract citizens of the European Union .
( PL ) Madam President , I believe a house should be built upwards from its foundations , not the other way round , which is effectively what the report by Mr Lamassoure and Mr Severin is doing .
The Treaty on European Union constitutes the foundations .
The Treaty must first be ratified , and I believe ratification is to take place within the next few weeks .
That is one reason why I voted against this report , even though it contains many good points .
Another reason why I voted against it is that I do not agree with my country being represented by as many as three fewer Members than it currently is .
The number of Polish Members would be reduced from 54 to 51 .
These are my reasons for voting against the report .
( ES ) Actually , yesterday I submitted my explanation of vote in writing and I received a response to the effect that it was still being dealt with , and so on .
That is one thing .
However , my name is Irujo Amezaga .
' Amenaza ' means something completely different in Spanish : it means ' threat ' and I am do not think I am that just yet .
In any case , my explanation of vote was on the Lamassoure report .
I voted against this report and I acknowledge that the composition of the European Parliament is a difficult issue .
My amendment on supra-state constituencies that recognised political and cultural realities and went beyond the borders of the current Member States was rejected in committee .
If we really want a Union of the European people , as stated in the EC Treaty , this Parliament should be open to other types of realities .
I am sorry for my pronunciation - my Spanish lessons are continuing .
in writing . - In regard to the future composition of the European Parliament , I voted against the unwarranted attempt ( Amendment 26 ) to inflate the representation of the Republic of Ireland to 13 MEPs .
Northern Ireland has a population of 1.7 million and three MEPs ; the Republic of Ireland 's population is 4.3 million , yet under Amendment 26 it would have 13 MEPs , meaning a representative for every 330 000 citizens , whereas in Northern Ireland the ratio is one MEP to every 630 000 citizens .
Clearly , the Republic of Ireland already is very generously provided for and should count itself lucky to hold 12 seats .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted in favour of the report .
We believe that the principle of degressive proportionality is reasonable and has good chances of being supported by the EU 's Heads of State and Government .
The other proposals that have been put forward have no realistic chance of being accepted at the summit .
The report gives Sweden 20 seats rather than the 18 we would get if the Treaty of Nice were to apply .
It is therefore important for the treaty to be adopted .
Otherwise the Treaty of Nice will apply , which would mean that all the Member States except Germany would lose seats .
The questions of how to define the concept of citizen and how to work out the population base governing the distribution of seats must be investigated .
We are very doubtful about trans-national lists for European Parliament elections .
If the matter is investigated , however , we may accept it .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by my colleagues Alain Lamassoure and Adrian Severin on the composition of the European Parliament .
They both knew that the current EP composition , established by the 2005 Act of Accession of Bulgaria and Romania , was to be modified , even if that meant going back to the provisions of the Treaty of Nice .
I applaud Alain Lamassoure 's bid to rally his political family and regret that a number of national attitudes in disagreement with the Council decisions required some awkward debate , and eventually arbitration in plenary .
This debate has highlighted the extent of national selfishness in some cases .
Although I have my reservations about the idea of examining the possibility of electing some Members on transnational lists , I am happy with Annex 2 of the resolution , which requires the IGC to ask Parliament for a draft providing for the election of its Members by direct universal suffrage that provides a more accurate definition of the notion of ' citizens ' in Article 9 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the EU .
The concept of a European citizen must certainly be defined .
in writing . - I voted against Amendment 25 because , while the UK is still a member of the EU , the number of MEPs representing the UK should not be reduced at all .
Therefore , to vote in favour of 74 MEPs would have been to vote for a reduction of four .
Under the proposed principle of ' degressive proportionality ' , which is yet to be defined , small countries and microstates would be disproportionately represented while larger states , such as the UK , would be under-represented .
Considering that large numbers of the population of Eastern Europe have migrated to the UK since 2004 , and that they are currently entitled to vote in European Parliament elections , the number of UK MEPs should at least remain at its current 78 , if not be increased .
in writing . - During the vote on the Lamassoure report we have voted consistently for a fair distribution of seats between the Member States and in particular for 13 seats for Ireland .
We campaigned throughout this process for 13 seats for our country .
The arguments in favour are well known .
We have a rapidly growing population in Ireland - it is the fastest-growing population in Europe , both in terms of natural increase in population as well as overall growth .
We were also one of the biggest losers proportionally under the Nice Treaty in terms of seats in the European Parliament .
Unfortunately the Irish Government did little to support the campaign to retain our current allocation of 13 seats .
Our vote today will at least ensure that Ireland 's allocation of seats will not fall below 12 for the next mandate , with provision for a full review before 2014 including on the vexed question of the use of a ' population vs. citizen ' statistical basis for assessing the MEP allocation in Member States .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the Lamassoure report on the distribution of EP seats after the legislative elections in 2009 .
The new distribution balances out the number of seats in accordance with population trends in the Member States .
I am glad that France has two more MEPs than those envisaged by the revised Treaty of Nice .
I also support the idea that the new distribution ought to be reviewed well in advance of the 2014-2019 parliamentary term in order to ensure a fair and objective system for the distribution of seats in Parliament , taking account of population changes , which would prevent the usual log-rolling between Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Members elected by the Social Democratic Party ( SDP ) , although they consider that this is not a perfect solution and that it fails to impose a requirement for further negotiations in the context of future enlargements , support Mr Lamassoure 's report on the composition of the European Parliament for three reasons :
1 .
Some Member States do not agree with simply defining the general principles and require , as a condition of approval , the strict definition of the EP 's composition before they will accept the Reform Treaty .
This could compromise the main priority of the Portuguese Presidency of the Council .
2 .
Mr Lamassoure has proposed a balanced compromise solution , which provides for a minimum limit guaranteeing the plurality of the representation of the smaller states and which takes account of the demographic size of the other states through a principle of degressive proportionality , ensuring a fair relationship between the states .
3 .
It therefore blocks the unacceptable attempts of the German , Polish , Spanish and Italian Members to reinforce the weight of the more populous states by reducing the representation of the medium-sized states such as Portugal .
in writing . - I have to express my disquiet about the principle embodied in the very notion of presenting this report to plenary .
Having a Parliament determine the basis of its own composition seems to me to be fundamentally flawed .
As one of my Irish colleagues said in the debate , ' Turkeys don 't vote for Christmas ' .
I have been a Member of this House since 1984 , when we had 434 Members , and now we have 785 Members .
With each successive growth in numbers of parliamentarians , working groups , committees and plenaries have become unwieldy and increasingly ineffective .
This is to be institutionalised here with a supposed ' reduction ' to 750 Members , a size 30-40 % too large to be effective , unless we want to model ourselves on China 's largely ornamental 3 000-strong National People 's Congress .
The other anomaly that strikes me is that , while we are allowed to select our composition , a vitally important institutional decision for the whole of the European institutions and the Union itself , we are not allowed to choose our own meeting place because of the recalcitrance of one Member State and instead are ' sold a pup ' by the City of Strasbourg that is riddled with asbestos .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am sorry it has not proved possible to find a new and permanent solution for the distribution of seats in the European Parliament between the various Member States of the Union .
The current method of distribution is temporary , and only applies to the next parliamentary term .
The method applied for distribution of seats is not clear and comprehensible to EU citizens .
In addition to application of the principle of degressive proportionality , political criteria also had a significant bearing on the distribution of seats in Parliament .
This was detrimental to representation of the citizens , which should actually be the governing principle .
Furthermore , the proposed distribution of seats is based on the number of inhabitants of a given Member State , rather than on the number of citizens of the state concerned .
My country , Poland , for example , would therefore lose out due to the temporary economic migration of some two million of its citizens who are currently employed in other Member States of the Union .
Incidentally , it should also be pointed out that this is illogical , since the EU encourages worker mobility .
We would like to reiterate our warning that the principles by which the Union is governed appear overly complicated to its citizens .
The latter are therefore feeling more and more misgivings about the Union 's institutions .
in writing . - ( SV ) We are firmly opposed to the idea of one constituency across the entire EU with perhaps 10 % of the European Parliament 's seats .
Creating a separate EU constituency is an artificial way to try to create a European demos .
There is no common political arena in Europe with media or debate covering all the Member States .
Each country has its own political agenda .
An attempt to break barriers of language and tradition by creating EU parties , entirely dependent on EU contributions , is doomed to failure .
We recall that 54.4 % of voters stayed at home in the 2004 European Parliament elections .
The ' stay-at-home party ' is the biggest party in the European Parliament elections .
There is no enthusiasm for European Parliament elections in the new Member States either .
In Slovakia the turn-out was 16.96 % in 2004 .
With any enlargement of the EU to countries such as Ukraine and Turkey the present Member States will have their delegations cut back .
This affects the smaller groups and reduces political diversity .
There will be no place for regional parties or minority parties in the European Parliament .
Both the Christian Democrats / Conservatives ( PPE-DE ) and the Socialists ( PSE ) would seem to have a hidden agenda of trying to create a two-party system in the European Parliament .
We are voting in favour of the report , not because it is excellent , but because it represents an improvement .
in writing . - ( PT ) We must be clear on this as there are many numbers :
1 .
This proposal means that , since 1999 , Portugal has firstly gone from 25 to 24 Members and will now be reduced to 22 , whereas Germany kept its 99 Members , which will now be reduced to 96 .
In other words , Portugal has lost 12 % and Germany has lost 3 % .
2 .
The six most populous countries currently hold around 56 % of the seats in the European Parliament .
With this proposal their control is fully maintained at 56 % .
In other words , they have given nothing .
Therefore , through the current reform of the Treaties , the major powers are reasserting their control over the Council , by applying the demographic criterion without any weighting , and are maintaining their full control over the EP .
Portugal is losing out !
If some are in control , others must be ...
In order to conceal their connivance with such an unacceptable situation , some are saying that it could be worse .
Others think that it is natural that only some countries should be able to defend their interests ... , at the expense of the interests of others .
Finally , but without forgetting other important aspects - such as the rejection of the creation of a supranational electoral body or the fact that the fewer Members Portugal has , the less they will represent the political plurality existing in our country - we reiterate that a fair solution at institutional level must without question respect the principle of cooperation between sovereign states with equal rights .
in writing . - I am voting for Amendment 26 , which argues that Ireland should retain the 13 seats it currently has .
Under the Nice Treaty , Ireland was allocated 12 seats ; however , since the Nice Treaty , Ireland 's population has increased by 12 % .
It is the fastest-growing population in the EU , in terms of national increase and overall growth .
This report gives Ireland an allocation of 12 seats - three less than the 15 that Ireland had for the 1999-2004 term , which means we will lose 20 % of our quota from 2004 .
in writing . - British Conservatives are opposed to the EU Constitution and to the draft EU Reform Treaty .
We do not agree with the terms of the draft IGC mandate delivered by the European Council or the text of the draft Treaty published on 5 October .
In the context of the request by the Council for an opinion by the European Parliament on the future composition of the European Parliament , British Conservatives have abstained on the Lamassoure-Severin Report .
We have done so because we disagree with the model and methodology proposed by the co-rapporteurs , which we believe is unsustainable in the long term .
We also disagree with the call for the election of MEPs on transnational lists .
We also deeply regret the fact that the important historical parity on this issue that existed between the UK , France and Italy has been abandoned .
We are nonetheless determined to pursue the best interests of the people of the United Kingdom who we believe are currently numerically under-represented in the European Parliament .
These factors have determined our position in voting on this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) How can a report be submitted to the representatives of Member States using legal and institutional notions that are simultaneously hazy , new , dangerous and utopian ?
Degressive proportionality , the main feature of the report , means nothing beyond the fact that larger states will again lose seats to smaller states .
It is true that at the European Council meeting in Nice Mr Chirac originally initiated the process by agreeing for the first time to uncouple France with respect to Germany , contrary to the spirit of the Treaties .
As for electing Members from transnational lists , it is obvious what the aim is here : to get rid of politically incorrect parties that do not accept the languid social-democrat consensus , and to remove any reference to anything that is still the regal domain of the nation states .
We obviously cannot accept this .
The notion of European citizen put forward by the rapporteurs is both dangerous and utopian , and in fact it is totalitarian .
It implies that nationality is a thing of the past and that the brave new world consists of a new ' denationalised ' man , bereft of his roots , his history and his culture .
For all these reasons , we feel that the Lamassoure report is an unacceptable legal , political and institutional regression .
The distribution of seats in Parliament between the Member States is not based on objective population figures but on promises made in the past and on negotiations that have been won or lost .
That is why the large countries - France , Italy and the United Kingdom - always have the same number of seats despite having different populations , as do Spain and Poland .
The same applies to Greece , Portugal , Belgium , the Czech Republic and Hungary .
Some countries are underrepresented , such as the Netherlands , which was foolish enough in 2000 to settle for fewer seats in Parliament in exchange for more votes in the Council .
We support the rapporteurs ' proposal because it is closer to a fair distribution than previous proposals .
We reject all the amendments that want a less fair distribution , no matter who they favour , or that make a distinction between ' citizens ' and other inhabitants when calculating the population of each country .
We support the amendments that automatically couple the future distribution of seats to the populations of the Member States .
We reject future reductions in the number of seats per Member State if they do not result from population decrease , but from the maximum of 750 seats or from the search for scope to elect a proportion of Members from transnational lists .
With that proviso we vote in favour .
in writing . - I voted for and welcome the Lamassoure-Severin Report on the composition of the European Parliament .
However , I find it rather strange that Parliament has the right to decide on the distribution of its seats but not on where it sits .
It is clear that the Council is incapable of sorting out the mess of Parliament having three locations and I call on it to follow the logic of giving Parliament the right to allocate its seats by giving it the right to decide where it meets .
This report recommends a new , fairer composition for the European Parliament to apply to the 2009-2014 Parliament .
The report 's operating principle of degressive proportionality , which calls for bigger Member States to accept fewer MEPs than a strict proportional distribution would allow , is one I agree with .
It will ensure that smaller Member States have viable parliamentary delegations , and that Parliament can return to a slightly more reasonable size of 750 .
in writing . - ( PT ) Given the need to alter the composition of the European Parliament due to past and future enlargements , I believe that the solution adopted in this report has the virtues of being consistent with what has already been agreed ( Nice ) , of not increasing the control of the most populous states over the others , by maintaining a model of balance between states which is quite understandable , and of helping to reduce the difficulties associated with the adoption of the Reform Treaty .
Therefore , despite having preferred , as apparent from the voting , a model based on the concept of citizenship and not residence - given that the link between citizens and the European Union must be one of citizenship and not residence - I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - Today 's vote was crucial for the future working of the EP .
It was necessary to have , on such a sensitive issue , a firm political indication from the EP towards the European Council , showing that national interests can be overcome to agree on a better system than the one laid down by the Nice Treaty .
Even if the proposal made today is far from being perfect , it is fairer than the distribution of seats laid down by the Nice Treaty .
After the EP unanimously called on the Council to define the term ' citizens ' as provided in Article 9a ( 2 ) in good time before the next elections in 2014 , I decided , in the interest of my country and the working of the EP , to vote in favour of the report , as this shows some progress in relation to what had been agreed upon before .
in writing . - ( SV ) The importance of the issue should not be overestimated .
A new distribution of Members among the Member States will not change the current developments in the EU .
The majority will continue to remain with the economic liberals and federalists in Parliament .
However , the report clearly expresses principles governing a distribution that by its nature will be approximate in the final analysis .
The distribution will be even better than the current situation , as the biggest country gets fewer members whilst the smallest ones get more .
I therefore voted in favour of the report , even though there are individual paragraphs that I do not support , in particular the provisions on trans-national lists and European parties .
The Greek Communist Party in the European Parliament voted against the Lamassoure-Severin report because it further strengthens the confrontational nature of the European Parliament .
in writing . - I voted against Amendment 25 because , while the UK is still a member of the EU , the number of MEPs representing the UK should not be reduced at all .
Therefore , to vote in favour of 74 MEPs would have been to vote for a reduction of four .
Under the proposed principle of ' degressive proportionality ' , which is yet to be defined , small countries and microstates would be disproportionately represented while larger states , such as the UK , would be under-represented .
Considering that large numbers of the population of Eastern Europe have migrated to the UK since 2004 , and that they are currently entitled to vote in European Parliamentary elections , the number of UK MEPs should at least remain at its current 78 , if not be increased .
in writing . - ( SV ) Sweden should hold a referendum on the new constitution in order to obtain exceptions and an ' opt-in ' clause ( like the United Kingdom ) .
With such an opt-in clause , for example , Sweden gets the right to decide itself whether , and if so when , to introduce the euro and to sign up to the Social Charter .
However , this does not mean that I do not want a clear document as the basis for the EU which plainly defines the EU 's field of competence .
Such a document must contain , among other things , rules on the distribution of seats in Parliament .
I am therefore prepared to support this part of the proposal for a new EU constitution specifically relating to the distribution of seats .
The fact is that unless the proposal on the distribution of seats comes into being in accordance with the proposal for a new EU constitution , there is a great risk that we will have to go back to the Treaty of Nice .
The consequence of the Treaty of Nice is that Sweden gets only 18 seats , two fewer than Sweden gets under the proposal for a new EU constitution , and two fewer than Sweden is entitled to given the relative sizes of the EU Member States .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the resolution on the humanitarian situation in Gaza .
I am concerned by the deterioration of health indicators in Palestine and aware of the difficulties posed by closure of border control posts , thereby curtailing economic activity and free circulation of goods , and I request that emergency and humanitarian aid be allowed to continue unhindered .
I condemn the increasingly difficult living conditions that are rife in Gaza : the blockade preventing the movement of people and goods , partial privatisation of access to water , food and electricity , destruction of agricultural land , and basic services such as refuse collection that no longer operate properly and are on the point of collapse .
I feel it is urgent for human rights to be fully respected in Gaza , and I wish to call for an international peace conference to be organised to usher in a fair and lasting peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians ; a peace based on the relevant UN Security Council Resolutions concerning the Israelis ' right to live within secure recognised borders and the Palestinians ' right to a viable state .
in writing . - I support this resolution .
The current humanitarian situation in Gaza can only cause deep concern .
The Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip must be lifted and electricity and fuel must be supplied .
Also , Israel must guarantee the flow of financial assets to the Gaza Strip suspended since September 2007 , the lack of which has seriously impacted the economic , social and daily life of the Palestinian people .
The Council and the Commission must use all the pressure they can exert to persuade the Israeli Government to move and to guarantee future essential humanitarian aid for the Palestinian people .
in writing . - ( PT ) Given the terrible situation in which the Palestinian people have been put , the European Parliament has adopted a resolution which , while recognising the extremely serious situation not only in the Gaza Strip but also in the other Palestinian occupied territories , does not hold Israel liable or condemn it for its deep-rooted responsibility , particularly for the destruction of the Palestinian National Authority and its supporting institutions and infrastructures , including those meeting the most basic needs of the population , and for seeking to prevent the creation of a sovereign , independent and viable Palestinian State .
Israel has imposed a brutal blockade on the Gaza Strip , thus creating , as denounced a long time ago by UN officials , a gigantic prison for the Palestinian people , depriving them of the most fundamental human rights and preventing the provision of humanitarian aid by UN organisations .
It is imperative that this inhumane blockade be lifted , with Israel being ordered to end its aggression towards the Palestinian people and to fully respect and comply with international law and UN resolutions .
It is also vital for urgent humanitarian aid to be provided to the Palestinian people .
A fair and lasting solution for the Middle East will only be achievable through respect for the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to their own independent and sovereign state , respecting the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution , which draws attention to the plight of people in the Gaza Strip .
It calls on Israel to fulfil its international obligations under the Geneva Conventions to guarantee the flow of humanitarian aid , humanitarian assistance and essential services , such as electricity and fuel , to the Gaza Strip .
In calling for an international peace conference , an end to the blockade , and in asking for the Commission and the Council to work towards this , I join most other MEPs in advancing ideas that can make the situation on the ground better for those suffering the consequences of the status quo .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the EP resolution on the Gaza Strip .
The measure taken by the Israeli Government to declare the Gaza Strip a ' hostile entity ' paves the way for economic sanctions .
This measure comes at a time when the Gaza Strip is plunged into a humanitarian crisis , aggravated by the suspension of direct international aid to the Palestinian Authority and Israel 's failure to pay back taxes outstanding to the Palestinian Authority since March 2006 .
Even if the Israeli authorities have allowed food trucks into Gaza , the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East reports shortages of basic foodstuffs caused by frequent closures of the Karni border crossing .
We would not be faced with a humanitarian crisis of such proportions if we had not cut off our aid to the Palestinian people in the first place .
Many other organisations maintained their cooperation with Palestine , particularly a large number of European local authorities .
Is it not time we reviewed our policy of sanctions against Palestine so that this does not hinder supplies of the most essential humanitarian aid to the local population ?
in writing . - I wish to stress the importance of the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip .
Whilst I accept that the political situation is one that is dictating the plight of the people of Gaza , nevertheless it is the people - men , women and children - who are suffering , and heaven knows what long-term effects this will have .
I agree that Israel must feel secure in its own borders , but there are also obligations on Israel to ensure that humanitarian aid and assistance are given to the Gaza Strip .
In Gaza there is a responsibility to end attacks on Israel , and we all have a responsibility to support a viable state for Palestinians , so that the Palestinian people can live securely in peace .
I support this report because it is absolutely essential at this time that we in the EU make our voice heard on behalf of the people of Gaza .
They need help and we should deliver .
in writing . - I wish to support the endeavours of those in this House who have brought to our attention the crucial problems particularly facing those in the Gaza Strip and in the State of Israel and Palestinian areas .
The only way ahead is to move within the United Nations Security Council resolutions and to convene an international peace conference along these lines .
( FR ) Madam President , they are killed because they are women .
These murders known as feminicides are caused by a social context influenced by a patriarch mindset that prevents women from becoming socially independent .
The extremely well balanced report by Mr Romeva , although it refers more specifically to feminicides in Latin America and Mexico , forms part of a global strategy to eradicate and prevent violent deaths of women all over the world .
That is why I voted in favour : the EU must promote and defend the values of gender equality .
My amendments , which were in fact taken over by the rapporteur , had focused on support for the victims ' families , who are often completely helpless and , to make matters worse , they endure the pain of seeing these murders go unpunished .
I therefore wish to call for awareness and training programmes dealing with gender problems and for measures to promote the creation of effective protection systems for witnesses , victims and their families , psychological support , and free legal aid .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by our Spanish colleague Raül Romeva i Rueda on the murder of women , or feminicides , in Central America and Mexico and the role of the EU .
I am sorry we are focusing here on Central America and Mexico , for there are many places all over the world where the matter of female murders has not been solved .
I support any global strategy striving to bring about the worldwide eradication of violence against women .
The suffering of women cannot be treated with indifference , and we must support them because their revolt will be at the root of many geopolitical trends in favour of the ideals promoted by the European Union , notably gender equality .
in writing . - UKIP abstained on this report because we do not recognise the legitimacy of Parliament .
This in no way reflects our views on the content of the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted in favour of this report , which expresses the European Parliament 's solidarity with women suffering violence throughout the world , including in our own countries of the European Union , but with particular emphasis on the serious situation in Mexico and certain Central American countries , where there is a real culture of feminicide , with thousands of violent deaths of women in recent years , which cannot simply be attributed to a widespread climate of violence .
This situation stems from cultural causes and socioeconomic contexts that are unfavourable to women and is worse in the case of indigenous women who suffer from high levels of economic dependency .
However , it is also aggravated by the actions of criminal gangs .
We hope that this report will turn the spotlight on this serious situation and therefore help to ensure that , in the various countries concerned , the necessary steps are taken to end feminicide and violence against women .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List believes that human rights must be upheld in all societies throughout the world , both in the EU Member States and in other countries .
The report is a motion for a resolution which calls on the Member States and the states concerned to work to uphold women 's rights .
This is a deserving cause , but this is not the right forum in which to discuss the matter .
As usual , paragraphs are included where the EU seeks to act with a single voice in foreign policy .
With the report 's proposals for new budget headings , campaigns and increased responsibilities the EU is seeking to appropriate more power and to use issues like these as means in that quest .
Crimes against women are unacceptable and a dialogue between sovereign states to put an end to this is to be welcomed because it is important to improve the vulnerable position of women in much of the world .
However , the EU must not pursue a single foreign policy and for that reason we chose to vote against this report .
in writing . - I fully support the report .
Sustainable development is impossible without taking account of gender equality and the right to dignity and peaceful existence .
Such crimes should not be viewed as simply an expression of culture ; nor should they be dismissed if they are committed against women who may earn their living as sex workers .
If no serious and consistent efforts are made to investigate , prosecute and punish the perpetrators , this indicates that violence is acceptable and then no one is safe .
The proposals outlined in the report deserve our support and I trust that Parliament will monitor their progress .
The human rights dimension of our external policies is extremely important : we have to work for the rights of people to live safely and securely in order to exercise their democratic rights and freedoms at all levels of society and whatever their occupation and status .
in writing . - The report by Mr Raül Romeva i Rueda on the murder of women in Central America and Mexico and the European Union 's role in preventing this is a well balanced report .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work and his engagement .
He led the negotiations in a very sensitive and positive political style .
I would also like to thank him for the attention he devoted to this topic .
Human rights enjoy a high-ranking importance in the European Union .
Luckily , between the EU and Mexico , human rights topics play an important role ; as part of the Free Trade Agreement they even have a kind of formal character and they also play a crucial role in our Joint Parliamentary Delegation , which I have the pleasure to chair and which is now chaired on the Mexican side by Senator José Guadarrama Márquez .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which I strongly support , and which is part of a global strategy for the eradication and prevention of feminicide and proposes EU actions in the framework of partnership agreements .
I hope to see this issue taken up by the national governments in the framework of their bilateral relations with the countries of Latin America , and European institutions within their strategic partnership , to support the prevention and protection policies relating to violence .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have supported the report by Mr Raül Romeva i Rueda because he clearly identifies , in a few points , the main causes of the murders of women in Mexico and Central America : the murders are occurring unhindered in a social and economic context which is geared solely towards economic interests .
A high percentage of them have happened in the so-called free trade zones with their maquiladora industry ( sub-contractor companies which produce for the export market ) , in which the absence of a social infrastructure and high poverty rates are accompanied by impunity for semi-legal security forces .
These structures are reinforced , too , by the EU 's relations with Mexico and Central America , with their focus on trade facilitation .
The EU 's Association Agreement with Central America , which is due to be concluded before the end of this year , already shows , in its present form , that the EU is mainly interested in market liberalisation and deregulation .
However , the ' creation of a climate favourable to trade and investment ' , as championed by the Commission , leads to precisely the structures which the report rightly identifies as constituting the unfavourable social and economic context that is conducive to the high rate of murders of women .
The report also sends out an important signal that the human rights clause agreed in the so-called ' Global Agreement ' between the EU and Mexico must finally be acted upon .
The work of the relatives ' and victims ' associations must also be strengthened .
in writing . - I voted for this report recommending that , in order to prevent fraud , transit movements be computerised , the legal framework be revised and the Commission and the Member States improve physical checks based on common risk analysis .
The UK is affected by this issue : up to 4 % of potential VAT revenue is being lost to fraud in this area .
in writing . - ( DE ) The removal of borders very quickly and demonstrably makes itself felt in a massive decrease in turnover from cigarettes , not only in the border region but in the interior as well .
Desolate labour market conditions tempt numerous private individuals to smuggle small quantities of tobacco products across the border on foot as a way of boosting their incomes .
Fantastic profit margins , despite the high transport costs , have also contributed to the massive increase in tobacco smuggling in recent years .
A practice which is written off as a minor crime in some quarters is providing a livelihood for criminal gangs , and a very good one at that : after all , it is easy to bring these black market products to smokers in the EU .
The traffickers know that information campaigns are hardly likely to change the situation , for studies have shown that most buyers are well aware of the higher concentration of harmful substances in these products and the risk of penalties being imposed .
Montenegro 's role is especially inglorious , for it has become Europe 's main hub for tobacco smuggling , with the State taking a generous cut .
More pressure will have to be brought to bear here through the talks currently under way , and of course the penalties need to be much stiffer and a uniform labelling system introduced to put an end to a state of affairs in which the tobacco producers ' lucrative export business ends in illegal re-imports .
in writing . - The EPLP supports the aims of the Philip Morris agreement to combat fraud and illicit cigarette trade in the EU .
However , the UK Government has not signed up to the agreement since it could conflict with existing UK legislation on tobacco smuggling .
Existing legislation applies to all tobacco manufacturers , which is important in ensuring that smuggling activity is not simply displaced into products manufactured by companies that have chosen not to sign an agreement , or who might at some point choose to withdraw from one .
This legislation also contains no significant exclusions , which better allows the UK to address the particular types of tobacco smuggling problems that it encounters .
( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the enterprising report by the rapporteur , Mrs Jensen , because the decreasing quality of ground handling services has , over the last while , become an increasingly urgent issue and the true Achilles ' heel of the aviation industry .
There are many causes of this .
I would like to address those related to the increased security measures practised in some airports throughout the EU .
Such measures often border on degrading human dignity and increase the risk of spreading infectious diseases , without any tangible impact on security .
I am referring , for example , to the requirement for female passengers to remove publicly any jacket-type items clothing , even when worn over undergarments only .
Similarly , standing barefoot on freezing floors often follows the removal of footwear before going through the security detector .
In addition , when going through passengers ' personal items staff often have no respect for basic hygienic rules .
It is evident that if we do not take notice of these issues and demand a better travelling culture as well as respect and politeness during security controls from ground handling personnel , civil aviation will become , as far as ground handling is concerned , a sometimes appalling and unpleasant experience .
in writing . - ( PT ) Pointing to a rapid rise in goods and passenger air transport , the Commission has decided to produce an ' action plan for airport capacity , efficiency and safety in Europe ' in which it puts forward a series of measures .
This European Parliament resolution , despite containing aspects with which we agree - for example , its references to the need for respect for social laws and collective agreements , training or the needs of the most remote regions - subscribes to a concept of liberalisation of the sector and creation of the so-called ' Single European Sky ' .
Although it highlights that responsibility for planning airport infrastructures must lie with the Member States , it advocates a ' global EU approach as regards the need for extra capacity , the constraints on future investments in additional capacity and the strategic axes ' .
The resolution confirms the primacy of the ' Community competition rules ' , particularly with regard to the provision of ground handling services whose further liberalisation is not excluded .
It therefore advocates increasing the minimum number of service providers admitted at airports , not setting an artificial limit on the number of third-party handlers and removing constraints preventing ground handling service providers from entering the market .
This is our critical position .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Jensen on ' Airport capacity and ground handling : towards a more efficient policy ' .
The report gives appropriate consideration to the issue of ensuring that airports have the required capacity .
Air transport movements are increasing by 5.2 % annually .
It has been calculated that by 2025 more than 60 airports will be unable to cope with the demand for flights .
The report provides for the growth in air transport to be accompanied by technical and regulatory programmes to limit its external impact .
The rapporteur rightly points out that the European Union can only meet its requirements in this area by providing different types of airports and responding to the specific needs of each country .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which calls on the Commission to present before 2009 a master plan for enhanced airport capacity in Europe , in order to promote and better coordinate European initiatives for building new airport capacities dedicated to international traffic and to make better use of existing capacities .
Only the cohabitation of various airport models according to national specificities will enable the EU to fulfil its need in this field .
in writing . - ( SK ) I voted in favour of the Jensen report on ' Airport capacity and ground handling : towards a more efficient policy ' because I regard it as fundamental for ensuring sustainable regional development .
Transport infrastructure is often the decisive factor for the location of regional investment , tourism development and rapid transportation of goods .
Air transport offers important value added , especially for less developed , peripheral and island regions .
Globalisation and rapid economic development are giving rise a rise in the demand for flights in the EU .
The current and future development of air transport in Europe urgently require the foresight to anticipate the necessary steps to be adopted at EU level for the benefit of EU citizens and its economy as a whole .
In my opinion , the image of all European regions can be improved by the construction of new airports , the modernisation of existing ones and the conversion of former military airfields into civil airports .
Building and expanding airport and logistical infrastru