Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 15 March .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , it is once again my sad duty to have to open this part-session with a condemnation of the ETA terrorist attacks in Spain .
As you know , since 15 March , there have unfortunately been two further additions to the intolerable list of Spanish people whose lives have been lost in these attacks .
During the night of 17 March , Santos Santamaría , who was a member of the Mossos d ' Esquadra , the Catalan regional police force , was killed in a car bomb explosion in Rosas .
On 20 March , Froilàn Elespe Inciarte , a Socialist party municipal councillor in Lasarte , was shot twice in the head and killed .
In carrying out these murders , ETA has once again shown its total disregard for democracy and the recent threats made on tourists are examples of the same despicable behaviour .
As on each of these sad occasions , on behalf of the European Parliament and on my own behalf , I have sent our deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to the families of the victims .
I have also sent a message of our support to the Spanish authorities .
I would ask you to observe a minute ' s silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Agenda
The next item is the final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of 29 March 2001 , pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure .
Relating to Thursday :
President .
With regard to Thursday , I have received two requests for amendments , both concerning the topical and urgent subjects of major importance and the item on human rights .
First of all , I have received a request from the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to withdraw the first item entitled ' Iran ' from the agenda .
Madam President , I should briefly like to explain our request .
The reason for it is not that we have become more tolerant of the situation in Iran , but that difficult discussions and negotiations are being held in Iran itself at the present time with a view to improving the lot of a number of Iranian citizens who work in the German Embassy .
I do not believe that we should now disrupt this process which is taking place in Iran , perhaps by adopting a resolution .
We have firm views on the violations of human rights , but in this case - and , I would stress , at this particular time - I do not believe that we should either hold a debate or adopt a resolution .
Does any Member wish to speak in favour of keeping this item ?
There being no speaker , I shall put the request to the vote .
( Parliament gave its assent )
President .
The second request is from the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to withdraw the third item entitled ' Violence towards Catholic nuns ' .
Madam President , this is a serious problem , yet limited in terms of scope .
At the end of the day , this is about a few priests who spent some time in Africa and who displayed behaviour which was naturally wholly inappropriate and which we do not endorse at all .
However , we should not generalise . This was not the Holy See ' s policy .
Neither is this an urgent matter , because the incidents date back to 1994-1995 .
Now the Vatican too has taken measures and launched its own inquiry .
Steps have since been taken against the priests in question and the relevant details have been disclosed .
Accordingly , my group proposes not to include this topic in the urgent and topical debate .
Needless to say , it is entirely logical in our view , and we would also appreciate it if we were to discuss this topic within the parliamentary committees , for that - and not the urgent and topical debate - is the appropriate forum .
Does any Member wish to speak in favour of keeping this item ?
Madam President , my group understands all too well that this subject is of an extremely sensitive nature .
The present resolution has indeed turned out to be rather elaborate and should focus on the rape of the women .
I am very much of the opinion that this subject should be dealt with in the topical debate , for it was revealed only recently , last week , in fact , that women ' s rights have been violated not only in Africa , but in 23 countries across the world .
In this light , we cannot just dismiss this subject as marginal .
What we as Parliament should say about this is not so much that it has happened - indeed , it happens in every society , irrespective of religion , both in the West and elsewhere - but that it is being concealed under the cloak of charity .
For years , the existence of a problem was simply denied .
I believe Parliament should make a statement on this .
I repeat , once again , that the text which is before us contains elements which do not belong in this resolution ; we will therefore remove them so that it becomes an accurate resolution which deals with the problem of the violation of women ' s rights across the world by Catholic priests .
I hope that I will be able to count on your support .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Madam President , I do not wish to make a request regarding the urgent subjects , but I would like to draw the attention of the House to a point relating to respect for the objectives of the Kyoto conference , which took on a new dimension some days ago , following President Bush ' s comments , which were untimely , to say the least .
I think that at this debate , which is unfortunately scheduled for Thursday afternoon , in other words , when few Members are present , it would be crucial for the Commission and the Council to be represented at the appropriate level and for Parliament to be aware that President Bush ' s comments are not only important in relation to the Kyoto protocol , but that they call into question the very nature of the privileged relationship between the European Union and the United States .
Given such an astounding unilateral position , which , it has to be said , completely alters the political climate between Europe and the United States , I believe that it is the duty of the European institutions to give a response which should be a strong political reaction rather than an escalating verbal conflict .
I think that the nature of the transatlantic economic partnership and the transatlantic dialogue that we have with the United States risks being compromised if the U.S. does not change its attitude .
Mr Lannoye , I share your feelings especially because , as you know , I thought that I could react extremely swiftly in exactly the way that you describe .
With regard to Thursday ' s debate , the Commission has certainly listened to your request that it be suitably represented , at the highest level .
This also applies to the Council .
Madam President , there is another serious matter which surfaced very briefly .
Since we have some time available , perhaps we could dedicate a few moments to this matter .
Our fellow MEP , Mr Imbeni , in his capacity as Parliament ' s Vice-President , is attending the Interparliamentary Meeting in Cuba on our behalf .
Mr Imbeni has stated that he is not prepared to make a statement on democracy or the human rights violation in Cuba .
My group believes that this is not acceptable and that Mr Imbeni should be instructed , on behalf of yourself and us , should the opportunity arise - which may well be the case during the press conference - to take a clear stance against the violation of democracy and human rights .
I would therefore ask you to include this in the urgent and topical debate on Thursday , or to submit a statement tomorrow , since the Interparliamentary Meeting will continue until 7 April at the latest .
Thank you , Mr van Velzen .
I shall check this with Mr Imbeni .
Madam President , your silence in the face of the untimely speech by Mr van Velzen obliges me to speak , not only because Mr Imbeni is a colleague from my own group , but also because he is a Vice-President of Parliament and a person who has always acted with great dignity , as an MEP and as Vice-President , in defence of our common values .
Furthermore , I am sure that Mr Imbeni , who is not present at the moment , being in Cuba or Timbuktu , will always defend the resolutions of the European Parliament and will behave with the greatest dignity .
I ask Mr van Velzen to withdraw his comments and , if he wishes to repeat them , to do so in the presence of Mr Imbeni .
Mr Barón Crespo , I should like to point out to you that I immediately checked to see if Mr Imbeni was present .
However , it was difficult to begin a debate since Mr Imbeni was not here .
Having said that , I shall do my best to resolve the issue .
The order of business is thus adopted .
Speeches on procedure
Madam President , we have reached a point where , when we talk publicly about the situation in the Basque Country , we cannot know what the consequences will be .
I take this opportunity to enthusiastically greet all the Members of this Parliament .
Montaigne said that most of the ills of the world resulted from ' ânerie ' , a word which is untranslatable into Spanish , but which is related to ' ass ' .
I do not believe that it is worth wasting much time replying to criminal asses .
Thank you very much .
Madam President , I would like to draw both your and Parliament ' s attention to two very important decisions that have recently been taken by two European companies , which have stirred up great feeling amongst the working population .
As you know , Danone recently decided to close down several European factories , getting rid of thousands of workers , despite this very company telling us not long ago that its previous year ' s profits had been fairly significant .
In addition , Marks & Spencer recently decided to close down all its European outlets outside Great Britain .
This seems to be an illegal decision , in that the unions and the Works Councils were not notified and the workers found out what would their fate would be from the radio .
I would like to know , therefore , if it would be possible for you , Madam President , and if it would be possible for Parliament , to make a statement on this unacceptable action , perhaps at the next part-session , which , on the one hand , is discrediting the social Europe that several of you want to see , and , on the other hand , constitutes a denial of justice and an attack on the dignity of the working population .
Thank you , Mr Krivine .
I am sure that the issue will be looked into at the Conference of Presidents , when it meets this Thursday .
Madam President , I wish to express our indignation at two recent events in the Balkans .
The first is the arrest of the former President of Yugoslavia , Slobodan Milosevic , and the other is the imminent agreement between Bulgaria and NATO on free passage for NATO forces .
The Americans , NATO and the European Union spent USD 100 million ousting President Milosevic .
They spent another 100 million securing his arrest with a view to handing him over to the so-called Hague War Crimes Tribunal set up by the imperialists in order to justify their own crimes .
Only nations have the right to judge their leaders , no one else .
President Milosevic would not have been arrested had he followed NATO ' s orders .
Is this the punishment for resistance ?
Mind you , even those who gave the imperialists everything , such as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , have to suffer armed intervention by the NATO elite .
Developments in the Balkans clearly demonstrate that we have not yet seen the end of the war .
Only once ÍÁÔÏ leaves the area will the people there be able to foster some hope of living in peace .
Madam President , I have to take the floor , although I regret to have to do so after a Member of my group has spoken .
First of all , I believe that I am expressing the feelings of the greater part of my group when I say that it was necessary for Milosevic to be arrested .
Furthermore , I believe that his arrest is not a snub towards the people of Serbia and Yugoslavia . Instead it is a relief , because it enables this people , this nation , who certainly have a very honourable and often glorious history , as well as an extremely troubled recent past , to turn the page once and for all on this extremely troubled recent past , at a time when the whole world is watching .
My last point is to say that , on the other hand , I think the pressure that the American leaders are putting on the new leaders of Yugoslavia is extremely misplaced , irresponsible and dangerous .
I think that you must be aware of what you want .
If you want to refuel nationalism and give food for thought to those nostalgic for the past , do so .
However , if you want to give Serb and Yugoslav democratic powers a chance , allow them to bravely take on their responsibility and see things through to the end .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , I should like to draw your attention to the Council ' s decision of 19 March , in which , instead of the promised regulation on openness that should have come into force on 1 May , a set of internal provisions is adopted , infringing the Treaty rules on adoption of the Rules of Procedure , which as we know requires a simple majority .
One of these provisions specifies that , in future , a qualified majority is required for introducing increased openness in the Council . Furthermore , Parliament was not consulted on this subject .
So I call on you , Madam President , to address this issue the next time you meet with the Council .
At the Conference of Presidents last Thursday , we decided to have the legal service examine whether there is a basis for possible legal proceedings . However , I think you should , in any case , discuss this matter with the Council , and I believe that the Council should , in all decency , withdraw its decision until agreement on a regulation on openness has been reached with Parliament .
Mr Bonde , as you said , a legal opinion was issued on this matter and it will be looked into this week at the Conference of Presidents .
Madam President , you will shortly be paying an official visit to the Netherlands .
I am very much looking forward to that . My only regret is that you are not planning to take the opportunity to talk to the representatives of the people , European or national .
I would like to ask you why you , yourself , as representative of a parliament , avoid contact with parliamentarians when you visit Member States ?
Why do you only talk to government officials ?
I am a member of a party in office myself , but I know that the opposition sometimes has very interesting things to say as well .
I am astonished by this , because I have not made a single official visit without meeting with the Presidents of the national parliaments of the country I am in and I would be tempted to say that I meet them before I meet anyone else .
They are the people with whom I am in closest contact .
If this were not the case , I would be utterly dismayed , but I am certain that , of course , I am scheduled to meet the Presidents of national parliaments , as I do everywhere , as well as the Prime Minister and the government authorities .
There are a number of people that I have to meet , such as , naturally , the Presidents of the national parliaments .
Given the current background , which is the first phase of the post-Nice deliberations , I would add that it is even more important to maintain contact with the representatives of the national parliaments , even more crucial than under normal circumstances .
I believe that there must have been a misunderstanding here , but I will most certainly send you the final schedule for my visit .
Investment services
The next item is the joint discussion on the following reports :
( A5-0106 / 2001 ) , by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication on upgrading the Council Directive on investment services in the securities field ( 93 / 22 / EEC )
( A5-0105 / 2001 ) by Mrs Kauppi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication on the application of conduct of business rules under article 11 of the Directive on investment services in the securities field ( 93 / 22 / EEC )
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report which I have the honour of presenting to the House concerns the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on upgrading the 1993 directive on investment services .
The Commission has notified this communication within the context of the wider action plan for financial services drawn up in application of the decisions by the European Council in Lisbon on the unification of the European financial and capital markets .
Unifying these markets will help to complete the single market .
Ôhe last European Council in Stockholm revisited this issue , calling for the action plan to be fully applied by 2005 and for all interested parties to make every effort to achieve a single stock market by the end of 2003 .
Investment services are , without doubt , an important tool , perhaps the most important tool to the working of the stock markets .
Clearly , every initiative in this context , such as that contained in the Commission communication which it is my honour to present to the House , has been stamped urgent by the European Council .
The Commission communication is not a legislative text .
However , it is , nonetheless , of crucial importance because it paves the way for the reforms needed so that , when the time comes for a legislative proposal , and I believe it will be soon , Parliament will be prepared to adopt the necessary amendments to the original directive quickly and , I trust , almost unanimously .
I think that this will give us a chance to prove the speed and efficiency of our legislative procedure which , unfortunately , has been thrown into doubt recently by certain reports , such as the Lamfalussy report .
My fellow Members , the economic policy objective of the Group of the Party of European Socialists is not , nor has it ever been , purely and simply to distribute income and wealth more fairly and reduce inequalities in society .
Along with this objective , which forms the nucleus of our policy , we have always endeavoured , and we still do , to strengthen the productive base , because goods need to be produced before they can be distributed more fairly .
With these thoughts in mind , the Socialist Group firmly supports the completion of the single market and the unification of the financial markets in Europe .
We believe that progress on these fronts will strengthen the productive potential of the European economy , to the benefit of one and all .
We also believe that the market cannot use its autonomous and automatic procedures to create the changes needed for the purpose .
Self-perpetuating change in market institutions often traps the economy in an unproductive situation , creating monopolies and safeguarding the interests of the few at the expense of society as a whole .
Political intervention is therefore required in order to shape the frameworks needed within the economy , so that the market can be liberalised and can return a real productive result .
It is exactly this sort of reforming intervention which I have the honour of recommending in this report on upgrading the directive in question .
The original directive , in 1993 , was intended to promote the unification of the markets and fight national protectionism in the provision of investment services .
The mainstay of the directive was the mutual recognition by all the Member States of the operating licences which any one Member State issued to investment service companies , the famous European passport .
The idea was an inspired one , but it was thwarted in practice by the fact that each Member State had the facility to attach different operating rules to the provision of these services .
The fact that , under the original directive , the investment company no longer needed to file 15 applications and obtain 15 licences , but only needed one licence in order to establish anywhere in Europe was , without doubt , a step forward , but it lost much of its impetus because each company had to deal with 15 different legislative regimes on the ground .
This situation acted as an important national regulatory barrier to the unimpeded movement of investment services and the unification of the European markets .
I now recommend to you , and I am delighted that the spokesman of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mrs Kauppi , agrees with this proposal , that we dismantle this barrier and impose the force , not of 15 , but of a single regulatory regime , namely that of the Member State which issues the licence .
We shall have taken a big step towards the single market once certain aspects of the investment services sector are unified , especially once clearing and settlement of share purchases and sales have been unified .
In the United States , which can teach us a great deal about these matters , one central clearing house acts for the whole country .
In Europe we have many more than one .
Given that clearing services have huge potential for economies of scale and hence for reducing costs , which are much higher for us than in the USA , it would be a good thing if the directive helped to unify these functions .
It cannot , of course , insist that the stock exchanges merge , but what we can do , and what I suggest to you , is that contracting parties should have the right to choose the clearing and settlement system which they prefer , even if it is different from that of the stock exchange on which the transaction was conducted .
By strengthening competition as part of the procedure of stock exchange mergers being promoted by the euro , there is hope that , in the end , the companies with the lowest costs will prevail , rather than the companies with the strongest monopolistic links .
Furthermore , the directive should monitor the constant changes being driven by technological progress .
Today , the regulated markets are no longer infrastructure-type organisations ; they have become commercial companies , while numerous large , highly computerised stock exchange companies have metamorphosed from intermediaries on the market into internal share markets .
The regulations need to be adjusted accordingly .
Many of the rules on the integrity of the markets , such as rules to combat insider trading , need to be extended to the internal transactions of these companies , while other rules , which at one time only related to companies , such as rules governing customer relations , should also apply to stock exchanges .
This question is difficult to broach , but it is , perhaps , one of the questions which we should regulate in general terms , leaving the details of application to the regulatory authorities of each country or of Europe , where there are any .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to stress that the Socialist Group supports the unification of the financial markets , the aim of which is to strengthen the investments needed to achieve full employment in Europe .
It certainly does not support , in fact it is most certainly opposed to , the speculative fever of stock exchanges , which can cause catastrophic , explosive conditions in the real economy , which is why we are calling on the Commission to present its proposal on safeguarding the integrity of the markets as quickly as possible .
Of course , we do delude ourselves that a regulation will do away with speculation at a single blow .
However , we do at least want stronger principles of commercial honesty , precisely because speculation increases the temptation to act dishonestly , now that the stock exchanges are increasingly consolidating their pension function in our society .
The limits within which European stock exchanges are fed from workers ' pension funds cannot but be much stricter than in the days when stock exchanges were simply casinos for the rich .
Strengthening discipline and the proper functioning of the stock exchanges are one of the most important projects in the action plan for the investment markets .
Madam President , Commissioner Bolkestein , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to express my thanks to the Commission .
This communication was so skilfully drafted in fact that we in Parliament were able to reach consensus both in the Committee and here in the plenary sitting .
There was not a single amendment made to my report , which I am very happy about .
Article 11 of the investment services directive needs to be revised to remove the legal uncertainty that prevails nowadays in the European investment markets as well as overlapping and conflicting rules .
Factors of uncertainty such as these hamper the success of the internal market and result in considerably increased costs , which European investors ultimately have to pay .
We must ensure that all investors have the opportunity to participate in the internal investment services market , safe in the knowledge that European legislation will provide the appropriate freedoms and , if required , adequate protection .
My report proposes that any clarification of Article 11 will work best if the country-of-origin principle is applied to all investment services provided across borders .
From the point of view of professional investors , it will be possible to switch quickly to the country-of-origin principle , but , from the consumer ' s point of view , applying the principle still requires greater harmonisation of the conduct of business rules that affect them .
This is very much under way in FESCO .
Complete harmonisation is not a prerequisite , however , for the country-of-origin principle to also be applied to retail sales of investment services for the small investor .
This solution would , at the same time , be consistent with the electronic commerce directive , which was passed last spring , and which Member States are under an obligation to adopt as part of their own legislation by 1 January 2002 .
If these two directives do not work on the same basis , the position of customers purchasing investment services electronically will be different from that of consumers who purchase their services through traditional channels .
The basic idea behind the classification of investors is that different investors need different kinds of protection and , on the other hand , are entitled to demand greater freedoms as their experience grows .
European legislators must ensure that a lighter conduct of business regime should apply to professional investors than to small investors , who need more legal protection .
Restrictions on the freedom to provide services can only be sustained when they are applied in the interests of the general good .
For example , for transactions between professional investors rules for the general good should not be required .
Restricting the market for reasons connected with the general good is not , as a rule , possible either .
Any interpretation of Article 11 of the directive on investment services must in any case be consistent with Articles 3.4 and 3.5 of the electronic commerce directive .
The host country may thus only restrict the free movement of services to protect investors on a case by case basis and in compliance with a special procedure and a list of specific conditions .
Commissioner , my report contains reservations with regard to the three categories of investor , as proposed by FESCO .
Rules that are too strict may make it needlessly difficult for investors in the middle category to operate in the internal market , especially as we are giving them the chance to opt-up to higher protection , if they so wish .
There is also a degree of uncertainty regarding what categories will be entitled to benefit from the country-of-origin principle .
The Commission should clarify this and propose that , in principle , all who have opted for the level of protection intended for professional investors , that is to say , a lighter level of protection , should always be able to benefit from the country of origin system in cross-border services .
Another issue which merits further consideration on the part of the Commission is the application of rules for marketing and advertising .
The current ISD already states that the right to market services in the internal market can only be restricted for reasons connected with the general good .
Despite this , many Member States have included advertising rules in their conduct of business rules .
This may lead to rules that overlap .
Finally , I would like to mention the proposal by the Lamfalussy Committee that the revision and updating of the ISD would , in many respects , be an ideal example of a legislation project where the new procedure proposed by Mr Lamfalussy could be applied .
The problems in the present ISD have mainly led to difficulties of interpretation , so it will be important to ensure the amended directive is implemented consistently at national level , to achieve a successful result .
Just to have a good and relevant directive will not be enough .
Madam President , I welcome and support both the reports we are discussing today .
They are excellent and I congratulate both the rapporteurs on the hard work that they have done on them .
It is vitally important to get the investment services directive right because the rewards will be an increased return for savers and cheaper products for consumers .
But the ISD , I am afraid , symbolises much of what is both good and bad about current EU legislation .
It is a good idea in theory but it has not yet delivered in practice .
It has produced a single market on paper , but not yet a single market in reality .
It was supposed to have made it possible for a firm or a company complying with its own home rules to have a passport to trade anywhere across the European Union .
It has not delivered that in practice because of differences in interpretation between Member States , because of differences in enforcement between Member States and because of poor implementation .
It is really unacceptable that almost eight years after adoption there are still some Member States trying to work out how they are going to enforce this directive .
The result has undermined both the country-of-origin principle and the principle of the single passport , because operators still face multiple , overlapping and sometimes conflicting sets of rules when they trade across the European Union - just the problem which the ISD was supposed to tackle .
This is really a textbook case of where the single market legislation has not actually delivered .
We have an increased administrative and bureaucratic burden , which still leaves different firms facing over 15 different legal systems and rule systems .
The conduct-of-business rules have been used by Member States to impose their own host-state rules where they are neither necessary nor desirable and I would include the UK in that .
These conduct-of-business and advertising rules have been used to protect markets rather than consumers and the Commission should clamp down strongly on that .
I very much welcome the call in the two reports to move to a country-of-origin principle for conduct-of-business rules , for advertising rules , for retail investors and for wholesale investors .
I hope the Commission will take note of what Parliament has said because where the Commission can be criticised in its upgrade is that it is too tentative on these vital issues .
We should have a country-of-origin approach underlying this directive .
I do not see why we cannot trust consumers to pick a product from other Members of the European Union and to be protected by the financial services authorities of those other Members of the European Union .
Consumers are receiving proper and appropriate protection from different countries which have been in this very close relationship now for almost 50 years .
It is vital to ensure that we are consistent with the e-commerce directive , and a country-of-origin approach will be consistent with the e-commerce directive if we adopt it in the ISD .
Any exception to the country-of-origin approach , whether in the ISD or in the e-commerce directive , should be strictly interpreted , narrowly interpreted and should be eliminated as soon as possible .
Minor updates to the ISD are , of course , welcome but above all we need a change of culture .
The Commission has been far too tentative in enforcement .
It is unacceptable that for many years many countries simply failed to distinguish properly between professional and consumer investors as is required by the ISD .
I would like to see the Commission make full use of its enforcement powers to make sure the current version of the ISD is enforced properly by every single Member State and indeed that the next version of the ISD is also properly enforced .
Mr President , Commissioner Bolkestein , ladies and gentlemen , I am happy to announce our group ' s support for the reports by Mr Katiforis and Mrs Kauppi , whose proposals are a significant step forward in the creation of a single market in financial services , in accordance with the Commission ' s proposals contained in the action plan on financial services .
The removal of obstacles in the Member States with regard to financial markets is essential in the Europe of the euro and will enable us to take advantage of all the opportunities offered by the existence of the single European currency .
Allow me once again to repeat the comparison I have made before . What we are now undertaking in the financial and monetary field is what we undertook ten years ago with the establishment of the European single market for goods and services , ensuring the general freedom of movement for capital , workers and goods .
We have set a timetable : 2005 , and our fellow Members ' proposals , I believe , move in the right direction .
They support the Commission ' s proposals , they highlight the need to meet the timetable and , at the same time , they offer and indicate specific aspects .
With regard to the report by Mrs Kauppi , I believe that paragraph 16 , on the mechanisms which have been applied and proposed - and which the Commission has already implemented - to resolve cross-border extrajudicial disputes relating to financial services , is essential to overcoming possible problems at Member State level .
This system and this concern also appear in Mr Katiforis ' s report .
I congratulate both of them on their work and I repeat that we support them .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I am pleased for both rapporteurs that their reports have met with such broad approval , not only in the Committee but also here in Parliament .
It shows that we are all of the opinion that an accelerated process of change on the internal European financial markets must also have consequences for our political work .
Of course , this was also highlighted in the report by the Committee of Wise Men on European securities markets regulation chaired by Mr Lamfalussy , which we will be debating later on this week .
A second piece of evidence for this change is the exponential growth in the volume of shares , of over 30 % each year between 1995 and 1999 .
This is of prime importance , owing to the strategic significance of well-functioning financial markets for increasing economic prosperity in the EU .
When the investment services directive is upgraded , three aims must be taken into account simultaneously : firstly , speeding up market integration ; secondly , improving the level of protection afforded to investors , and thirdly , market stability .
On the one hand this benefits the markets and on the other it protects investors .
In this way , financial stability will be safeguarded in the future .
Two further points , which have also already been mentioned , are of concern to me here .
Firstly , a fully operational European passport needs to be created for investment firms .
In order to use this opportunity and remove the existing obstacles to its introduction , we urgently need to move over to the country-of-origin principle .
For major investors this should happen as quickly as possible and for small investors - Mrs Kauppi has already referred to this - the same principle applies but transitional arrangements will probably be necessary .
An additional issue in this context is the harmonisation of conduct of business rules , which is a prerequisite for a healthy internal market .
My second concern is that there should be genuine competition between stock exchanges and trading platforms .
To make fair competition possible an appropriate and efficient system of supervision needs to be set up .
This should avoid competition being determined and thus distorted by differing rules and the ensuing hunt for the more favourable regulatory framework .
There is a trend towards ever increasing investments in securities - we also talk about this in connection with pension funds - and that is why I would recommend speedy adoption and implementation , hopefully before 2005 .
This too would be in line with the Lamfalussy report .
I thank both Mr Katiforis and Mrs Kauppi for the reports which they have produced .
They reflect a very large measure of agreement .
It is good to hear that speakers have supported these two reports .
The Commission has also taken cognisance of these two reports with great pleasure .
It is well-known that the investment services directive is the bedrock of the EU legislative framework in the field of securities markets .
That directive defines common regulatory parameters for investor protection and orderly markets .
Five years after its entry into force it is now time to test its roadworthiness .
The Commission believes that the judgment must be mitigated .
While there have been significant improvements , cross-border provision of investment services continues to be dogged by legal uncertainty and impediments .
More fundamentally , the securities trading environment has undergone seismic shifts which pose new challenges for EU regulation .
The Commission welcomes the timely and coherent responses of the European Parliament to the two communications on the investment services directive .
The reports provide clear pointers for the Commission when it prepares its proposal for a modification of the ISD which is due for adoption by the end of this year .
I will now mention a few specific points which are contained in the report prepared by Mrs Kauppi .
The most immediate and tangible objective of the ISD remains the provision of a single passport for investment firms .
The Kauppi report cogently addresses the principal hurdle to be overcome , which is the overlapping and conflicting national rules for conduct of business .
The approach outlined in the communication in Article 11 has been constrained by the inherent ambiguity of the provision and the absence of relevant jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice .
Despite this , the communication sends a clear message , that the cross-border provision of investment services to professional investors should already be subject to home country conduct-of-business rules alone .
The definition of professional investor put forward by the Commission on the basis of a consensus reached between national supervisors and FESCO represents a useful starting point .
Before mentioning some elements which are specific to the report prepared by Mr Katiforis , perhaps I could mention a few aspects which are common to both reports .
The forthcoming revision of the ISD provides an opportunity to clarify the conditions under which firms and investors engage in cross-border business .
The Commission is convinced that the approach advocated by both reports is the only one consistent with a single market .
Furthermore , it will ensure that both on-line and off-line provision of investment services will benefit equally from the country-of-origin principle of the e-commerce directive .
The challenge is to reach this goal in a manner which offers sufficient safeguards to the retail investor .
The ISD communication suggests that this requires some further convergence of conduct-of-business and advertising rules for retail investors .
The Commission is hopeful that such convergence can be achieved within a relatively short time-frame .
I now come to a few points which are specific to the report prepared by Mr Katiforis .
The Commission believes that inter-exchange competition and the emergence of infrastructures for cross-border trading of securities raise important new regulatory issues .
These are not adequately addressed by the current ISD .
The Katiforis report cautions against sweeping changes at this time .
The Commission is acutely aware of the need to do no harm and of the risks of acting at a time when markets are in a state of flux .
However , profound changes in the organisation of the trading infrastructure and increased involvement of household investors in equities investment call for fresh thinking .
The Commission agrees with the Katiforis report that clarification of ISD provisions relating to exchanges and trading systems should concentrate on the risk to market integrity .
The Commission also agrees that the primary focus of attention should be equity markets where retail investors are more exposed .
Mr Katiforis , in his speech , said that he wanted a Commission proposal concerning the integrity of markets as soon as possible .
As he may or may not know , the Commission is in the last stages of preparing a proposal on market abuse .
That will hopefully be made known in a few weeks time .
A strengthened ISD will not in itself prevent the sizeable market corrections that we have witnessed in recent weeks .
However , a revised ISD can help to contain market excesses by promoting transparency , protecting integrity and ensuring that investment firms always act in the best interests of their clients .
Moreover , it can ensure that these protections are enjoyed by investors throughout the European Union , regardless of the origin of the security which they are purchasing or the exchange on which that transaction is executed .
Without such a framework , the Lisbon objective of a single integrated capital market , which we all want and need , will remain a dead letter .
I shall now provide a more specific reply to two points raised : the first being criticism of the agreement reached within FESCO on the definition of professional investors , and the second a reply to what Mrs Kauppi said about the link between this issue and the Lamfalussy report .
On the first issue , criticism of the FESCO definition of professional investors , as yet no legal content has been given to the concept of professional investor by the European Court of Justice .
The FESCO agreement represents a first informal attempt to establish a collective European view on this concept and it should be welcomed as a valuable first step towards clarifying this important operational concept .
The Commission is , of course , aware of widespread concern that the FESCO agreement is overly restrictive in determining which investors qualify automatically as professionals .
This deprives many large and sophisticated investors of the benefits of operating under a single , that is , home-country , light-touch supervisory regime .
Nevertheless , given the prevailing uncertainty surrounding the term ' professional investor ' , the Commission believes that the wisest course of action is to make use of an approach which has won support from all national securities authorities .
The proposed approach to the definition of professional investor , as set out in both reports , would seem to offer additional advantages from the perspective of a properly functioning single passport .
The Commission will study these proposals carefully when preparing the revision of the ISD .
Finally , on the matter of the interface between this proposal and the well-known Lamfalussy blueprints , the Commission notes the observation made by Mrs Kauppi in her explanatory statement that the revised ISD is - I quote - " a prime candidate to be adopted and implemented according to any new approach which may be agreed in the light of the Lamfalussy reports " .
The Commission agrees with that view .
The ISD communication clearly states that the lack of capacity to issue legally binding guidance on implementation of ISD provisions has been one of the principal factors contributing to the shortfalls and uneven implementation which have bedevilled the ISD .
In view of its increased scope and complexity , a revised ISD is likely to suffer even more from such defects : hence the importance of the Lamfalussy report for this issue as for a number of other ones .
In conclusion , may I once again thank both rapporteurs for the important work they have been doing .
May I also thank other Members of this Parliament who have intervened , in particular Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and Mr Karas .
The Commission would like to assure Parliament that it will act accordingly .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Cosmetic products
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0095 / 2001 ) by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending for the seventh time Council Directive 76 / 768 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products [ COM ( 2000 ) 189 - C5-0244 / 2000 - 2000 / 0077 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we adopt new legislation in this House we always assume that it will constitute an improvement on the current situation .
That is why I , as rapporteur , also require the seventh amendment of the cosmetics directive to be an improvement on the status quo .
And is it ? This is what I am asking myself and also all of you .
In response , many in this House will say with me : no it is not .
The sixth amendment of the cosmetics directive , for which I also had the honour of being rapporteur some years ago , clearly provides , for example , that in a number of stages an absolute final date should be set for animal testing for cosmetics , a date after which no more animal testing should take place .
I would ask that we all bear in mind that there are now more than 8 000 tested ingredients which people can use quite happily .
Now , however , the question is : what happens with new ingredients ?
This test and marketing ban - in effect a sales ban - from the sixth amendment has been converted by the Commission into a straight ban on testing in the territory of the European Union .
This therefore means that in the future , people will be able to carry out tests on animals quite easily , for as long as they wish , just a few kilometres further away .
Now I am hearing from all sides - including from the Commission - how sympathetically and favourably they look upon my amendments , but that unfortunately they cannot accept them because there are trade-related issues preventing them from doing so .
Is this true ?
No , it is not .
No one is yet in a position to say which way the ruling would fall in a case before the World Trade Organisation because no case has yet been decided on the basis of the protection of animals and moral considerations .
Whether the Commission 's trade argument would carry weight at all is all the more questionable because recently , a few months ago , the United States itself decided in its Dog and Cat Fur Act to adopt laws which are based solely on animal protection and on the moral sensitivities of the population .
That is why I would invite the Commission to be rather more plucky at this juncture and to make its political priorities clear .
Mr Liikanen , you know how highly I esteem you , at this stage you really must nail your colours to the mast and declare your intention to do your political duty . Stand up to your colleague , Mr Lamy , and others , or explain to them that they are mistaken .
What does ' a marketing ban some time in the future ' mean ?
Of course , I am also starting from the assumption that the products are safe .
I am not forcing anybody to spread an unsafe product on their skin or on their children 's skin or even to brush their teeth with an unsafe toothpaste .
I would never want this .
That is why I wish to propose a way forward which I consider to be very reasonable and which was generously supported by many colleagues in the Committee .
Yes , there should be a test ban .
Yes , there should be a marketing ban - a sales ban - wherever there are alternatives which have already been evaluated .
Some time later - five years in my amendment , perhaps even later - there should be a total sales ban .
During this time , industry also has the chance to develop alternatives and to invest in research .
In the intervening time there should then be a labelling system so that consumers know , and it is fair that they should , whether they are buying products which have been tested on animals .
The seventh amendment should , of course , bring even more improvements .
Can it really be the case that the Scientific Committee on Cosmetic Products in the European Union should ascertain that ingredients - fragrances - cause allergies and these fragrances not be indicated on the label ?
This is unacceptable .
It contravenes the principles which we have in the European Union , namely that products must be safe , but also clearly identifiable and genuine .
So they have to be labelled .
What I am proposing is nothing more and nothing less .
Surely it is also only right and proper for consumers in the European Union to know when they buy a product how long it can be kept for and how long the active ingredients will remain effective ?
For how long will the toothpaste still taste good and for how long will the perfume or the skin cream remain safe to use and not turn rancid ?
That is why I am proposing to this House , with the support of the Committee , that we develop a symbol and that the Commission prescribe a clear label to go with it for products with a durability of over 30 months .
Once they have been opened , how long can they be kept ?
In my opinion , these are all proposals which improve the sixth amendment - that is why we are here after all - and which afford a better level of protection to consumers , but also keep them better informed and give them the right to choose .
In the first reading of a piece of legislation this is definitely what we all want and what we should have .
After all , we also need to go into the second reading with something to play for .
I am convinced that not only consumers can be happy with this but also representatives of the cosmetics industry , even if they still give the impression that they are downtrodden and victimised .
I think that , at the latest , after this reading and also after the second reading , they will recognise that we need to join forces and achieve a viable working relationship .
I invite them to do so here and now .
Mr President , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy ' s area of specialisation is industry , external trade and scientific research .
The Committee ' s opinion focuses on the examination of the ban on animal experiments in testing cosmetics specifically from these points of view .
It would appear that the global cosmetics industry has been unable to come up with alternatives to animal experimentation as quickly as the European Parliament would have hoped .
Cooperation between industry and the scientific community has not worked , and researchers have not availed themselves sufficiently of the EU ' s fifth Framework Programme in the development of alternative methods .
To speed up the introduction of alternative methods , our Committee is suggesting that a ban on animal experiments in the testing of end products and cosmetic ingredients should come into force according to a faster schedule than that which the Commission is proposing .
Regarding the marketing ban on products proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , according to information received by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , it may be that a marketing ban , a sales ban , on cosmetic products that have been tested using animals is in conflict with WTO regulations .
That is not entirely certain , however , as no precedents have been set .
As a specialist committee in the field , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy is not proposing a sales ban .
This should serve as something of a warning to Parliament .
It may turn out that a sales ban on cosmetics tested on animals outside the EU will lead to countermeasures in the WTO .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee , I see it as a problem that may arise , but I also understand the view of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy : we have to test the limits of the WTO position .
As it is a matter of ethical principles with regard to the relationship between people and nature , an industrial bloc such as the EU must be able to standardise its financial and industrial activities .
Our Committee also defends the consumer ' s right to information through the proper labelling of products that have not been tried out on animals .
Mr President , I would firstly like to inform you that the correct version of Amendment No 33 , signed by myself and Mrs Müller , is the English version .
It appears that there has been an error in the translations .
I am not going to get involved in the arguments for and against animal experimentation , which at this stage we all know and which , undoubtedly , together with the ban on sales and marketing , are the focus of this seventh amendment of the directive .
I will say that , as shadow rapporteur , I have been able to note a clear majority opinion , in all the groups of this Parliament , in favour of banning both sales and marketing and experimentation .
However , I feel I should mention the concern of some Members of this Parliament , most of whom are reputed scientists , who view with alarm the total ban on experimentation within the terms and time periods put forward in Mrs Roth-Behrendt ' s amendments , since , according to her criteria , compliance with them could compromise the security of the product or impede progress in the field of scientific research into cosmetics .
I believe that this is an opinion which should at least be taken into account and which we should try to incorporate into the text , since we must not forget that the aim of the legislator must be to establish a balance between two values : the safety of consumers and the protection of animals .
In the quest for this balance we will have to take into account not only economic , socio-cultural and animal protection factors , but also scientific and legal factors .
I completely agree with the rapporteur on the need to put an end to experiments on animals .
However , as I have said , the scientific community does not currently seem to totally agree with the idea that a more or less immediate ban would aid consumer safety .
Nevertheless , I believe that it is extremely important to find legal incentives , and above all practical ones , which will speed up research procedures , so that , in the very near future , we can say that animal experimentation is confined to history .
I therefore fully support the idea of banning experimentation on animals and I agree with the rapporteur that a date should be set in order to speed up this process .
However , I believe that the time limits indicated by the rapporteur should be more flexible , bearing in mind that in the last debate in Parliament , if I am not mistaken , the Commission said that the necessary alternative methods could be developed in approximately ten years time .
In any event , it must be said that , in the view of my group , the amendment proposed by the Commission does not solve the problems already raised in the sixth amendment , mainly those relating to the World Trade Organisation . It merely eliminates the provision on the ban on sales and marketing and extends the time limit for banning experiments .
We in the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats view the Commission ' s proposal with concern , since it appears to be inconsistent with its own previous position , it does not resolve the problems of the World Trade Organisation , which have been going on for years , and it restricts itself to extending time limits for banning experimentation .
Our group therefore wishes to support Amendment No 21 which proposes that Parliament reject the Commission ' s proposal in its entirety .
The Commission should probably redo its homework and then present a more coherent text that , above all , offers solutions to the problems at hand .
Another issue which I want to deal with is the list of substances which may produce allergies : Mrs Roth-Behrendt includes a long list , and our group limits them to thirteen , which are already described as dangerous , because we do not believe it is a good idea to produce a very long list of substances , most of which are of minimal danger , which would result in confusion amongst consumers , and which would not distinguish between what is dangerous to them and what is not .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Dagmar Roth-Behrendt , who has done an excellent and thorough job .
The report is also to be praised for its realistic approach , but at the same time , for its stringency with regard to timetables .
The aim must be to impose a ban in the EU area on tests using animals and the marketing of products that have been tested on animals .
The rapporteur has also hopefully discovered a way of influencing policy in the Council for the implementation of swift measures by calling for an immediate ban on the sales of products tested by using animals .
A derogation would only be granted in respect of products for which there is no other alternative to animal experimentation .
The rapporteur quite rightly points out that both the Commission and the Council have failed to take sufficient action to ensure that the existing legislation on a sales ban is implemented .
We have given in too easily to pressure from the WTO .
When we talk of new products it is worth asking how many new products we still need .
Do we need products that are only distinguishable from each other through advertising ?
Naturally we need to ensure that products are free of risk to the consumer .
In my opinion , it is industry that must mainly bear the responsibility for developing non-animal alternative tests , especially with regard to the costs involved .
Of course , when we speak generally about consumer policy Community financial support can also be used .
Labels must be clear , and allergies must be taken into consideration , especially with products intended for children .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal for a ban on the testing of cosmetics on animals - but only within the European Union - is totally inadequate .
I agree entirely with the rapporteur .
It will allow us to pretend that we are doing something to prevent animal cruelty , but while maintaining the same testing requirements not one fewer animal would suffer .
By contrast , the rapporteur and the Committee , in calling for a sales and marketing ban , are maintaining the previous signal and the moral guidance about the relationship between humans and animals : that we do not accept that cruelty should be practised on animals for no better purpose than to develop products which are essentially frivolous and designed to flatter our vanity .
The Committee has addressed some spurious issues put up by the industry , such as that of the possible health benefits from new products , which they said could be reclassified as pharmaceuticals .
Our emphasis is on saying that the industry should spend a little less on marketing and a lot more on developing alternative testing methods .
Despite the vociferous objections of the industry , with 8 000 products already on the market , with the shop shelves heaving with deodorants and shampoos , make-up and hair gels etc . , it hardly seems likely that a great many people are going to lose out if a marketing ban is introduced .
At the heart of this debate lies the problem of the World Trade Organisation .
The truth is we do not know whether possible objections can be sustained .
If they can , then change is needed .
Whether it be this issue or the environment or the application of the precautionary principle , we must have the democratic freedom to be able to insist on some minimum standards acceptable to the majority of our citizens .
It is totally unacceptable that those who seek to bring about improvements in animal welfare should be told by the Commission to put up the white flag and run away from the battlefield even before we know whether the enemy is armed .
That would not indicate wise judgment , but abject cowardice demonstrating a total want of real leadership .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her work and the work of the Committee .
It is a major improvement on what the Commission has actually proposed . The proposal from the Commission is not only fundamentally flawed but it is also extremely disappointing .
The fact that they are abandoning the sales ban is an absolute disgrace , apart from the fact that it was supposed to come into effect in 1998 .
The Commission did not actually deliver on what was promised in relation to the testing ban , as has already been pointed out by Mr Davies .
It is a complete cop-out because the testing ban is just going to ensure that EU multinationals will carry out animal testing outside the EU but the products will still be for sale here .
What we need is both a marketing sales ban and a testing ban and we must do that now .
The argument about fear of a World Trade Organisation challenge is completely unfounded .
There is no reason why animal protection cannot be a legitimate reason for adopting trade restrictive measures .
Even the WTO itself recently confirmed to us that the US clearly agree because this is the basis which they use to ban the import and sale of dog and cat fur .
The WTO argument is just an excuse not to deliver on what was originally promised .
In the report there are a number of very important improvements in relation to consumers and consumer information .
Ingredients in cosmetic products are now to be listed in full , including the ingredients of perfumes information which so far has not been available .
It is great that the public will actually have access to this information because lame excuses were used in the past for refusing it .
Cosmetics containing any of 26 fragrances above a certain threshold are to be labelled with a warning which says ' could cause an allergic reaction ' .
We would have liked to see a complete ban on these fragrances , but unfortunately we did not get support within the Committee for that .
That should have been the line to take : if they are dangerous then they should be banned , rather than saying ' they may cause problems ' .
As regards the use of fragrances in baby products or products for intimate hygiene , we would have liked to have seen a complete outlawing of fragrances in baby products .
This is completely unnecessary , it is also exposing babies and children who are extremely vulnerable to unnecessary risks .
Hazardous substances that are carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic should not be used in cosmetics at all under the current proposal unless they are evaluated by a scientific committee and found acceptable .
This will actually encourage more animal testing .
Normally I do not take much notice of the lobbying information I get in this Parliament , in particular from industry , but I was amazed at ' Cosmetics - your choice , our responsibility ' from the European Cosmetics , Toiletry and Perfume Association .
As Mr Davies just pointed out , it is trying to flatter our vanity suggesting we really need to continue testing on animals so that we remain clean , so that we can actually correct body odours ; in other words , that we can improve on nature and change our appearance .
This is all ludicrous and it is completely unacceptable that animals are tortured for this sort of excuse .
If you look through the information from the industry there is not one photograph of what animal testing really involves and the consumers should know about that as well .
Mr President , this debate on the subject of animal protection reminds me of the foot-and-mouth crisis .
In the name of international trade , tens of thousands of healthy animals are being slaughtered .
In this light , the testing of cosmetics on animals pales into insignificance . Nevertheless , this subject is not unimportant .
I believe that all these animals are creatures of God and deserve to be protected for that reason .
In addition , we have been given animals to use for our daily nutritional needs .
Animal experimentation is an entirely different matter .
We can accept experiments on animals for the development and testing of essential medicines .
There are , however , less essential purposes for which animal tests are used . In my opinion , these also cover cosmetics .
We all know too well now that an increase in pressure from society has prompted the European Parliament to press for a ban on animal testing for cosmetics .
After all the respite which the cosmetics industry has been granted , we should clarify the matter once and for all .
I therefore back Mrs Roth-Behrendt ' s report .
I do wonder , however , whether we should amend the directive at all , since existing legislation is clear and a further delay is undesirable and unacceptable .
As far as perfumes are concerned , I do not believe that these should be tested on animals for any allergic reactions .
A warning on the label that these could cause an allergic reaction should , in my opinion , suffice .
We are , of course , left to deal with the import of cosmetics from non-EU countries and the international rules in this connection .
This should , however , not stop us from forging ahead .
It is hoped that in the rest of the world too , a broadly-based discussion will take place at a high level , at which point people will realise that animals should not be used for absolutely everything .
If this leads to a more limited choice of products , so be it .
Mr President , the amendment to the directive on cosmetic products has provoked intense debate on the issue of animal testing .
The text seems to have abandoned the idea of a marketing ban on new cosmetics tested on animals and prefers to confine itself to a ban on testing cosmetics on animals within the European Union .
Of course , no one is in favour of animal testing .
Nevertheless , in this case , we must be seen to act in a realistic and consistent manner .
Animal testing represents only a very small part of cosmetic testing and , besides , it is destined to be phased out within ten years , thanks to research undertaken by laboratories to find new types of testing to replace it .
In the current situation , however , there is a lack of sufficiently reliable alternative methods .
Furthermore , the general strength of feeling for an immediate and outright ban on animal testing seems quite strange , at a time when tens of thousands of animals are being slaughtered on our farms , without any hesitation whatsoever , in order to combat foot-and-mouth disease which could be eradicated with a mere vaccination .
To put it mildly , does that not amount to an unfortunate clash in our agenda ?
An immediate ban on animal testing may also lead laboratories to carry out their testing on people , who are so poor that they are forced to accept anything in order to survive .
So , then , it will not be pictures of rabbits with sore eyes that you could be feeling sorry about ; it will be pictures of women in the third world who are disfigured as a result of allergies .
As usual , it is the poorest people who will suffer from our legislative whims .
The question is not to find out whether we are in favour of animal welfare , but whether animal welfare counts for more than the welfare of the poor .
Basically , if we interfere too much in the work of our industries , the latter will take their business outside of the European Union so that they will be able to compete with other countries and particularly the United States , since testing on animals will not be banned there .
Will thousands of workers ' jobs be put at risk ?
Of course they will , and once again , it is the least well-off who will foot the bill .
Ladies and gentlemen , does this sound like the social Europe that you have been hoping and praying for ?
Mr President , I appreciate the consistent way in which Mrs Roth-Behrendt has developed her report and , in particular , the need to bring to an end a debate which has lasted for many years now .
I also share the public 's concerns regarding animal experimentation ; when this is a matter of repeat trials on active ingredients and principles which have been known for years and are already on the market , then the sacrifice of more animals serves absolutely no purpose .
However , Commissioner , when , as I point out in an amendment supported by over 50 Members of Parliament , it is a matter of new cosmetics containing new ingredients which have never been tested in the past in order to establish their toxicological profile in laboratory animals , then , as a scientist , I am convinced that it is essential to carry out an initial set of experiments on animals before cosmetics are used by human beings and before they are placed on the market .
If new cosmetics are not tested on animals , I would like to make it quite clear that this could lead to potentially toxic risks for men , women and children alike . There would be a risk of toxic effects on the liver and nervous system , and even cancer .
And who would be responsible then , my dear Commissioner ?
For all these reasons , I strongly urge the House to adopt an amendment tabled by myself and 50 other Members , which calls for barriers not to be placed in way of the progress of science .
As a scientist , I would like to make another point , dear Commissioner , and that is that , although it is important to develop , improve and finance alternative methods , they will never , never - and I am saying this as a scientist , as a man who has worked in laboratories for 35 years - they will never be able to reproduce the complexity of an animal or human organism .
Finally , it would appear absurd , moreover , both in scientific terms but also in terms of existing international agreements , to prevent the marketing in Europe of those very cosmetics which are the safest because they have been tested on animals in the past .
For all these reasons , dear Commissioner , I support your report , the Commission 's report , which is not a hit-and-miss report but a report based on the recommendations of an international scientific committee .
I therefore support it and I call upon Parliament to adopt amendments which would enhance it and which would make it possible , at last , for the entire report to be adopted so that this debate can be brought to a close .
Mr President , Mrs Roth-Behrendt put it concisely .
The seventh amendment is a backwards step - we all know that .
It is not even the status quo .
But to look at some of the protestations of the cosmetics industry you would think that this directive is something new .
It is not .
It has been with us for many years , and for many years we hoped and believed that an effective test ban , conditional on a phased introduction of alternative testing , was on the way .
There is a phrase in the Bible that colleagues will know : ' Hope long deferred maketh the heart sick ' .
If we are heartsick today it is because of the nature of that deferral .
Those who deferred our hopes should listen now .
Many in the industry not only accept the need to end animal testing , but have also put their own resources to that end .
I have certainly benefited from discussions with them .
It is true also that , to follow Mr Nisticò , some of the experiments that can be put in place involve human volunteers , human and animal tissues , and in vitro testing .
The development of these over the last few years has been a major step forward .
But now the industry has to demonstrate that it has a realistic timetable for developing alternative tests .
It is simply not good enough to say , as this glossy publication does , that you cannot set these timetables because that would be the equivalent of announcing the date for a cure for cancer .
That is not the case at all .
We are looking here at the way in which they might in this decade get to the point we and the public desire , and they will only do it with the looming incentive of a marketing ban .
Equally , if we detail the allergens present in these fragrances , they are not being driven out of the market .
It is a necessary precaution which should not threaten a single valid product .
We have done it elsewhere , at great gain to human health .
All the more reason to do it for products which , as I fully accept , contribute to human happiness and wellbeing .
We shall all be happier still when we can use them with a clear conscience , knowing that unnecessary animal testing has gone for good .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Roth-Behrendt ' s report is excellent , and I am pleased that there are to be restrictions upon animal experiments .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt also proposes a total marketing ban on animal-tested cosmetic products which is to come into effect five years after the adoption of the directive , even if no alternative testing methods are available .
This strategy may be in danger of temporarily restricting product development in the cosmetics industry , but it will considerably increase the incentives for developing alternative testing methods that do not involve animal experiments .
Nonetheless , the proposed ban on animal experiments is not in itself enough , because the industry could quite simply conduct its experiments outside the EU instead .
That is why a marketing ban is also needed .
Such a ban would prevent producers in non-EU countries from obtaining market advantages by being able to continue making use of animal experiments .
Instead , competition would mean that other methods would have to be developed .
As a liberal , I care a great deal about the rights of individuals .
I take the liberty of also including the right of animals not to have to be exposed to unnecessary suffering .
I also care a great deal about free , informed choice on the part of consumers .
It is therefore important that , through detailed and accurate labelling , consumers should immediately be given a chance to adopt positions on matters themselves .
In this connection , I would ask you to pay particular attention to Amendment No 39 , which proposes that animal-tested products should be required to be labelled with the words , ' Tested on animals ' .
With a marketing ban and a ban on animal experiments , together with other measures supported by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I believe we shall make significant progress , I am glad to say .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a very good report .
There was also a very good debate in committee .
The issue of animal testing has been of concern to this Parliament for a long time and is also reflected in the level of lobbying by constituents who want to keep the ban on marketing cosmetics .
It is time for us to ensure that action is taken ; that the concerns of our citizens and those who care about animal welfare are properly addressed by a complete ban on sales of cosmetics tested on animals and a testing ban .
As other Members have said , there have been enough postponements : from 1998 to 2000 , and then to 2002 .
We have to set a date and keep to it .
There can be no justification for making animals suffer in tests when there are proven , effective and safe alternative testing methods and 8 000 cosmetic ingredients already in use .
And we are talking about cosmetics , not medical products ; we are talking about shampoos and anti-wrinkle creams , and as Mr Davies said earlier , there is certainly no shortage of those in the shops already .
Consumers must have the right to choose whether the products they buy have been animal-tested and to be warned if those products contain allergens , so the issue of labelling is essential .
We would have liked , as a group , to have seen the report further strengthened by the adoption of a ban on the use of allergenic fragrances , particularly in baby products .
So I would urge Members to support the report , which is in line with the demands of the majority of the people we represent throughout Europe .
It would not endanger consumer safety and it would certainly force the cosmetics industry to speed up development of the alternatives which we know are available and which can be developed by alternative testing methods in future .
Mr President , in 1992 , animal welfare organisations from all over Europe presented the European Parliament with the biggest petition ever submitted in the world , a petition signed by 2.5 million people , who in signing it were expressing their support for a ban on animal testing in the cosmetics sector .
My dear Commissioner , I am well aware that when one holds such high office , one no longer needs to be directly elected by the people .
I am quite certain , however , that this will also make a great impression on you and that it will also be clear to you that a very large proportion of the European population backs this request .
The reason for the recent postponement of the marketing ban is quite simply the Commission 's fear of the WTO .
And now the proposal is to replace the marketing ban for cosmetic products with a ban on animal testing in the EU .
Do you really believe that the 2.5 million signatories in Europe , the general public and also this Parliament do not realise what is being proposed here ?
It is rather embarrassing .
If we cannot even manage to oppose the WTO on such a ridiculous matter as cosmetics and formulate our own moral standards , what will happen with more important issues , such as , for example , hormones in animal products of some kind ?
What on earth will we do then ?
We will be even more scared .
Allow me to make it clear that this is not about medicinal products - this is sometimes suggested subliminally - but solely about new products .
Everything which is already on the market now , which you can see in any airport , from Elizabeth Arden to Ellen Betrix , all of this can continue to be sold and marketed .
One more thing for the benefit of the scientists here in the room , animal tests are not 100 % reliable .
Any scientist will admit that this is true .
Finally , with your permission , I will cite a really great European , perhaps one of the greatest Italians ever to have lived , Leonardo da Vinci . Even so very long ago he said : the generations which come after us will shudder when they discover how we treat animals .
Mr President , I speak in support of the Roth-Behrendt report and congratulate the rapporteur on the quality and thoroughness of her report .
I note with approval too that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy have adopted all but one of the amendments of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
Colleagues , without doubt , there is major and well-grounded public abhorrence about the use of animals for testing ingredients in cosmetics , and all concerned want better protection for animals worldwide .
This has been reflected in the consistent line this Parliament has taken in the past .
The cosmetics industry is about marketing glamour , dreams and illusions and I am not as critical as some previous speakers about this .
Without doubt much of the responsible sector of the cosmetics industry has taken considerable strides in moving towards fewer tests on animals , but public opinion is well-grounded and it is good that it has been reflected , not just in the past , but strongly reiterated and strengthened in the Roth-Behrendt report .
We cannot know about the WTO .
There has been no challenge yet and the arguments in my view ring a bit hollow from the United States of America about the possible neglect of our international obligations in the same week as President Bush has so publicly repudiated the Kyoto agreement on climate change .
Nevertheless , it may well be that the international cosmetics industry draws back from a WTO challenge if they know that the full glare of public scrutiny is focused on testing ingredients on animals .
It is right that we hold the line .
This report is well worked out in its detail .
If it does lead to a challenge under the WTO rules then we from the European Union will have to argue our corner vigorously .
If we listen to those arguments , we would do almost nothing in this Parliament .
It is not that we are insensitive to those arguments , but that we place them in a context of what is the stronger and the greater good .
I commend the Roth-Behrendt report to you .
Mr President , the key and emotive issue regarding this debate and this directive is how to protect the health of children and adults while ensuring the phasing out of animal testing within a reasonable timescale .
As we know , cosmetics , like chemicals , pesticides and medicines , have to go through rigorous tests before they can be placed on the market for human use .
A cosmetic manufacturer is legally obliged to ensure that its products are safe , both for normal use and for foreseeable misuse .
The Scientific Committee on Cosmetics sets guidelines on the sort of tests that should be carried out and these include animal tests .
The key is to get the test and any alternatives to existing tests into Annex 5 of the dangerous substances directive .
When we seek , as we do , an end to animal tests , we have to take account of human interests too .
It would be horrendous if a child were to suffer or even die because an inadequately tested product was allowed on the market ; and we have to remember that items such as toothpaste and medicated shampoos are classified as cosmetics .
The industry , to be fair , has made giant strides in reducing both the number of animal tests and the number of animals used in such tests .
In some cases they have replaced the test ; in some they have refined it to reduce suffering ; and in some they have reduced the number of animals used .
To achieve an alternative takes up to ten years .
Agreeing a research project , funding it , undertaking it and then having it validated by ECVAM , endorsed by the Scientific Committee and incorporated into Annex 5 requires that sort of timescale .
Looking at the Commission 's proposal , we have to ask : is it effective , and is it realistic ?
I fear the answer to both questions is no .
The Commission 's proposal would ban animal testing within the EU , but that would simply send such testing to non-EU countries where standards of animal welfare may be much lower .
The rapporteur has wrestled , as only Dagmar Roth-Behrendt can , to find an alternative ; and if her alternative is to ban the marketing of any products that have been tested on animals , then that is fine ; but on its own that could bring an end to research and improvements , including improvements to the health of children and adults , if no alternative is available .
Doing nothing is not an alternative either because that would bring no pressure to bear on anyone to seek alternatives .
We have to keep the pressure on .
Of the twelve tests required for cosmetics , three have alternatives now , a fourth is in the pipeline , four more have been refined or reduced , four have no alternatives even on the horizon .
We must set realistic marketing and test end dates for each .
We must require alternatives to be used as soon as they are validated .
We must distinguish between makeup and cosmetics that have a medicinal purpose .
We must stop manufacturers and retailers claiming their products are not tested on animals when one or more of the ingredients have been so tested .
And I fear we must ask the Commission to take its proposal away and start again .
. ( DE ) Mr President , it is now my privilege to speak on behalf of my group and to have the opportunity to respond to a number of the points which have been made .
Let me do so .
I am the very first to vote only for safe products , not only on the European market but also worldwide .
This is what I have done since entering this Parliament , in respect of foodstuffs but also cosmetics .
Mr Nisticò , even after a sales ban , of course existing products should continue to be sold as products which are recognised as being safe .
The only products which would no longer be sold would be those for which animal tests had been carried out after this cut-off date .
Your Amendment No 42 , Mr Nisticò , which concerns finished products , is already covered in the existing legislation .
We have already discussed this in committee .
Some colleagues , including in particular Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo and others , pointed out that we should also take the misgivings expressed by scientists seriously .
Of course I wish to do so , and it is not my intention , John Bowis , to put any child , or even anyone older , at risk .
I am simply convinced that with the ingredients which are available and have been tested we are already able , even today , to produce any toothpaste in the world and also , for me , any kind of lipstick , of which I am so fond .
I also believe , however , that from a particular moment in time , whether it be after five years or , Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo , after ten years , as you propose , we need to say , no more .
Either people use the ingredients now available or new ingredients are tested using alternative methods .
If this is not possible then they will just have to take those which are already available .
In the Committee Mr Davies ' produced ' the philosophers ' stone .
He refuted a deadly argument .
He said very clearly : in that case perhaps we need to re-examine the delimitation between cosmetics and pharmaceuticals if this new , fantastically important suncream protects us all from skin cancer .
Good , the Committee has taken on board what you certainly have in mind , Mr Nisticò .
Then , some people have said , but there are already tests .
Yes , there are : artificial tissue is used for in vitro tests .
There are very many experiments underway , and wherever you go - you have the best contacts , Mr Nisticò , but others too - listen to what the scientists are saying ; they do not have enough money .
Let us make money available for this under the sixth Framework Programme for research , but let us also invite industry to invest more in this than they have done to date .
I should like to make one final point : if we decide on a test ban today , but also a marketing ban in a few years ' time , we need to have a labelling system for the interim period .
That is why I would invite all of you once again - and in particular my colleague and shadow rapporteur from the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrat ) and European Democrats , Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo - to take another look at Amendment No 39 .
This is the amendment which is of the greatest significance , in conjunction with other amendments of both yours and mine .
Finally , colleagues , I should like to thank you for your very fair and constructive cooperation in the run up to our discussions in the Committee , during the vote in the Committee and also here in Parliament today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in Germany there is an old proverb which says that you have to suffer to be beautiful .
With the new cosmetics directive , however , precisely the opposite is true : beauty , hygiene and well-being without risk .
Three points are of particular importance to me : optimal consumer protection , a clear label and , as a general rule , the avoidance of animal testing .
Optimal care must be combined with a maximum degree of consumer protection .
We can only guarantee this optimal safety by having numerous scientific tests .
Scientists are busily researching new test methods which deliver reliable research results and at the same time avoid the need for animals to suffer .
It is our declared objective to bring to an end the era of animal testing .
We need to support all scientific moves towards achieving this .
In the future there must be no tests on animals for products and their constituents which have already been investigated once and for which reliable results are available .
Nevertheless , consumer protection and product safety are our prime concern .
That is why in exceptional cases , where there is no alternative , we need to allow animal testing until further notice , above all when the optimal protection of infants , children , the sick and older people is at stake , including with respect to shampoos and creams .
That is why we have to permit the Member States to allow animal testing for cosmetics for two years longer than is currently laid down , provided that there is no alternative .
In certain cases it is quite simply necessary to carry out tests on animals , in particular where acute skin and eye intolerances are concerned .
It is also important for consumers to know which products can cause allergies .
It would be detrimental to the market and discriminatory , however , to label all the cosmetic fragrances listed in Annex 2 for this reason .
That is why the only products which should carry warnings are those which have also been previously identified as allergens by the Scientific Committee .
It is very important for consumer safety that there should be a clear , visible indication of the maximum and minimum durability of the product after opening .
The product label should also provide consumers with clear and easily understandable information about the correct way to administer the product .
This is about consumer protection and safety with a minimum of animal testing while encouraging the use of alternative methods .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt on her important work , which I support and admire , which seeks to prevent the use of cosmetics and perfumes leading to animal experimentation .
Like Mrs Roth-Behrendt , I love animals , and proof of this is the fact that I have two dogs , three cats and a guinea pig at home .
Now then , at home yesterday afternoon , caught up in this measure on which I was due to speak today , I asked my wife , Graziella Fatuzzo ( née Spallina ) , to show me the creams she uses .
When I had read the label , I said to her , ' Look , this cream even contains placenta material ' , but she replied , ' Really ?
You are right !
How horrible ! ' and continued to apply cream to her face .
That night , we went to bed , as usual , and I turned towards her with amorous intentions .
However , she was wearing night cream which smelt horrible . I said to her : ' But do you know that these creams are tested on animals ? '
' You are right , Carlo , ' she replied , ' you are right ' , but she did not remove the cream from her face and I could not sleep for the rest of the night .
However , later on , while I was asleep , I dreamt of Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
In my dream , she was my daughter 's mother-in-law and we were having dinner together .
There were mushrooms for dinner , and so I asked her whether she was sure they were not poisonous .
' No , no , they are fine ' she said , so I suggested that we try them out on the cat .
' No ! ' she shrieked , ' not on my pussy cat , not on animals ! '
After eating the mushrooms - this is still the dream - Mrs Roth-Behrendt was overtaken by dreadful spasms and taken to hospital , where she was saved by a stomach pump . Afterwards , she said to me , in some pain : ' Tomorrow , you must vote against my report .
You must call for products to be tested on animals before they are used in cosmetics , because , in actual fact , I do not want this dream to become reality . '
Mr President , our group thinks that Mrs Roth-Behrendt has done a very good job .
We support all the important parts of the report .
When it comes to the main issue of animal experiments , we think that this issue has been dragged out for too long .
This decision concerning an effective ban on animal experiments in connection with cosmetics ought to have been taken several years ago .
It is indefensible , both ethically and as far as the electorate is concerned , to test cosmetics on animals , which is something of a luxury .
Nor is there any doubt about public opinion on this issue .
I also believe that , if we are to force manufacturers to find alternative methods , they have had many years in which to begin applying such methods , they must know that there is a fixed date when the ban comes into force .
We know that the methods applied will vary from one area to another and that there are thousands of ingredients to choose between in cases where these methods have not been fully developed .
We therefore support a comprehensive ban on these tests .
If such a ban is to be effective , it nonetheless needs to be combined with a marketing ban .
It is only a combination of marketing and testing bans that can be really effective , which is why we obviously support a marketing ban too .
As a counter-argument , we are told that the WTO might object to a ban .
In our view , this is , for one thing , by no means certain ; and , secondly , it cannot just be accepted that , by voicing its objection , the WTO can prevent tougher animal and consumer protection regulations from being introduced .
That is , of course , what has to be fought for ; the right to tougher , more progressive legislation .
We believe , then , that this cannot be an argument for not pursuing this issue .
On the contrary , the EU ' s implementing this ban might also open the way for a worldwide trend whereby more countries follow suit and adopt the legislation we have in place and the methods we have developed for alternative testing procedures .
We also support the other parts of the report .
We believe that more account must be taken of people with allergies .
Allergies are a major and growing problem which does not only affect those who directly use products but also people in their vicinity , if such people are particularly sensitive .
That is why we are in favour of tightening up on the use of allergy-causing substances .
We also think it reasonable that there should be tough rules on content labelling and that both the date of manufacture and the best before date should be stated .
This is my way of saying that we in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left will be voting for all the principal points in this report .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission I would like to thank Mrs Roth-Behrendt and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for their support and also for the discussion today .
The Commission is well aware that the debate on animal testing is a very difficult and sensitive one .
It has raised , and is raising , a great deal of concern among the public as many of you have mentioned here today .
The issue is linked to many policy areas , all of which have to be taken into account including public health , consumer protection as well as the need for us to comply with our international obligations .
I have therefore worked in constant and close cooperation with my colleagues David Byrne and Pascal Lamy , responsible for health and consumer protection and trade issues respectively .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for the many suggestions made in their report which aim to improve health and consumer protection not least by providing consumers with more relevant information .
The Commission welcomes , in particular , your proposal for amendments relating to some categories of products such as products for children and intimate hygiene products .
You propose the improvement of safety requirements of these products as well as the extension of the requirement of a minimum durability date for all cosmetic products which would be of clear benefit to consumers .
We share the concerns of the European Parliament on the use of substances classified as carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic for reproduction .
The Commission has proposed new measures on these products in its White Paper on the new chemical policy which is now in public consultation .
Actually , I personally think that it is important for larger parts of industry to be responsible for developing new alternative testing methods .
The whole issue of chemical policies is of vital importance here because more and more new tests are needed and for that reason we need more efforts to create alternative methods quickly .
This cannot be done by one part of industry alone .
With regard to the fragrance-allergy issue , the Commission welcomes the introduction of a labelling system for allergenic fragrance ingredients .
This will represent a positive improvement to the current labelling requirements allowing consumers who are sensitive to certain ingredients to avoid products which contain them .
On the issue of animal testing , the Commission understands and shares the objective of Parliament to reduce animal pain inflicted during experimentation .
Let me recall the reasons behind the Commission 's proposal .
The aim is to ban animal testing for cosmetics within the EU and to make the use of alternative methods mandatory at the earliest opportunity while respecting our international commitments .
An additional primary objective , however , is to provide European citizens with the highest possible level of safety in all products which they use .
This proposal has the advantage of achieving these objectives by providing legally and practically enforceable measures without giving rise to possible trade disputes .
By contrast , a marketing ban would give rise to serious difficulties according to the Commission 's trade and legal experts .
It would have a significant impact on trade and would run a serious risk of a challenge under the disputes settlements system of the WTO since it would inevitably lead to discretionary treatment between imported and domestic products .
The Community is bound to ensure compliance with its international obligations .
Such a unilateral measure would run contrary to the EU 's current policy in the WTO to seek the inclusion of animal welfare issues in the discussions for the next round .
Only a coordinated approach at international level can improve animal welfare on a wider scale .
In the meantime , the Commission will continue its efforts to bring about the elimination of animal testing both at home and internationally .
I am convinced that further work in close cooperation in this very difficult and sensitive issue will finally lead to a balanced solution offering genuine benefits to animal welfare while safeguarding consumer health .
The Commission can , in principle , accept Amendments Nos 1 ( first part ) , 2 , 4 , 5 , 7 ( second part ) , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 14 ( second and third parts ) , 15 ( second part with the exception of the suggested consultation of the European Parliament ) , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 22 , 23 ( second part ) , 26 , 29 ( second part ) , 30 , 31 ( second part with the same remark as before ) , 32 , 33 ( second part ) , 34 ( second and third parts ) , 38 ( second part ) , 41 and 49 ( second part ) .
On the contrary , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 ( second part ) , 3 , 6 , 7 ( first part ) , 8 ( 3 ) , 14 ( first part ) , 15 ( first part ) , 20 , 21 , 23 ( first part ) , 24 , 25 , 27 , 29 ( first and third parts ) , 31 ( first part ) , 33 ( first and third parts ) , 34 ( first part ) , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 ( first and third parts ) , 39 , 40 , 42 , 48 and 49 ( first and third parts ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Environmental issues of PVC
The next item is the report ( A5-0092 / 2001 ) by Mr Sacconi , on behalf of the Commission on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Commission Green Paper on environmental issues of PVC .
Mr President , the Green Paper before us today on the environmental problems of PVC was presented by the Commission in July 2000 , in line with the provisions of the directive on end-of-life vehicles , which introduces a new method making manufacturers responsible for the entire life cycle of a product , from its design to its disposal .
This approach , which is intended to encourage manufacturers to design products and materials which are safer and , in particular , easier to recycle , is also the basis of the Green Paper on PVC .
Indeed , although the Green Paper does not deal directly with either the production or the use of PVC , it poses a clear set of questions regarding waste disposal which ultimately have a direct bearing on the product itself .
I would like to make this quite clear .
Although PVC has been the focus of an intense debate in recent years , and although some of the product 's properties , such as its high chlorine content , make it particularly difficult to manage in waste form , my report does not seek to penalise it in favour of other plastics .
Quite the contrary : the report explicitly calls upon the Commission to tackle the specific problems of this material as part of a broader strategy for plastics and to deal with the issue of differentiated collection as soon as possible from a Europe-wide perspective .
I have requested that this measure 's provisions on marking be extended to include all plastics as well , so as to avoid any ecomarketing .
Moreover , with regard to the PVC industry voluntary commitment , I honestly believe that this is an important step .
However , it is not enough , firstly , because , in its resolution of July 1997 , Parliament stated that it was no longer prepared to accept any voluntary agreement which was not part of the Community legal framework , and , secondly , because the objectives set out in the agreement are , quite frankly , insufficient , difficult to measure and therefore difficult to monitor .
However , there is one extremely important thing about this agreement , namely that it has gathered the vast majority of players involved in the process of production , processing and recycling and the trade union representatives around a table to develop common strategies and draw up proposals to change the current situation .
This will of industry is a positive factor and we must not waste it in our enthusiasm to regulate everything .
This is why I have called upon the Commission to put forward a legislative proposal that can serve as a reference for all future voluntary agreements as soon as possible .
This is why I have also proposed a different form of legislation laying down the adoption of legislative measures which , however , would only enter into force when companies fail to achieve pre-established objectives .
I am absolutely certain that genuinely sustainable development cannot be implemented without dialogue and cooperation with industry .
There are many other points in my report that I would like to mention , but I will limit myself to two : the disposal of the hazardous substances cadmium , lead and phthalates , in the first place , and then the multifaceted strategy for PVC disposal .
With regard to the first point , I would just like to stress how important the gradual disposal of these substances is , in the immediate term , for the health of European citizens , and that it may be even more important in terms of environmental protection .
Lastly , on the subject of waste disposal , I would like to say that the property of PVC that gives it its strength , its durability , is also something that makes its disposal an extremely complicated matter .
My suggestion was to tackle the problem from several different angles : firstly , to increase the recycling quotas , starting with certain applications such as window frames , large tubes and roofing membranes , introducing ' closed cycles ' recovery systems ; secondly , to limit PVC incineration to new generation plant , which respect the latest Community legislation and apply the ' polluter pays ' principle ; and thirdly , to dump what is left at refuse disposal sites , taking into account , in this case , the new legislation that will enter into force as of 2002 .

Mr President , I would like to end by thanking all the Members who have contributed to the improvement of my report by tabling amendments in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I feel that the text adopted in committee is genuinely well balanced and that , should the amendments rejected in committee and put forward again for the vote in Parliament be adopted now , this balance could be seriously upset .
Mr President , the majority in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy have a different opinion on the problems of PVC and their prevention to that of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy firmly believes in self-monitoring in the PVC industry and its ability to take responsibility for the adverse effects of PVC throughout the material ' s entire life cycle .
As draftsman of the opinion , I would like to say that the PVC industry has been very aggressive in its lobbying activity .
It neither sees nor admits to there being much of a problem at all .
In that respect their views are in conflict with the spirit of the Commission ' s Green Paper .
The PVC industry does not want additional studies conducted by outsiders to support their views .
Industry criticises the fact that the Green Paper focuses on a study of the far end of the life cycle of PVC products .
It is nevertheless justified , as problems start to appear at the stage when responsibility for the product has moved away from industry itself towards society .
Governments , which must be responsible for the disposal and final storage of products , must have an interest in the possible adverse effects of PVC .
Industry , on the other hand , fears these problems , as they might have an impact on the use of products and alternatives in the sector .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has made an evaluation of the Green Paper , which , in my opinion , has been greatly influenced by the industry ' s aggressive line .
A majority in the Committee voted in favour of an opinion in which concern for the environment and for health is linked to a strategy of voluntary commitments on the part of industry .
The EU ' s current regulations on product labelling , waste incineration , and sorting at landfill sites are adequate for the majority in the Committee .
As draftsman of the opinion , I would like to say that I supported the minority opinion .
The problems at the far end of PVC ' s life cycle have to be resolved , and industry cannot do that on its own .
Mr President , allow me to start by thanking Mr Sacconi .
He has certainly made every effort to see whether a compromise could be struck .
However , this has taken us away from a specific line of thought , so much so that the report is merely portraying all sides of the argument , and that is not the fault of Mr Sacconi alone , but of the entire Commission .
I would in any event like to thank him for the consultations on this matter .
PVC has often been at the centre of a controversial debate of late .
The opinions on PVC and its effects on health and the environment are very diverse .
A number of Member States have already taken measures regarding specific aspects of the life cycle of PVC .
Those measures are not the same across the board and can thus have implications for the internal market too .
We , as the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , welcome the Green Paper and are in favour of an integrated approach which , on the one hand , protects the environment and health , and , on the other , guarantees the smooth operation of the internal market , whilst also very much taking into account the interests of employment .
PVC is different from other plastics in that a large quantity of chlorine has been added , namely 25 % to 50 % , and that many other additives are also used in PVC .
In terms of application , PVC is inherently a sound material , something which we very nearly overlook in the discussion as a whole .
Pure PVC is a rigid material , which is mechanically strong , weather resistant , waterproof and chemical resistant .
We are thus fortunate , especially in the medical sphere , to have PVC .
Consequently , the environmental and health issues surrounding PVC mainly gravitate towards the presence of the additives and the way in which PVC waste is handled .
Allow me to list a few of these additives .
There are the plasticisers to start with .
In the case of soft PVC , up to 60 % of plasticisers , mostly in the form of phthalates , are added to render the material flexible .
As phthalates are rarely used in other plastics , their primary application is in soft PVC .
There is an ongoing debate whether or not phthalates have an impact on living organisms .
The second additive is cadmium .
I believe that industry has already entered into a large number of effective commitments voluntarily .
Cadmium is being phased out . In this respect , the Green Paper is in fact outdated .
The case of lead is quite different .
Lead stabilisers , in other words organotin and lead compounds , are the most relevant ones and the environmental risks are higher , especially in the case of lead stabilisers .
After all , once waste has been incinerated , lead additives from PVC account for approximately 10 % of the unwanted high lead content in residues of waste plants , which necessitates a more stringent policy in this respect .
This brings me to production and incineration in general .
In terms of production , industry has signed a large number of voluntary commitments in order to introduce very strict restrictions with regard to chlorine which may be released .
Furthermore , research has shown that these self-imposed emission values have been achieved comfortably .
Insofar as PVC is not reused , it is generally incinerated in a waste incineration plant .
An important aspect in this connection is the high chlorine content .
There are two sources of chlorine in waste incineration plants : firstly vegetable , fruit and garden waste , which contains a large amount of chlorine too , and then there is PVC .
That means that that waste in those waste incineration plants , and the possible release of dioxins , must be very closely monitored .
The elimination of PVC from waste plants is thus important .
In fact , incineration and the emissions released in the process are not the only concerns : chlorine also impacts on the recovery of energy in the waste incineration plant .
This should therefore be closely monitored .
Mr President , we would like the Commission and industry to join forces and to examine how we , in the framework of self-regulation , can make effective and clear commitments in the very short term .
Industry is prepared to do this , and I would also ask the Commission to examine this issue closely .
Mr President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , Mr Sacconi , for an excellent report .
The health and environmental problems associated with PVC are due to released chlorine , stabilisers and softeners .
These products ' life cycles are long and they remain in the ecosystem for a long time , which means the extent of the problems for the environment can at present only be guessed at .
The volume of PVC waste continues to grow , however .
We need to undertake a study as quickly as possible , and , as Mr Seppänen quite rightly pointed out , one that is not just industry ' s own investigation .
We need an impartial study to be undertaken on the adverse effects of PVC , in order to be able to prevent a strain on the ecosystems and a deterioration in people ' s health .
The problems that exist with disposal have been mentioned here .
The size of the problem is seen in the fact that the incineration of PVC can produce even more hazardous waste than that represented by the original quantity of waste , and , because it remains in the ecosystem so long , a landfill site is also a poor option for the disposal of this sort of waste .
We therefore need a proper investigation into the matter .
I do not think we can simply put our trust in industry ' s own voluntary agreements .
As we have already observed , measures must be put in place after studies have been carried out , resulting in a ban on hazardous substances .
For this we shall need legislation at European level .
As European legislators we must bear in mind the importance of the health of our citizens and the protection of the diversity of nature .
Mr President , what are we to do with PVC ?
Some people are trying to make out that this material is public enemy number one .
We find this hard to grasp .
The extent to which PVC entails environmental and health risks that do not outweigh the benefits , remains to be seen .
This might well be the case .
It appears that PVC also has certain advantages as a material . Blood transfusion bags are often cited in this connection .
Politicians need not judge these benefits .
What we should do , however , is to ask ourselves how we will deal with PVC if it appears that aspects of its use are unsafe or harmful to the environment .
What measures will we be taking ?
In our opinion , this is where the Green Paper leaves something to be desired , particularly since the alternatives for PVC are kept out of the picture .
It is a murky discussion , which is held almost as a religious debate between those for and those against .
Like Mr Sacconi , we do not wish to base our choices on myths which are being presented to us by those for and against , and which failed to convince any of us , but rather on proper research and usable comparative materials .
As long as we do not have that , we can hardly be expected to move on to the field of legislation .
Meanwhile , we do not wish to place PVC under a ban , but we do want to handle it with care .
The precautionary principle requires us to do this .
The industry ' s initiative to phase out cadmium stabilisers can only be applauded .
We believe that similar action should be taken with regard to lead and organotin .
In general , we welcome the industry ' s voluntary commitments , and believe these should be supported by a legal European framework , thus creating the scope for sanctions whilst adhering to what is possible in terms of content .
The risks at the waste stage are considerable because we cannot dispose of the harmful substances in PVC .
One of the few options that are left to us then is reuse , whereby the harmful substances simply remain inside the product .
However , the current level of reuse is so modest that it hardly contributes to a solution .
In this respect , industry could indeed make an extra effort .
Mr President , I would be exaggerating if I said that we cannot wait for the Commission ' s legislative proposals .
In this connection , the Green Paper gives in actual fact insufficient cause for this .
There is a lot of explaining to be done before that happens .
Mr President , PVC is the second most commonly used plastic .
It poses significant environment and health problems over its entire life cycle .
Those problems always go back to the same two causes : PVC contains chlorine , and requires the addition of a wide variety of hazardous additives in large quantities if it is to be functional .
The scientific studies commissioned by the Commission highlighted a number of key hazards relating to PVC , in particular during disposal .
Landfilling is a ticking time-bomb due to the release of hazardous PVC additives and the potential for dioxin formation during landfill fires .
Incineration of PVC makes the problem even worse , as apart from the risk of dioxin formation the hazardous residues resulting from PVC incineration may even exceed the quantities of PVC put into incineration .
Recycling cannot solve the problem as potential recycling rates under ecological criteria are projected to reach only 5 % by 2020 .
The problem is set to get worse , as waste quantities will increase significantly over the next decades .
At a public hearing organised by the European Commission last October there was a very strong and clear call for substitution of PVC .
This call did not just come from environmentalists . It included a coalition of industry , waste-management , local and national authorities , environmental , health and consumer interests .
There was very clear and strong support for the substitution of PVC .
There is an obligation on the Commission and the EU to respect the wishes of the vast majority of the public .
It seems to me that there is a huge amount of support for substitution , while only the PVC industry is reluctant .
Whose interests come first ?
It has to be the interests of all those people that attended the Commission hearing .
The report on substitution calls for the introduction of substitution policies for certain product categories .
We think this is a very good starting point , but it should not end there .
We would like to see it extended to all categories , not just to some .
Mr President , PVC has unique qualities as a plastic , of course .
It is strong and hard-wearing , which makes it suitable for use in a number of areas .
However , PVC also has other qualities , being the source of unusually hazardous waste .
Chlorine is one of its main components . Lead and cadmium are used as stabilisers , and phthalates are added to make the material more supple .
This creates very major environmental problems when it comes to disposing of it .
We find it an encouraging sign that we have been given a Green Paper in this area , but we hope that this will soon be followed up by a more comprehensive legislative initiative .
I believe that the Sacconi report can make very valuable contributions to such an initiative on the part of the Commission .
We are convinced that voluntary agreements are not enough and that genuine legislation is required instead .
What ought to be done , then ?
Well , first of all , there must be a reduction in total use , at the same time as substitute materials are promoted .
That is the only way of reducing the quantity of waste .
Secondly , a system must be introduced whereby manufacturers are made responsible for recycling and bear the costs of this .
Hazardous stabilisers in the form of heavy metals such as lead and cadmium must be banned as soon as possible .
It is important for this to be combined with an import ban , so that the measure is comprehensive in scope .
The issue of voluntary agreements arises in this connection .
A voluntary agreement cannot , of course , involve a ban on imports .
The fact is that an import ban and legislation in this area would benefit the most modern industries in that they would obtain protection for their more environmentally friendly products .
Legislation would be more effective and more environmentally friendly than a voluntary agreement .
We want the use of phthalates to be monitored and preferably reduced .
That applies particularly to their use in certain types of medical equipment .
We also want to see more done to promote recycling .
That means an efficient labelling system , however , and it has to be realised that much of the recycling done at present is a failure .
Overall , we are very satisfied with Mr Sacconi ' s report .
We have therefore tabled only a few amendments .
We think it only reasonable to specify a year after which cadmium is no longer to be used , just as has been done in the case of lead .
As I said before , the reason for this is that if there is no legislation and if the latter is not combined with an import ban , there is a risk of the measure ' s not being effective enough .
It would therefore be consistent to specify a deadline for cadmium , just as the report does in the case of lead .
I have also joined with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance in drafting an amendment dealing with the substitution principle whereby chemicals are to be replaced by less hazardous substances .
I believe it is important to incorporate this as one of the basic principles of the whole of the European Union ' s policy on chemicals .
That is why it is appropriate to mention the substitution principle in this context too .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for a good piece of work and for having cooperated so well with other groups .
Mr President , PVCs are plastics with a very wide range of industrial and commercial uses .
The main applications are in the building sector ( 57 % of total use ) , packaging , household appliances and cars .
The industry comprises more than 21 000 firms providing 530 000 jobs , with a turnover in excess of EUR 72 billion .
According to the Commission 's Green Paper , no full assessment of the risks connected with the use of lead-based products - which include PVC stabilisers - has been completed .
For this reason , contamination of the environment is possible during the production phase , and during the waste phase once PVC has been used .
Specific preventive and protective measures must therefore be taken so as to reduce workers ' exposure to PVC .
No data are available on the state of landfill waste containing large amounts of PVC .
I am calling on the Commission , under the auspices of the European directive , to carry out a broader study of the possible public health consequences of PVC products consigned to landfill dumps in Europe .
The next 20 years will probably see an increase of around 80 % in the quantities of PVC waste because of the increase in the average lifespan of certain PVC products such as window frames .
The Commission must centralise the information concerning the effects of PVC in our society so that appropriate measures can be taken at national and European level to reduce any possible public health consequences from its use .
The European PVC industry has signed a voluntary commitment concerning the sustainable development of PVC and this programme is to be implemented this year .
While I support voluntary commitments in general , if they are not seen to be effective then the European Union governments and institutions will have no option other than to legislate on this matter .
The Commission should ensure that no public health side effects arise from the uncontrolled recycling of PVC products .
Finally , it is important to support the use of alternatives to PVC products .
Mr President , in the Green Paper on PVC , it is unfortunate that the Commission does not go much beyond a description of the situation and the presenting problems , whilst hardly offering any solutions .
This is an early indicator of how difficult and confusing the entire discussion surrounding PVC is .
We are dealing with different points of view , which range from promoting the PVC industry right through to banning PVC .
PVC is a very important material in our society .
It is processed in many products because PVC is cheap , strong and is also durable .
When we consider a replacement policy , we must give serious consideration to the ideal characteristics of the product for which there might not be an alternative .
In the comparative life cycle analysis , a balance must be sought between environmental protection and the product ' s life .
In this connection , the differences between hard and soft PVC must also be taken into account .
The production of PVC is justified if strict emission requirements are met .
In most cases , the addition of stabilisers , especially heavy metals , does not pose a problem at the user stage , since these additives are safely embedded in the structure of the material .
The problems involving PVC start at the waste stage and are mainly due to the emissions of heavy metals and chlorine compounds , as well as large quantities of residues .
The resolution hits the nail on the head by calling for reinforcement of European waste strategy .
Unfortunately , since the recycling of PVC has been very slow to take off , incentives are needed .
In this connection , we should start with the simplest task , namely to focus on PVC which is easy to collect in large quantities .
This is what we call bulk PVC , and includes pipework , tubes , construction profiles , window and door frames , eaves and other waste from the building trade .
In order to recycle , however , the problem of heavy metals must be remedied and the emissions kept within bounds .
When phasing out cadmium , we need to give the industry ' s voluntary commitment a fair chance .
The reduction in lead is laudable too , but for the phasing out process , we need to wait for the results of the study .
In my opinion , the phasing out of organotin compounds is too premature at this stage .
Organotin compounds are needed for the production of PVC film as long as there is no equivalent alternative available .
In addition , I am still not convinced that phasing out is justified , given the possible harm this may cause .
The same applies to phthalates in my view .
It would be useful if we could separate plastics , but whether this is possible must be further examined ; that is why we ought to wait until after the publication of the study to decide on compulsory labelling .
However , what causes me real concern is Paragraph 31 of the resolution , which more or less concludes that PVC should be dumped .
The solution should , however , be found in separate storage , in anticipation of the recycling capacity expanding at some later stage .
I hope that the Commission communication planned for this year will appear soon after the European Parliament has given its opinion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that PVC is a material with advantages and disadvantages .
It is certainly wrong to confine ourselves solely to the problems of disposing of PVC .
Instead , the entire lifecycle of PVC needs to be assessed from various points of view , namely the production of the raw material , its manufacture , use and processing , recycling and finally disposal .
PVC is impressive above all because of the diversity of its applications and its long lifespan and thus has a wide variety of uses in particular in the building sector , as well as in many other sectors including medicine .
The Commission Green Paper and Mr Sacconi 's report put particular emphasis on additives , especially the cadmium and lead-based stabilisers .
Industry already voluntarily refrains from using cadmium in PVC products today .
The use of lead is also becoming less common .
In certain product groups , for example , window frames , many firms are already using calcium-zinc compounds as a substitute for this stabiliser today .
We should reward this willingness of industry to innovate and protect the environment by continuing to pursue and promote the system of voluntary commitments .
Binding legislative measures should only be contemplated if industry falls well short of agreed targets to reduce heavy metals or increase the percentage of PVC which is recycled .
A general ban on PVC products would be nothing short of fatal for 530,000 employees in the PVC sector throughout Europe , 170,000 in Germany alone .
That is why it is particularly important for socio-economic factors to be taken into account when alternatives to PVC are developed .
Against this background it would be irresponsible to call for a moratorium on PVC .
Compulsory marking of PVC products would also lead to considerable distortions of competition .
This would neither apply equally to all products nor would it deliver a noticeable environmental benefit .
The introduction of a PVC levy , the separation of hard and soft PVC and a ban on PVC in the building sector would be a particular burden on small and medium-sized enterprises throughout Europe .
In the European Union alone , 21,000 small and medium-sized companies are affected .
PVC as a material needs to undergo a thorough assessment of its entire life-cycle .
The problems and advantages need to be weighed up with a critical eye .
As things currently stand , a general ban on PVC is neither possible nor sensible and should not therefore be advocated in this Green Paper .
Mr President , Commissioner , of course I can agree with you , Mrs Müller , that we need to subject PVC to an integrated and comprehensive life-cycle analysis .
This will show that PVC windows and window frames , for example , or PVC water pipes are products which we want to use because of their characteristics .
The same is true of blood bags , for example . Although this is a non-durable PVC product , it is the most suitable because of the product 's properties .
However , contrary to you , I do think that , because of the dangerous characteristics of PVC , we really should ensure that we do all we can to prevent it from being disposed of in an uncontrolled manner .
In this respect we need to step up our efforts to introduce recycling - both mechanical recycling and melting for reuse - for all PVC products .
It is certainly possible to find a sensible recycling solution .
Here we need to show , however , much more determination and exert much more pressure so that true closed cycles develop .
To achieve this , Mrs Müller , we also need labelling , not so that the products are marked ' Danger PVC ! ' , but so that they can be collected separately and be properly recycled .
At the end of the day , alongside attempting to carry out a lifecycle analysis , this is about guaranteeing that people can use PVC .
That is why we need differentiated collection and distinctive labelling of PVC .
When making any decisions about the future of PVC we also need to guarantee that employees ' representatives are involved .
We need to improve this aspect of the Green Paper a little more and ensure that the PVC strategy is also implemented in the applicant countries as soon as possible .

When Mr Sacconi was appointed rapporteur I knew that he would do an excellent job , and I was right .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we need to constantly remind ourselves that the problems presented by PVC are unique .
There is no other product which is manufactured from chlorine and which produces such large quantities of additives with highly dubious environmental and health-related effects .
There are certainly alternatives .
What I find completely irresponsible is the panic-mongering about jobs .
As a legislator , our job is to ensure that the environment and public health are protected .
It really is not up to us to repeat industry 's panic-inducing arguments about jobs .
We need to be clear that 96 % of jobs in the PVC sector are in conversion .
This means that these manufacturers could just as easily use other materials .
After all , we know that the leading PVC manufacturers are just as capable of producing the alternatives .
That is why I do not think that we should be taken in by these mendacious arguments .
We need to remind ourselves of the risks .
The five Commission studies have made it clear that the problems are simply huge , in particular with waste incineration , which produces yet more hazardous waste .
Allow me also to comment on the argument that industry should have a system of self-regulation .
Industry has had decades to develop a strategy of self-regulation here .
In fact it has actually become clear that it only brought in self-regulation when it realised that we , in our capacity as legislator , finally intended to introduce a strategy to replace PVC .
In actual fact industry does not propose any alternatives either ; for example it does not indicate any solution to the landfill problem and does not call into question incineration , which is so fraught with problems .
I find it nothing short of dishonest that it makes the percentage of waste recycled dependent on the amounts collected , but does not wish to take part in collecting the waste itself .
Surely this shows that this is complete rubbish , a smokescreen .
We should not be taken in by this .
Instead our responsibility must surely be to propose an alternative solution and not to genuflect to industry .
Mr President , we are surrounded by chemicals in our everyday lives .
Even natural products like the leather of these desks or wood are treated with chemicals ; and of course we put chemicals in our bodies , both as food additives and as residues from pesticides ; and we use cosmetics , some of us more than others , which come into intimate contact with our bodies .
PVC has received a lot of attention and despite the fact that it has been around for over 40 years with no apparent health risks , the spectre of the risk of PVC has been raised .
I wonder if it is maybe being unnecessarily demonised , to provide an enemy that the Greens can use in their campaigns .
Parliament has already discussed the problems of phthalates , the substance used to soften plastics , in the context of children 's toys .
The problem we faced there was determining how much of the chemical gets into people 's bodies .
No migration testing is available to test how much of these chemicals enters people 's bodies .
Of course that will also be relevant in the application of PVC to medical goods .
Although I am sure I would not like a blood bag used for a transfusion I am getting , or a piece of pipe that has been put in my body , to contain poisons , similarly , I would not want a product which did not perform as well to be used in that application .
Other PVCs are treated with stabilisers to prevent them being broken down by heat and light .
In particular , window frames have been mentioned .
Cadmium , which is being phased out , and lead have also been mentioned in this context .
Lead is toxic when ingested as a compound , but no one would suggest that it is risky to be in a room which has PVC windows , this is an inert substance .
It is when we get to the end of the life of the PVC that we have a problem , as Ms McKenna said .
We must certainly try to recycle more PVC .
PVC windows have a long life - in fact , none have been recycled yet because they have reached the end of their useful life , but only because buildings have been demolished or because fashion has changed .
We are looking at a 60-year life cycle .
If we ban the use of lead in new windows , we will not be able to recycle the old windows when they come into the waste stream .
Technology is available to ensure that windows made of old lead-containing PVC are overlaid with new PVC so people do not come into contact with it .
Before we ban something we should look at the whole picture .
What are the real risks , in particular the risk of absorption when we use these products ; and what are the risks of alternative products ?
My house has wooden windows and we have to paint those every three years , so there are risks even with wood , and of course some companies marketing alternative products will play up the risks .
Lastly , we should be very careful how we use the precautionary principle because that can be dangerous : used correctly , it is a good thing but if it is used to justify actions for which there is no scientific basis , in politically motivated campaigns , it is a very dangerous principle .
Mr President , I welcome this report as a very important first step in what is going to be a very important debate .
The rapporteur has worked very hard to bring us together on this issue and I would commend the work he has done to the House .
He really has tried very hard to get us to the situation where this House will give a great deal of support to his ideas tomorrow .
We all know that there is widespread concern about PVC within our society .
We have , however , to bear in mind that it is a cheap plastic made from salt and natural gas .
Where there have been problems they have been where it has been pressed into service for uses for where it is not best suited , e.g. packaging or children 's toys .
Where it is best used , where its natural properties are best used and need not be modified , e.g. in construction products and in specialist products like blood bags , it is an extremely useful , very important plastic and very difficult to replace .
We do , however , have a problem in terms of its disposal where harm to the environment can be caused by inappropriate disposal and we need to take sensible action with regard to that .
Much of the Sacconi report I entirely endorse .
I support the phase out of dangerous and unnecessary additives .
I believe the voluntary recycling commitments must be reinforced and turned into legally binding agreements .
But I believe that the proper route for disposal is incineration in a high temperature incinerator .
Suggestions that it should go into a landfill are a serious mistake and a very bad error and I am very glad that Ms McKenna , speaking on behalf of the Green Group earlier tonight , agreed with me about that .
This is the beginning of a very long debate before we reach the stage of legislation .
It must be a wide-ranging and broad-based debate . It must reach conclusions that are satisfactory to the public , because of the concerns they have expressed , but also to the industrial needs of society .
I welcome Mr Sacconi 's report as the first step in the right direction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I particularly welcome the tabling of a Green Paper on PVC , but I have to say straight away that this Green Paper disappointed me , because it opens the door to panic , not to panic about jobs , but panic about PVC as a material .
This has been quite perceptible here today .
I should like to say to Mr Sacconi that he has tried to put a few things straight and he has succeeded in doing so in parts , but not everywhere .
I think that we have a great deal more to do here .
We must , I believe , take note of one thing : if we are discussing how to phase out or replace PVC then we are on the wrong track .
PVC is a material which we encounter every day , which we need and can use in many areas of our lives .
In my opinion this is also how it will stay in the near future .
The fact that this requires us to solve problems is something that is also true in any other sector and with any other material .
The weak points of the Green Paper are that it mentions products , such as cadmium and lead , which industry actually uses only very rarely in the PVC production process even now .
I have seen for myself how the measures under the voluntary commitments are being introduced in companies .
I , myself , am no friend of self-regulation ; I have always campaigned hard against it .
After all , we need laws to achieve something . In this case , however , it was not the lobbying trap to which someone at the front referred a few minutes ago : I satisfied myself of its effectiveness .
We should appropriate industry 's findings and not randomly back or call for substitutes which we ourselves have not yet investigated , and about which we ourselves do not know the full facts .
These are points , therefore , which certainly need to be taken into consideration , and the Green Paper needs to be altered to reflect them .
Where legislation is concerned we always say that we need to make progress quickly and that we need to know what 's what .
The entire body of legislation on the use of PVC - the incineration directive , the landfill directive - provides legislative foundations on which we can build when we want to use and dispose of this particular material .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Green Paper before us has , in my opinion , served its purpose .
All of the stakeholders - the Commission , Parliament , the companies and associations - have held in-depth discussions in the last few months about the advantages and disadvantages of PVC as a material .
Industry 's repeated request to exclude certain options from the process of reflection - such as , for example , substituting PVC with alternatives or finding replacements for the stabilisers cadmium and lead - must be refused .
In my opinion , in a Green Paper nothing must be off-limits and no possibilities must be ignored if we wish to have a sound basis for deciding on a comprehensive strategy .
Mr Sacconi 's report remedies the deficiencies in the Green Paper in a balanced way .
Thus , it is not only the critical waste-related issues which are assessed , but the entire lifecycle of PVC and possible alternatives .
I also believe that it is important for the social dimension , the impact on jobs , to be integrated into the reflection process alongside the ecological and economic aspects .
Because of its long lifespan PVC certainly presents advantages in some products , but these are reduced by the stabilisers used .
Urgent efforts should therefore be made to find substitutes for these two toxic substances .
In addition the percentage of material recycled must be increased .
The debate about phthalates , which we have already had in connection with toys , must be urgently concluded with an independent scientific risk assessment .
I hope that the last outstanding report will be included in the assessment of soft PVC in the Green Paper .
Overall I think that if we make the right decision tomorrow we will have a good basis for a comprehensive PVC strategy .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for its report , and , in particular , the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , for his excellent and balanced contribution to this issue .
The main purpose of the Green Paper was to initiate a broad public debate at European level that would be all-embracing and multi-sectoral in nature .
The aim was to get all interest groups involved in the decision-making process at an early stage , in order to ensure that the preparatory work with regard to the issue was transparent .
I , along with my colleague , Margot Wallström , organised a public hearing in October 2000 . It was attended by representatives from all interest groups .
The Green Paper had also asked for written opinions on the questions put forward .
There was a huge number of responses .
We received more than 30 000 e-mails , faxes and letters .
Most came from employees in the PVC industry and companies in the sector , but many were also received from NGOs and their supporters .
In addition , the Commission received official opinions from the majority of Member States .
The draft opinion presented to the European Parliament covers all the essential matters and will be an important guide when the Commission prepares its communication proposing a Commission strategy on PVC .
In its assessment , the Commission will mainly concentrate on the use of certain PVC additives , lead , cadmium and phthalates , as well as the treatment of PVC waste in accordance with the commitment the Commission made in its proposal for a directive on end-of-life vehicles .
These are two environmental questions requiring action , and the position on them expressed in the Committee ' s report is clear .
The Commission notes the view expressed in the report that the use of PVC should be studied thoroughly by assessing with equal precision the life cycle of products made from PVC and alternative materials .
The Commission notes with satisfaction the Committee ' s proposal that a combination of both legislative and voluntary remedies should be used in any future strategy .
Of interest too is the proposal for drafting legislation on PVC that would only enter into force if the players concerned are unable to meet the set objectives through voluntary agreements .
This safety mechanism and other methods are to be examined more closely in a communication on voluntary agreements that the Commission is at present drafting .
I would finally like to emphasise that the Commission works on the basis of sustainable development in all three dimensions of society , the economy , and the environment .
The European Parliament is kept very much up to date on developments , and in the months to come the Commission will be issuing a communication based on the Green Paper and the opinions received during the consultation procedure , which will spell out the Community ' s strategy on environmental issues connected with PVC .
This strategy will serve as a framework for future initiatives on PVC .
Pension schemes and funds
The next item is the Oral Question to the Commission pursuant to Rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure ( B5-0165 / 2001 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on Community initiatives on the future of the pension systems , including pension funds in Europe .
Mr President , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is currently working on one of the important subjects on the European agenda , which was also one of the focal points of the discussions at the Stockholm European Council , namely the issue of demographic change , combined with comprehensive social protection , and other issues related to pension schemes within the European Union .
At the moment , we have on the table the Commission proposal on supplementary occupational retirement provision .
This is certainly - in particular from the point of view of European integration - a very important proposal , which should complement the statutory pension scheme and , together with a private pension , form , as it were , a three-pillar basis for secure retirement provision in the European Union .
The second pillar , the supplementary occupational pension , will certainly play an increasingly important role in the Member States of the European Union .
One reason for this is , of course , that , owing to demographic change , State security systems are experiencing financing problems , but it is primarily because we wish to have pensions which will provide for a secure future .
In this context it should be noted that the Commission has not yet submitted a proposal for a directive to Parliament which covers the whole package necessary for an occupational pension , as it promised it would last year , but only one part of it .
The European Commission 's proposal for a directive contains no reference to tax arrangements .
For us it is very important to know to what extent the existing regulations are to be supplemented by proposals to harmonise taxes or proposals for new taxation arrangements .
Commissioner , you have announced that a communication will soon be published .
In order to actually give our opinion on the overall package , it is very important for us to know to what extent the principle of the free movement of workers might not be undermined by diverging national taxation , by different taxation of contributions , including to occupational pension schemes , and by different taxation of pensions themselves , because we do have downstream taxation in many Member States .
All of these questions remain open and are closely bound up with the success of the proposal for a directive which you have tabled .
I have one further comment : it is unacceptable for workers to be discriminated against solely on the basis of the place where they then draw this pension .
Neither tax avoidance , nor unfair tax competition , nor insufficient exchange of information on tax are responsible for this problem .
What we actually need here is coordination of tax policies , the initial moves towards which looked so promising with the Monti package .
It is also in the interests of workers who wish to engage in cross-border activities - and the Treaty provides for this - that we need to make this possible .
That is why for us in the European Parliament it is terribly important that we also receive answers from you , before we complete our discussions , on how tax coordination is to be guaranteed in this sector .
Mr President , Mrs Randzio-Plath has , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , raised questions on a particularly important issue , namely the Community initiatives on the future of pension systems .
I agree with Mrs Randzio-Plath on her first question .
The proposal for a pension fund directive is a first important step in the direction of cross-border membership of pension funds . It must be supplemented by further initiatives .
As the explanatory memorandum to the proposed directive sets out , for cross-border membership it should be possible for companies and employees to obtain tax relief on contributions paid to funds in other Member States .
This aspect will be the subject of a separate initiative by the Commission .
The second question is what the Commission will do to make cross-border membership of pension funds a reality .
First of all , it is a priority for the pension fund directive to be adopted by Council and Parliament .
However as a corollary to the pension fund directive , the Commission will adopt a communication on the elimination of tax obstacles to the cross-border provision of occupational pensions .
The adoption of the communication is now scheduled for two weeks ' time .
It is necessary to secure the elimination of discriminatory treatment against pension institutions established in other Member States .
Many Member States give better treatment , in terms of tax deduction for contributions and taxation of benefits , to schemes operated by institutions established within their own territory .
That poses a major obstacle to the cross-border movement of workers , and European businesses as well . It effectively closes off the pension markets of many Member States .
Furthermore , Mrs Randzio-Plath asks whether the Commission thinks that it should be tabling legally binding initiatives and , if not , how the Commission could still ensure that cross-border membership would become a reality .
As I said , the Commission is in the process of adopting a communication .
This communication will make clear that the most urgent obstacles to labour mobility and cross-border pension provisions can be overcome without secondary legislation , by enforcing the Treaty rules which are already in place .
I hope that you will appreciate that until the communication has been adopted by the Commission I hesitate to go into detail of its content .
I shall be very happy to discuss those with you and how the communication should and could be implemented after its adoption by the Commission .
I can , however , assure you that I see the elimination of tax obstacles to labour mobility and cross-border pension provisions as an absolute priority .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that we are having this debate today , because there is of course a need to clarify a number of points in connection with the report on occupational retirement provision , the second pillar .
Some say that this is a directive which , in the first instance , needs to be seen as part of the financial services sector .
Others think that we ought to use the directive straight away to cover conclusively the whole second-pillar package , from taxation issues to social security , therefore including biometric risks .
You have now explained that this is just one step in the process and that others will have to follow so that the directive - and here we are of the same mind - does not perpetuate existing distortions of competition .
The tax issue is fundamental here , but the social aspects , the issue of supervisory regimes , the issues of labour law and social law - which after all are not the same thing - of course also have their part to play .
Commissioner , I must also repeat that for us , and for me as rapporteur , this directive represents a step forward , a considerable one , which sets the ball rolling .
Further Commission initiatives will have to follow , which we will address in our report very clearly and in ever greater detail , because we will not have transferable pensions and mobility within the EU until the Member States agree on common taxation principles .
We know that setting the tax rate is part of income tax and thus falls within the purview of the Member States .
Nevertheless , in my view , a general shift to downstream taxation is necessary to avoid contributions and benefits being taxed twice or not at all .
A second point is very important to us , putting an end to the discriminatory tax treatment of service providers established in another Member State and pension contributions made by EU citizens resident in another Member State . This system is practised in many Member States and is tantamount to cordoning off the pension market .
Although our views may coincide here , in many respects we are sceptical about whether this really will be achieved .
On the one hand you are now announcing a communication rather than a directive - you will have your reasons for this .
A second point , however , makes me even more sceptical : at the last plenary sitting of the European Parliament , the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , announced the demands that he was going to make at the summit in Stockholm with respect to occupational retirement provision and the tax issue .
There is a difference between the demands which were expressed here in the last Strasbourg week and the final document from Stockholm .
In the final Stockholm document , the pensions issue is , in fact , reduced to the labour market of the over 55s and is no longer worded , as announced here , as a call to reform the pensions system and remove all tax obstacles .
That is why we would ask you to ensure that the initiatives , which you have again mentioned today as being necessary to follow up on the directive , quickly become part of actual Commission proposals , so that we do not encounter possible difficulties with the application of this directive on occupational retirement provision on account of the many unresolved issues .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in making this proposal for a directive the Commission is pursuing one main objective .
This objective is to use pension funds to strengthen Europe 's financial markets .
If it wanted to do this it would not need a directive at all , because all of the pension funds and financial markets are covered by the OGAF directive .
That is why it explicitly mentions occupational retirement provision , meaning the second pillar of the overall retirement provision strategy .
However , if we do mean occupational pensions then the financial markets have to be subordinate to the occupational pension schemes and not vice versa .
In this case we believe that we need to talk about a proper directive on occupational retirement provision and not only about a step or series of steps which may in 20 or 25 years ' time perhaps lead to this .
I now turn to the issue of taxation .
I have no sympathy for you , Commissioner , when you say that you cannot say anything about the content of the actual communication because it has not yet been adopted .
You , yourself , announced several times that it would be ready in March , then the beginning of April and then there was talk of Easter .
So when is it going to arrive ?
How can we be expected to work on the proposal for a directive and Mr Karas 's report in the Committee if the tax issue is not included ?
Unless the tax issue is addressed we will not , in my opinion , be able to put Mr Karas 's report to the vote .
You are therefore required to table something .
You say that you have hopes of enforcing the Treaty rules which are already in place with the help of the European Parliament ; my only objection is that you have already had the chance to do so many times in the past .
You did not need to wait , and you can always be sure of Parliament 's support for uniform taxation rules .
For once the Commission also needs to start to show courage , courage against the Council of Ministers .
Mr President , my group 's attitude towards the Commission 's attempts in this area is rather different from that of the previous speaker .
Indeed , if we were to criticise the Commission , we would criticise it rather from the other side ; we would hope that the Commission would take a rather more robustly liberal attitude , for example in the proposals which it has made for a directive on occupational pension funds , to remove the possibility of certain Member States deciding to continue to implement quantitative restrictions for which there is absolutely no evidence whatsoever of any superior performance .
The Commission should generally adopt the guiding principle that it should at least be capable of putting forward some evidence in favour of its proposals , rather than merely going for something which appears to be no better than the average practice in those Member States where the prudent person principle is adopted .
We also take a different view in urging the Commission and our colleagues in Parliament to try to make progress in taxation coordination .
While that is a very desirable aim , we should not allow the best to become the enemy of the good .
If we can make progress in improving the returns for pensioners in private schemes across the European Union , we should do so .
There is , as I have already said , absolutely no evidence that there is any reduction in safety or security as a result , and to establish an entirely spurious linkage , whereby we wait until we have a perfect scheme for taxation before we attempt to make some progress in the area of opening up and liberalising asset management seems to me to be very unfortunate .
We also welcome the Commission 's new stress on coordination rather than on legislation .
We know that it is perfectly possible for the Commission to make many proposals , as it has done in the past , without making very much progress .
This is a new approach and I hope that it will be more successful than the approach of some of the Commissioner 's predecessors in this area .
Mr President , may I begin by extending a heartfelt thanks to all speakers and to Mrs Randzio-Plath and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the fact that this debate is taking place this evening .
It certainly indicates the importance which Parliament attaches to the matter of pension funds and also to the issue of problems in the area of taxation .
May I further note that we have almost unanimous agreement - I say " almost unanimous agreement " - on the fact that it is of utmost importance to deal with the tax problems in the area of cross-border pension provision .
A fully functioning single market in this area is crucial for the free movement of workers , and it will increase the Union 's competitiveness .
For this we need of course swift adoption of the proposed pension fund directive , but that will not be enough .
We should also be dealing with the tax problems , as I said just now .
That is an absolute priority for the Commission and it is precisely why I have proposed to the Commission the adoption of a pension communication .
Today has not been the best time to engage in detailed discussions for the reasons which have been mentioned .
The pension communication has not yet been adopted by the Commission .
Mr Kuckelkorn criticised the Commission for being so tardy ; he mentioned the delays .
May I say that the Commission is running into important manpower problems .
The financial services action plan is a considerable task consisting of 42 measures .
The Lamfalussy report deals with ways in which that can be speeded up , but we are now running into manpower problems .
It is not the first time that I say this here tonight , but it is one of the reasons why we have not been as quick as we had wanted to .
Tonight is perhaps too early for a detailed discussion of that communication .
I am looking forward to presenting it to you and hearing your detailed comments once that communication has been adopted .
Mr Karas said that the directive or the communication could have included more aspects .
He mentioned social aspects and so on .
As Mr Huhne said - I know the saying better in French than in English - le mieux est l 'ennemi du bien .
He gave the English translation of that saying .
Let me say to Mr Karas : if we had to deal with all those aspects then Mr Kuckelkorn would be even angrier with the Commission because the delay would have been that much longer .
Mr Karas says that this is ein Schritt , it is just one step in the right direction and of course he is right , as I said in my opening remarks .
It is one step in what the Commission thinks is the right direction ; other steps will follow and must follow in view of the demographic time bomb which is due to go off in ten years or so .

That is why it is a good thing that the Stockholm European Council conclusions made mention of the fact that Member States now have the right to look into each others ' affairs as far as pension funds are concerned because , thanks to the mechanisms of economic and monetary union , what happens with pension obligations is of importance to Member States , since all must avoid having deficits which are larger than 3 % , or deficits which do not obey the Dublin rules that they should tend towards zero or even be in surplus .
That is a very good part of the European Council conclusions to which I should like to draw the attention of this Parliament .
Mr Kuckelkorn said , " Would you please stand up to the Council of Ministers ? "
The Commission does little else but stand up to the Council of Ministers but only , of course where this is necessary .
We do not stand up to anyone for the sake of it but only when we think that the Commission is right and the Council of Ministers , or the majority thereof , is wrong .
Certainly the Commission would not be hesitant in such cases .
Mrs Randzio-Plath drew attention to the matter of whether there should be a directive or communication , as did other Members of Parliament .
Tabling a directive on the matter of taxation would not solve anything since Member States would not be able to agree to it unanimously .
We are here in the area - I am talking about the fiscal aspects of pension funds - we are here in the area of unanimity .
Does this Parliament really think , does Mrs Randzio-Plath really think , that we can get unanimity in the Council on important fiscal aspects of pension funds ?
The chances of getting a unanimous vote in Council on an ambitious directive on the fiscal aspects are similar to the prospects of a snowball in hell .
The Council may give unanimous approval to a much smaller and insignificant directive but that is not what Parliament or the Commission wants .
The Commission is ambitious , wants to have a proposal with meat in it and that means that it is driven to issuing a communication and not a directive .
The area of unanimity is such that we must find appropriate instruments for a proposal that contains any meat at all .
If we merely wanted a qualified majority vote in Council then a directive would have very limited scope and would only cover posted workers .
Lastly , I have not yet addressed Mr Huhne .
May I express the gratitude of the Commission for his support .
He would have liked the Commission to be somewhat more robust .
The Commission seeks a maximum of robustness but it must take into account what opinions are prevalent in the Council .

The directive that the Commission has put forward deals with the security for the contributors , prudential requirements , as Mr Huhne knows ; it deals with the freedom of pension funds to invest where they would like and in which currency ; it deals with the European passport for the pension fund industry .

These are significant issues and as Mr Huhne knows full well , the sums involved are considerable .
In conclusion , the Commission now finds itself caught in a crossfire between Mr Kuckelkorn and Mr Huhne and therefore perhaps the golden mean is the right place for the Commission to be .
Commissioner , I should like to ask one more question because we have had repeated problems with the timing of events : when exactly will the communication reach us ?
The second point which is unclear is : how is a communication supposed to help to actually determine the basic taxation rules for the whole directive if you are not able to tell us the principles according to which a minimum of harmonisation , while avoiding tax discrimination or non-collection , will have to be regulated ?
Even if you leave this to the Member States a contradiction still remains , namely : how can further progress be made and what then is the significance of the directive ?
I do not think it would be useful to reopen the discussion at this time of night .
I would ask the Commissioner if he would like to respond to the first part , but not the second part .
We have already had a discussion .
This will be coming back to Parliament at a later date .
Mr President , if you allow me then to reply to the first part of the question , the answer is ' within a few weeks ' .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was closed at 8.38 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of the previous sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , on page 18 of the Minutes , I am reported as having requested that Mr Imbeni adopt a stance now that he is in Cuba .
However , what is at issue is the fact that Mr Imbeni will be making a statement on behalf of the European Parliament in compliance with the resolutions which the European Parliament has always adopted on Cuba .
Parliament did this for the last time on 11 March 1999 .
Mr Imbeni , in fact , declared on 21 March to Agence Presse - and this what Mr Barón Crespo ' s subsequent question , on page 19 , addressed to me was about - that he did not intend to make a statement .
This is not a private visit , but an official one by Mr Imbeni on behalf of the European Parliament .
That is why we are urging him to make a statement on the human rights situation in Cuba .
One can make wonderful statements in the European Parliament , but actually doing it in situ is a mark of greater courage .
Mr van Velzen , I have taken note of that .
I recall that the President told you yesterday that she would attend to that .
Mr President , I regret the fact that we are discussing this matter once again .
Only yesterday , the chairman of my parliamentary group extolled the qualities and the sincerity of Mr Imbeni , and the way in which he has defended human rights , in Europe and in the rest of the world .
I also regret the fact that , once again , an attack has been made on a Vice-President of this House when he is not here to defend himself .
I hope that these words of mine will be recorded in the Minutes .
( Applause from the left )
Thank you , Mr Seguro .
I do not intend to allow a debate on this subject .
If there are any other requests to speak on this , I shall not accept them .
The President made it clear yesterday what she intends to do .
So that is the end of this item .
Mr President , I have no comments with regard to the Minutes , but I have unfortunately missed a large proportion of this interesting discussion because there are no Dutch interpreting services available at the moment .
I am sorry , Mrs Buitenweg , but it would be pretty difficult to do anything about that at this stage .
If there is no Dutch interpreting , then can I please ask the Sittings Service to do something about that .
I am afraid that I cannot do any more at this point .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Decision on urgent procedure
The next item is the vote on the request for urgent procedure on the following proposal : Proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1251 / 1999 on the introduction of a support system for producers of certain arable crops [ COM ( 2001 ) 87 - C5-0083 / 2001 - 2001 / 0043 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , will speak in favour of the request .
, chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . ( DE ) Mr President , this request for urgent procedure is about the fact that high-protein feed or pulses are to be grown on set-aside land before this year is out .
What we have here is an old demand made by Parliament finally taking effect .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has held negotiations with the Council presidency so that this scheme can be introduced within this year .
That is why my committee is supporting this request for urgent procedure .
This also provides an opportunity to grant financial compensation to cattle farms hit by the beef crisis caused by BSE , without imposing any additional burden on the budget - and I stress the word additional . And these farms would nevertheless be given income aid through the channel of animal feed .
That will please Commissioner Schreyer .
I call on the House to vote for this request .
As no one wishes to speak against the request for urgent procedure , we can now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request for urgent procedure )
2002 budget guidelines / Financial perspective
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Budget ' s proposed guidelines that we are now discussing attempt to be clear and concise in order to guide the evaluation of the proposed budget for 2002 , and we hope that they address the issue which the people of Europe currently consider to be most important : the European Parliament must be the forum par excellence for protecting the interests of Europe ' s citizens and for representing their political will and their democratic status .
It is with this idea in mind that the following priorities have been defined :
First of all , the issues of food safety and restoring consumer confidence , which go hand in hand with pursuing the reform of the common agricultural policy .
BSE and foot-and-mouth disease have raised many issues .
The establishment of a European food safety authority has become crucial ; it must be an authority with real power to act .
At the same time , a great deal is still expected of the Veterinary Inspection Office . We are waiting for decisions to be taken on this .
The situation that I have described , together with the prospects of enlargement and the new round of negotiations at the World Trade Organisation , is determining the shift in the focus of our system of agricultural production .
We need to quickly work out in which direction we are heading and why we are going there .
We must start discussing this issue before 15 September .
Let me clarify this aspect : what we want to have done , by that date , is to have begun the discussions that will lead to a shift in the focus of the common agricultural policy , not , obviously , to a thorough reform of it .
In the meantime , we must keep in mind the tragic problems facing so many farmers and draw our conclusions from the facts .
The European Parliament must be fully informed about everything , a situation which is a world away from the lack of decision-making power it currently suffers with regard to most expenditure in the field of agricultural policy , which is , therefore , a thoroughly undemocratic situation .
I would like to see codecision in this field and I feel that the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure is conditioning the way a large part of European Union expenditure is monitored .
Secondly , the budget must be implemented with greater rigour , efficiency and transparency .
We attach the greatest importance to monitoring he implementation of the budget and to creating an effective link between such evaluations and the adoption of supplementary budgets and even of the budget for the following year .
Hence my determination to ensure that , within the European Parliament , this task is carried out in the various specialist committees .
Central to achieving this objective is the report that the Commission will present in June .
Thirdly , the European Union ' s external action must be effective , in line with objectives that have been set previously .
We see the importance of the Union ' s external action , both in our relations with neighbouring countries in the Mediterranean basin , the Balkans and with Russia , and in our relations with other parts of the world , with which we have traditionally worked in cooperation , and even in our contribution to the development of third countries .
The potential for the EU ' s external action justifies making sufficient funds available and also justifies the requirement for greater efficiency .
Fourthly , we wish to see the creation of a genuine area of freedom , security and justice , as defined in 1999 by the Tampere European Council .
There have been delays in implementing legislative and administrative measures that have been translated into the corresponding budgetary appropriations with a view to achieving an effective asylum and immigration policy , and there is cause for serious concern about clandestine immigration .
We are seeing trafficking in human beings , the genuine social exclusion of millions of illegal immigrants and the despair that this situation generates deserves closer attention . This phenomenon calls for a multidisciplinary approach .
My fifth point is that we must be committed to achieving the objectives laid down at the Lisbon European Council , specifically the objectives of making a real contribution to creating more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
We need our citizens to be prepared to live and work in an information and knowledge-based society and the European Union must play a key role in this field .
The e ­ learning initiative must be ambitious because it is so crucial .
We must move from preparatory action to adopting a legal basis that will ensure our prominence in this field .
I live in an island region , which , under the terms of Article 299 of the Treaty , is called an ' outermost ' region .
I am therefore aware of what geographical barriers are and how the European Union can help to break them down .
I am aware , however , that the Union contains many other barriers , which are more difficult to discern than geographical ones .
The survival of this project , which can never be considered to be over or completed , depends on our ability to break down all of these barriers .
Let us find the courage to fight on .
I shall conclude by turning to the other institutions and stating my desire that we can work together and cooperate as closely as possible on this budgetary procedure .
Mr President , we are at the start of the budget cycle .
The report that is now before us is not a detailed report , but one which outlines Parliament ' s involvement .
I would like to thank my fellow MEPs warmly for accepting this constraint and for not including all kinds of details in this report , however tempting that may be .
We will be further detailing the 2002 budget of the other institutions very shortly .
I will ensure that future cooperation with your will be sound .
Allow me to outline the salient points of the report .
I would like to start with enlargement .
It will not come as a surprise to anyone that enlargement will also be one of the Committee on Budgets ' key challenges in the next few years .
We cannot afford to sit idly until that moment arrives .
The institutions must be ready to welcome the candidate countries .
That is why - and that is so important - we are asking all institutions to develop long-term plans in which the implications of enlargement are mapped out , also covering the extra building and staff requirements , and especially the effects on the translation services .
The preparatory activities generate costs , even before enlargement has actually taken place .
The financial perspective must therefore reflect these extra needs .
Another major point is efficiency .
We owe it to the tax payer to exercise strict budgetary discipline and healthy financial management .
Activity-Based Management and Activity-Based Budgeting will help us achieve this .
That is why we are asking the institutions to make their budgets more transparent .
Interinstitutional cooperation can also contribute to a more efficient use of funding and , where possible , this will need to be improved and extended .
We will be drafting proposals to that effect this coming year .
The institutions will need to display more than budgetary discipline .
They will need to play an exemplary role .
I would like to mention two areas which are important to me in that respect .
Equal treatment , not only in terms of gender , but also in terms of all the grounds for discrimination listed in Article 13 of the Treaty .
Equal treatment should be the cornerstone of our staffing policy .
I would therefore ask the institutions to look into the barriers to equal treatment , the measures required to remove these barriers and the impact this has on the budget .
I do not rule out the possibility that increased environmental awareness on the part of the institutions will also require adjustments in the budget in the short term .
But whilst we in the environmental action programme only talk about the exemplary role of the government , here , we can put our money where our mouths are .
The institutions need to make use of the amendments to the EMAS Regulation , as a result of which organisations like ours can now also take part in Community ' s audit system governing environmental management and the environment .
In this connection , we need to consider our buildings and the materials we use .
We need to develop mobility plans .
I would like to discuss all 35 paragraphs from the report with you in detail , and I know that you enjoy this subject matter just as much as I do , but I need to restrain myself , not only from a human point of view , because my fellow MEPs have heard the same tale a few times now , but also from a budgetary point of view .
In the final analysis , this will all need translating and then distributing in writing .
We would urge the other institutions to develop plans in order to avoid the unbridled growth of the work for the translation services .
We hope to set a good example .
I will therefore merely indicate a few aspects by way of thumbnail description , namely the importance of paying off the buildings as soon as possible via capital injections , the drafting of a statute for European political parties , and the statute for assistants .
I will , however , say a few words on the Council ' s budget .
This budget has experienced strong growth .
I do not deny the fact that there is a great deal of internal reorganisation and that strict budgetary discipline is being exercised .
However , it just so happens that the Council is taking on an increasing number of operational activities in its budget , and this is why , slowly but surely , a kind of shadow Commission is being formed - a second institution where European policy is being executed .
That is an objectionable development .
Parliament should not have to be sidelined because this expenditure is being included in the Council ' s budget , for fear of breaching a gentlemen ' s agreement .
Transparency of the European safety and defence policy ' s expenditure is too important .
If necessary , this can also be done via the Council ' s budget , by including a separate heading .
Only by means of a transparent budget can Parliament exercise democratic control on the spending of European funding .
This subject shows once again that the budget is not so much a technical-financial matter , but mainly a political issue .
, rapporteur . ( ES ) Mr President , I find myself in a rather strange and uncomfortable situation because , despite having the unanimous support of the Committee on Budgets , I am convinced that at midday I will have to ask for the report to be returned to committee .
Why ?
Because while we are debating this report here , the Council is also debating this same proposal and it is therefore possible that , if an agreement is reached , we will not be able to vote on the resolution today , but rather we will have to ask for the report to be returned to committee in order to ratify the agreement with the Council and vote on it on 2 and 3 May .
Ladies and gentlemen , the subject of the report may seem excessively technical : it deals with the adjustment of the financial perspective to the implementing conditions .
Clearly , the adjustment , as its name suggests , has to do with how the Structural Funds have been implemented in previous years , since the amounts in category 2 of the financial perspective do not only represent a spending ceiling , but also a spending target .
In 2000 , no less than EUR 14 000 million of the Structural Funds could not be implemented , since it was the first year of the new programming period ; that is to say , EUR 14 billion , of which 8 billion was rebudgeted in 2001 and therefore around 6 billion remains to be rebudgeted , to put it in round figures .
This EUR 6 billion can be rebudgeted , but we must remember that , given the new rules of the Structural Funds , this is the last time we will be able to operate in this way .
Therefore , amounts which are not implemented in future years can very easily be cancelled .
That is why we are concerned .
It is in our interest that everything is implemented correctly and that there are no delays in programming .
I believe that this objective is shared by the Commission , the Council - whose absence I regret , although I understand that it is holding a meeting in Brussels on the same issue - and Parliament .
Our differences so far relate to two chapters .
One lesser one : on whether a new budgeting of payment appropriations had to be included .
We believe that this is important in order to prevent the problems which we have had in previous years .
The other institutions do not agree .
This will not be the central issue .
And the other difference relates to the profile of this new budgeting .
Originally , the Commission was in favour of more linear budgeting .
Based on our experience , and advised by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we proposed a new way of budgeting for commitment appropriations in more of a bell-shaped manner : what is technically known as back loading , which involves allowing the large initial amount to be implemented now and then making another charge , a rather more significant one , at a later stage of the programming period .
Because we are convinced , from experience , that the appropriations could not be implemented next year in the way the Commission proposes .
We believe that a perspective such as this will allow a more harmonious development of the implementation of the Structural Funds .
The specific figures we have proposed are not a question of principle .
The question of principle is the profile of spending .
And this is the question on which , after yesterday ' s meeting - where we heard an intervention from the Commission in which it gave us details on the state of negotiations of the new programming - we believe that we are perfectly able to reach an agreement within a reasonable time scale , which the Council could accept and which would solve the problems of Greece , Spain and Italy in particular in relation to future programmes .
I simply wish to defend these positions and say that , in the spirit of honest cooperation between institutions , it would in no way violate any article of the Treaty if the date set in the Interinstitutional Agreement , 1 May - which , by the way , is not a working day - were delayed until 2 May , which is the day Parliament meets .
In the meantime , we have a meeting of the Committee on Budgets on 24 and 25 April , and , if the Council reaches an agreement this morning , the Committee on Budgets could approve the agreement definitively and , even without debate , approve it during the part-session of 2 and 3 May .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
Mr President , I am delighted to follow Mr Colom i Naval 's excellent speech .
I am speaking also on behalf of my colleague , Mr Wijkman , who is not here .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation is very concerned that the EDF is still not budgeted .
There is now something called the Joint Parliamentary Assembly of the ACP and EU , the only parliamentary assembly in the world which does not look at a budget .
It is quite ridiculous that this state of affairs should be allowed to continue .
If we are going to implement sectoral targets in the development budget then we need to move towards a budget which can have result-oriented strategy included in the budget itself so that the country strategies that the Development Commission is trying to put into place can decentralise and give greater control to our delegations .
Otherwise we have an old-fashioned budget looking at a new model of economic management .
Another thing I would like to mention is information technology and sustainable energy in the development budget .
Transport and communication has been old-fashioned stuff that has been put in the budget year after year , but there are new technologies that we also need to take into account .
Finally , a global fund for the combating of Aids needs to be considered in our budget .
Just asking the chemical companies and pharmaceutical companies to cut prices is not enough .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would like to extend heartfelt thanks to both rapporteurs Mr Costa Neves and Mr Colom i Naval for their work .
I hope that we will be able to conclude the Colom i Naval report with a Council agreement within the not too distant future .
I also hope that the wishes of my Committee will be taken into consideration in this connection .
With regard to the Costa Neves report , I believe that the rapporteur has set the right tone .
However , it is always a little difficult at this stage to be too specific until we have the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget .
However , I would like to take this opportunity to make an observation with regard to the employment programmes .
Over the past few years , this Parliament , the Commission and the Council have developed all kinds of employment programmes .
I believe that this year , we should perhaps take stock and try to draw the necessary conclusions .
I must admit that I have been very concerned recently , because the Commission displays a slight inclination , when we talk about open coordination , to listen only to the Council , and to overlook the fact that the budget falls within the remit of both arms of the budgetary authority .
It is , of course , up to the Council to give substance to open coordination , but with regard to the budgetary issue , both arms of the budgetary authority are competent .
The Commission , and especially the Council itself tend to overlook this .
I have the impression that the Council is , in some respects , acting in a way reminiscent of Mafia leaders in the United States who exchange mutual territories , and not so much like the competent budgetary authority that the Council should be .
This is also evident from its absence today .
That is , in actual fact , a very important , if not entirely clear , debate .
In any case , we will be taking a closer look at those employment projects and the issues surrounding open coordination in general , and will draw the necessary conclusions .
Mr President , in the opinion submitted to the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs highlighted a number of priorities , almost all of which can also be found in Mr Costa Neves ' report , for which I would like to give him my thanks .
First of all , I would reiterate that the creation of a genuine area of freedom , security and justice is of strategic importance to the whole of the European Union .
This priority , which was formally confirmed at the Tampere Summit , generated a major work programme for the Commission with extremely tight deadlines .
We therefore believe - and I direct this point in particular to the Commissioner - that the justice and home affairs sector must be allocated the manpower and administrative resources required to carry out the mountain of tasks before it , in an efficient manner and within the agreed time scales .
One of these tasks - the asylum and immigration policy , including the fight against criminal networks - clearly occupies a central position and I should like to thank the general rapporteur for having taken this up expressly in his draft resolution .
Lastly , I should like to draw the Commission ' s attention to the difficult problem that the European Union will face in the future , which is the effective control of its external borders .
The EU ' s borders , which are already very extensive and difficult to control at the moment , will be even more so in the future , when the current applicant countries , from which immigrants heading for the EU originate , will then become gateways to the territory of the European Union .
That is why , Commissioner , we believe that you must lay down strict guidelines in the 2002 budget that will enable us to face up to this challenge .
The EU cannot become a fortress , but neither can it start to resemble a labyrinth of criminal immigration networks .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Mr Costa Neves for his cooperation , congratulate him on his report and tell him that the priorities in the field of external policy are perfectly clear : enlargement , which does not come within heading 4 ; the prevention of conflicts and crisis management ; the reconstruction of the Balkans ; the European Union ' s Mediterranean policy ; the Nordic dimension , of course , and cooperation and improvement in human rights fields .
I would in particular like to stress that the Committee on External Affairs has asked - the Commissioner for External Affairs and I had the opportunity to talk about this with Mr Patten last week in Santiago de Chile - that the second Summit of Heads of State or Government of the European Union and Latin America and the new agreements which are being negotiated with Chile and Mercosur be considered as priorities .
The Committee on External Affairs therefore insists on these priorities and , of course , all of this must be carried out with the most effective management and the greatest transparency .
We hope that the cooperation with the rapporteur continues at first reading .
Mr President , as budget year 2002 is very important - one might even say incredibly important - because of enlargement , which is now entering a crucial phase , and because we have significant problems with the common agricultural policy and have not yet made full use of the Structural Funds , the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism wishes to propose three key points .
We believe that structural measures under the four Community initiatives Interreg , Leader , Equal and Urban are very important , as are innovative measures .
We believe that it is important for at least some TENs to be extended so as to eliminate bottlenecks .
In the long term , environmental and employment policy has to be improved and emphasis should be placed on greening the budget , which has not been taken into account up to now .
We do not think it is the end of the world that none of our committee 's conclusions has been incorporated into the guidelines so far , but we hope that this will be possible in future .
As a mountaineer I would like to say , in parentheses , that the fact that 2002 is the International Year of the Mountains should be reflected in the budget .
Otherwise , I accept the guidelines and support them .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , listening to the main rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , you could be forgiven for thinking that this year 's budget procedure chiefly consisted of considering the agriculture budget .
I am indeed grateful to him for emphasising the agricultural side , but in concrete terms this would mean - and this is something we welcome - that the 2002 budget would be taking the first steps towards the required reform of EU agricultural policy . However , these steps would be somewhat less incisive because the 2002 budget will probably be very much marked by the need to overcome the BSE and foot-and-mouth crises .
On behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I would therefore suggest that we take the issues before us particularly seriously , and that we therefore ensure that provision is made for the possibility of bringing together appropriations - including those in the area of compulsory expenditure - in the form of a fund for " animal diseases and market emergencies " . This would guarantee that we really have sufficient funds to deal with the crisis , which has assumed catastrophic proportions , in conjunction with the Member States .
On no account will we accept an attempt to tackle problems by means of across-the-board cuts , as was discussed for the previous budget .
We trust that there will not be a request of this kind from the Commission when the preliminary draft budget for 2002 is submitted .
In the context of export refunds and of a new EU agricultural authority , which is now on the cards , we should also try to continue the trend of further reducing expenditure in respect of exports , where it is still very high .
This would not only make it easier for us to energetically defend our position at WTO level , but would also increase our overall flexibility as regards agriculture and rural development .
In other words , despite all the problems that the BSE and foot-and-mouth crises are currently creating for us , we would like to see Commission 's preliminary draft budget containing the first positive steps towards the much-needed reform of EU agricultural policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to present the priorities of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the 2002 general budget .
The first point relates to the issue of statistical information , or rather the lack of it .
Statistical information is highly important for the work of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
We repeatedly find ourselves in situations where the statistics made available for our work are quite simply totally inadequate .
This applies to the structural indicators , for example .
The committee is therefore calling for sufficient funding for the budget line on statistical information .
Secondly , we are calling for adequate risk capital to be made available for small and medium-sized enterprises in particular .
Thirdly , we consider it very important to have adequate resources for the Financial Services Action Plan .
The same also applies to the Commission , of course .
We are reacting here to the Lamfalussy report .
It is better to tackle this point than to go through the legislative procedure at a snail 's pace .
Fourthly , we wish to stress the need to improve the human resources of the Commission 's Directorates-General .
Lastly , it should be ascertained whether the Prince programme can be continued during the first six months of the year 2002 to tackle the particular difficulties of small and medium-sized businesses which have still not made sufficient preparations for the switch to the euro , partly because of their financial resources , in contrast to larger companies and banks .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on establishing a clear set of priorities .
I particularly welcome the emphasis on food safety and consumer confidence and improving the implementation of the EU budget .
However , speaking on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I have to express my concern at the absence of any major areas of this committee 's priorities in these guidelines .
The committee 's opinion has been appended but I would urge the rapporteur and the Commissioner to accord the following areas greater emphasis during this year 's budgetary process .
First , the funding for the information society does not really correspond to the importance attached to it by the Heads of State or Government when it was launched with much fanfare at Lisbon .
The information society is an area that has caught the imagination of European citizens and they want to see results . But within the EU budget it is nothing more than an afterthought .
If we are to really connect the EU to its citizens , we must put our money where our mouth is .
We need to recognise that this is where the future of new European jobs lies .
However , the EU , and more importantly the EU budget , has never taken this on board .
We also have to address the issue of the possibility of the emergence of a digital divide in Europe .
We must do all we can to prevent the emergence of an information underclass .
That would drive a thick wedge between those who have access to information and those who do not .
I therefore urge the Commissioner to seize the initiative to ensure that the resources are enhanced to allow the information society to conform to the principle of equality , in terms of both accessibility and opportunity .
My second point relates to energy .
It is clear that we are too dependent on external resources .
What we must do is enhance Europe 's renewable energy capacity .
We must avoid a situation similar to last year where industry across Europe was brought to a standstill by a small group of people .
Therefore , we need corporate approach looking at alternative sources of energy .
Finally , what I am trying to obtain is not a shopping list of priorities for these guidelines ; I am , however , trying to ensure that adequate support and resources are targeted to areas that underpin Europe 's future economic success .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , which , although it cannot be described as a large spending committee , has an important role : to protect the rights of citizens who appeal to this Parliament to look after their rights .
We have two very modest requests of the budget which are contained within the Buitenweg report .
One is that there should be a proper database so that citizens can follow their petitions through the Internet .
We expect that to be up and running by the end of next year and we want there to be money for that .
Secondly , in preparation for enlargement , whatever language regime we choose , preparations must be made to enable citizens of the applicant countries to petition this Parliament in their own language .
Finally , I should like to make the point that the Committee on Petitions does not require money , but that it does require the support of Parliament , the Commission and the Council so that it can have access to documents .
That is free .
It does not cost anything .
But I can tell you that at present there are a number of petitions - for instance the Lloyd 's petition - concerning which the Commission and Council are refusing Parliament access to information .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing the budget guidelines .
In other words , we are discussing the political priorities we wish to set in the budget for the coming year .
I would like to make it very clear that not every issue that arises in Europe is an EU issue .
And not every EU issue has to be specified in the budget .
It is certainly important to make these distinctions here .
That is why I would like to concentrate on a couple of key areas .
The number one topic is , of course , the problem of how , in view of the foot-and-mouth crisis and the BSE situation , we can take budgetary measures - and all of this has an impact on the budget - to achieve sustainable agriculture guaranteeing optimal consumer protection and so that we can also sell European products in other parts of the world .
That is the be-all and end-all for our farmers .
This is an important task that we have to tackle together in the context of the 2002 budget .
The second topic is that the European Union is gaining ever greater importance because of the responsibility it is assuming in the area of common security and defence policy .
I am gradually coming to the view that it is no longer acceptable for the 15 foreign ministers of the European Union - and it is perhaps worth asking if we really need so many - to travel around the world , dispensing European largesse , and making promises that we in the final analysis have to struggle to implement using budgetary sleight of hand .
This is not acceptable .
The Council really must consider if everything it is doing in this way is advisable .
The third key area is this : we are now coming to a very critical phase in the enlargement negotiations .
And the more concrete the progress we make with enlargement is , the greater the impact on the budget .
And this is also an area where we have to state in the clearest terms that it is not enough to tour the capitals of the applicant countries slapping everyone on the back and saying " Things are going well " .
Not if the Council balks at making available money and appropriate instruments when it matters and is tight-fisted when it comes to providing financial resources .
That is just not on .
The final topic that I would like to mention , as it was also discussed in the Committee on Budgets , is justice and home affairs policy .
This is , of course , a political priority that just involves a couple of established posts for Mr Vitorino .
It does not have an impact on the budget .
Justice and home affairs policy does not have an impact on the budget .
That is simply a matter of fact .
So we need to make a distinction between politically significant themes , including justice and home affairs policy , in the coming year .
But this area is not a top priority for the budget guidelines , because it is not considered to be very significant .
I would , however , also like to mention the subject of administrative budgets .
I would like to ask , without making any bones about it , who the administration is there for ?
It should not be an end in itself , but rather a means of delivering , organisationally speaking , what the various institutions have to achieve .
That is why we in the European Parliament should consider at this point - in the middle of the parliamentary term , which actually falls at the end of this year - whether the way we work is correct across the board .
I am not a great supporter of the way we now keep establishing one subcommittee after the other ; for example , there is now talk of setting up a Subcommittee on Consumer Protection . Instead , we should be considering whether we can adapt the existing committee structures so that we can discharge our legislative responsibility more effectively .
These are issues that we should certainly be discussing this year , and this naturally has an impact on the budget .
We are also discussing the financial perspective .
The WTO will also have budgetary consequences for us in 2002 .
I have already mentioned the subject of enlargement and foreign policy , an area in which we are into our third year of special arrangements .
We are talking about the Sixth Framework Programme on Research , which we want more money for .
We are also taking about inflating administrative budgets .
The Council now wants an additional EUR 10 million .
So we are also coming under enormous pressure as regards administrative expenditure .
In short , that means that all the grandiose announcements made by the Heads of State or Government in Berlin in March 1999 to the effect that Europe 's ability to act would be guaranteed up to 2006 are proving , just two years later , to be unrealistic and inaccurate .
I can accordingly only ask the Council to finally come clean here - to drop their trousers , as we say in German - and adjust the financial perspective , as otherwise we will not be in a position to meet what is required and expected of Europe in budgetary terms in the long run .
Mr Ferber , on moral grounds I have to reject your last proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your comment , Mr Schmid , you saved me from having to say the same thing .
Of course , it is tempting , when Markus Ferber makes such an offer , to take him up on it .
Although seeing him with his trousers down is not a particularly appealing prospect , the idea of debating the issue he has raised here is not at all bad .
Because a proposal such as the one he has just made , that is to give the financial perspective a thorough overhaul , is certainly something that needs to be taken very seriously and is a very good starting point .
However , we have to recognise that we are , of course , dealing with taxpayers ' money .
We are dealing with tax revenue .
It is all very easy to stand there and say : " The framework you have established is pure nonsense , we can just sweep it aside , because we need more . "
It is all very easy to say that with hindsight .
Of course , the world has changed over the last few weeks and months , and I will make no secret of the fact that over the last few years I have repeatedly asked whether the financial resources for one thing or another really are adequate in view of the acute problems we are faced with .
These acute problems are some of the issues the Group of the Party of European Socialists wishes to address during the budget debates .
Consumer confidence and food quality are , of course , also acute problems .
These are two of the really major priorities that in recent weeks and months have really run into difficulties because of unforeseeable events in the fields of agricultural policy and public food supply .
But we cannot just stand there now and act as if nothing had happened , we cannot just bury our heads in the sand and say that everything must carry on as before and that what was agreed in the past will remain correct for ever .
At this point we really must make the question of consumer protection and food quality , in the context of a reform of agricultural policy , one of our top priorities .
Now let me mention another top priority and urgent issue . In this case I must insist that we cannot simply forget and sweep aside something that we have fought hard for for two years , by which I mean the issue of peace in Europe and , in particular , peace in the Balkans .
This is not a subject that can just be brushed aside because a new and more serious problem has arisen , and perhaps one that affects us more directly .
Rebuilding the Balkans and providing peacekeeping forces , providing support for the people there , are also issues that impact on the future viability of Europe as a whole .
Everything that we fail to do now to create peaceful structures there may rebound on us at some time in the future .
Which of you would like to guarantee that we will not be drawn into military conflicts again in the future if we give people the impression that we are more likely to support them when they are fighting each other ?
It must be obvious at the moment that the best thing is for them to work together with us to maintain peace in Europe .
Another acute need that is also the result of events in recent years , but is at the same time also a pointer for the future , is the fight against unemployment .
This is an area in which we have , in the past , been successful in Europe , in the European Union .
Last year , the unemployment rate fell from 8.7 % to 8 % .
The European Union itself has , of course , not borne the greatest part of this burden , but we can certainly claim to have played an integral part in making progress by virtue of our proposals and initiatives .
If social inclusion is taken seriously and we refuse to accept that sections of the population are excluded from participating in the labour market , for example , then we have to take appropriate countermeasures here .
People have a right to expect us to fight hard against unemployment .
But social inclusion - as Neena Gill has already said - also means that with the advent of new technology everyone must have an opportunity to participate in this society .
Such participation cannot depend on whether people have enough money to buy a top-of-the-range computer and use it for their children 's education . We must make absolutely sure to involve everyone .
One point that is certainly much more important in political terms than in budgetary terms is , as Markus Ferber has quite rightly said , the issue of immigration flows .
I am pleased that we in the Committee on Budgets agreed that we would deal with this subject under the headings of " migration " and " provision of aid " .
How can we deal with immigration that is either unwanted or which we may find desirable at some point in the future ?
I am not talking about criminalising it or reacting to it emotionally , but we must tackle this subject .
I regard it as being very positive that we can reconcile this with the wording of the corresponding part of Mr Costa Neves ' draft report .
My next point is the common foreign and security policy .
This is another point that may not have a particular impact in budgetary terms at the moment , but which is certainly important politically speaking .
We should no longer be worrying about how we in Europe can enhance the networking of military structures or how we can get more military units on the ground - European security policy should also be about disarmament , that is to say about dismantling the weapons of mass destruction that threaten us .
This should not just be a one-sided matter ; it must also be in our interest to contribute to a global process of dismantling weapons of mass destruction .
That should be an important priority for us .
In conclusion I would like to say that we intend to accept the draft report prepared by Mr Costa Neves , which we consider to be very good .
There is room for improvement in some places , and we have tabled appropriate amendments , and I know that there is a lot of support for these , for which I am deeply grateful .
We will always consider the budget - not only this year , but every year - from this point of view : do we as a Parliament actually have a voice in the budget as a whole or do we only have a right of say on one part of it ?
As we see it , there can only be one overall budget , without distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure , and it needs to cover revenue and expenditure alike .
Only then will the budget procedure be complete , and that is our long-term goal .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg for their excellent reports .
The 2002 budget guidelines clearly show the budgetary policy the European Parliament is to adopt .
Parliament wants to simplify EU administration and make it more efficient , underline the importance of the personal responsibility of officials , improve the way the budget is implemented , strengthen economic development and promote sustainable agriculture .
Commission reform and making administration more efficient are key objectives .
To achieve this the intention is to move towards an activity-based budget and administrative system .
People must be responsible for their own actions in matters of efficiency and economy .
Personal responsibility must be taken for delays , and the same applies to the fluidity and legality of financial operations .
In this regard the reports clearly allude to the slow handling of the Structural Funds programmes by the Commission .
We shall return to this subject in connection with the discharge procedure for 2000 .
In the reports , the key to smooth , efficient and responsible administration is a newly revised Financial Regulation , which is an urgently required measure .
Parliament is also demanding that delays and arrears should be dealt with .
My own group demands that the problem of arrears should be sorted out more effectively , and says that we should be able to dissolve outstanding commitments after a certain period of time has passed .
One particular problem is the agricultural budget .
The margin in its financial perspective has been almost used up as a result of the BSE crisis .
The idea of savings in the agricultural budget , which was discussed at Berlin , would not appear to be the solution at present .
The BSE crisis is jeopardising the entire budget because of the need for extra storage and exports .
In this connection , however , I cannot personally agree with Commissioner Schreyer ' s publicly expressed call for a cut in subsidies .
Farmers are the only section of the population in Europe whose income levels are determined directly by the EU .
For that reason , they cannot be expected to foot the bill personally for the BSE crisis .
Agricultural aid does not encourage over-production , because it is not connected to the volume of production and is based on surface area and number of livestock .
We must remember that our fiercest competitor , the United States , subsidises agriculture on a scale that is clearly greater than in the EU .
It would be important if the Commission were also committed to Agenda 2000 .
The main question for the future will be the trend in administrative expenditure under heading 5 .
The Council is developing its own military crisis management organisation and has asked , among others , for 51 new posts in the second supplementary budget in the middle of the budgetary year .
Crisis management is clearly a matter of operational expenditure .
For that reason , the Council must explain more clearly what the issue is here , in other words , is the Council creating a ' new Commission ' for the EU ' s second pillar , one which would be outside Parliament ' s budgetary authority ?
As this is clearly a case of non-compulsory expenditure , Parliament cannot endorse these plans .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I too wish to thank the rapporteurs for their excellent preparatory work and for the sterling work they have done in general .
I shall concentrate my comments on the Costa Neves report , as the rapporteur has already said what needs to be said about the Buitenweg report , and she , of course , has the full support of our group .
In particular , I would like to draw your attention once again to her comments about multiannual plans .
We need long-term planning for the administration of the European Parliament .
We are also largely in agreement with the Costa Neves report , and we particularly support the clear priorities it sets .
The guidelines should not , of course , go into detail ; they should clarify the EU 's priorities for next year , budget year 2002 that is .
We think that the priorities identified , for example the priority given to agricultural policy , are correct .
The foot-and-mouth crisis demonstrates that there is a profound crisis in the EU 's agricultural policy .
We hope that the mid-term review of Agenda 2000 to be undertaken now will lead to the necessary reform measures being taken , and that it will also result in Parliament being given a greater role in formulating agricultural policy .
We regard this as necessary first and foremost because our agricultural policy has led to a widespread collapse of trust amongst the public .
We need to recover that trust by means of a change , of course , towards more rural development programmes , and away from market support measures . We also need greater involvement by Parliament in the decision-making process .
The priority is no longer additional money , but rather fundamental reform .
The second priority is eastward enlargement , which presents enormous challenges for the EU .
We very much hope that the appropriations provided for 2000 will actually be implemented .
We must utilise these appropriations .
We only have to think about environmental policy in the enlargement countries to realise that substantial appropriations are required .
That is why I am hoping for more support in committee , and I will take Mr Ferber at his word , as he has already promised this support .
I believe that as a committee we must move forward and make appropriate demands , because everything that is not addressed in good time now will return to haunt us later on .
In this area in particular there is an urgent need for a reform of EU policies to ensure that eastward enlargement is affordable and feasible in the long term .
I believe that the call for the financial perspective to be adjusted is justified .
We all know about the problems we had last year with the financing of the Stability Pact for the Balkans , and with the financing of the MEDA Programme .
We also have a duty to continue to pay great attention to the area of external actions and to ensure that good work is done in that area , especially with regard to conflict prevention .
But this is not just about more money .
I believe that this is an area where we need to think more about efficiency .
There is an urgent need for reform in various external policy areas .
We hope that the additional staff the Commission acquired last year will also lead to greater efficiency in this area .
Overall , and I would like to stress this one again , we support all three reports , but we need to put our heads together once more on the subject of eastward enlargement and come up with something more specific .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Costa Neves has produced an important report on the 2002 budget guidelines .
Unfortunately , however , I have to point out that there are a number of inconsistencies in the report .


The first inconsistency is in the choice of priorities : social issues , which are the focus of our citizens ' expectations , are not included ; employment , a subject to which the European Council said it intended to devote the recent Stockholm Summit , since this is obviously one of Europe ' s core challenges - Mr Pronk and Mrs Gill mentioned this point earlier - does not feature prominently enough in the list of priorities ; and enlargement , a seminal ambition if there ever was one , is also missing from the list of priorities .
To tell you the truth , I do not understand .
There is also an inconsistency in the report between the stated objectives and the financial resources provided to achieve them .
Therefore , although it is , of course , right to focus on food safety and financial support to the agricultural sector given the consequences of the BSE crisis and of foot-and-mouth disease , this intention seems to me to be inconsistent with the commitment made to maintain budgetary discipline , along with the absence of any cost estimate of the BSE crisis and given the rejection of my group ' s proposal to create a special reserve for BSE grants .
Mr Virrankoski also highlighted this problem .
The final inconsistency , which is of a more general nature , is in this tendency to look at every one of the European Union ' s political ambitions primarily from the point of view of cutting back on expenditure .
The rapporteur says that we must prepare for the reform of the common agricultural policy , bearing in mind the forthcoming round of negotiations within the framework of the WTO and the implications of enlargement .
We know what that means .
As for the EU ' s external policies , the rapporteur insists that performance targets first need to be established .
What true significance can such a request have for the Balkans , the Middle East and for our partners in the southern Mediterranean , if not the prospect of cuts or redeployments in various programmes , due to an unacceptable cost / effectiveness ratio ?
With regard to pre-accession expenditure , the rapporteur again stresses that we need to examine closely whether this is effective in terms of the convergence of the applicant countries ' economies with those of the Member States .
A word to the wise , however .
Only one chapter seems to find favour with the rapporteur and that is the one on European defence .
In his opinion , and in his opinion alone , he alludes to the idea of a revision of the financial perspective , the taboo subject of all the previous debates on the budget .
That is certainly one of the reasons why a third of the Members within the Committee on Budgets immediately refused to approve this report .
In fact , given the enormous hurdles currently standing in Europe ' s path , we cannot afford to duck underneath them .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteurs for their work .
I would like this year 's budget to be rather more far-sighted than last year 's , which we had requested should contain an appropriation for what subsequently proved to be an international crisis , BSE .
I would venture to say that it has now caused collective neurosis , and this is a sign to all of us policy-makers that we must staunch the flow , so to speak , and endeavour to provide the citizens with food safety .
With regard to the various aspects of the budget , I would stress , on the one hand , that it would be appropriate for the ECSC to try to incorporate the annual income produced by the assets into the general budget , in order to comply with the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement and the Financial Regulation , and , on the other hand , the need to create two separate budget headings for budget revenue and outgoings .
In the field of culture , we will have to fully support the enhancement of educational and professional skills .
As regards a fundamental area such as agriculture , we will have to support it more and more in the future , particularly in the face of the now imminent eastward enlargement , together with the small and medium-sized businesses , which are the real core of the European economy .
Let us take note of our weakness , now , in economic terms , and let us endeavour to produce a budgetary policy which will reinvigorate our economy and boost its development .
Mr President , clearly , Mr Colom i Naval has not applied Goethe ' s maxim " In der Beschränkung zeigt sich erst der Meister " [ Only in moderation is the master revealed ] .
In his report on the financial perspective , he is right to draw our attention to the considerable underspending of appropriations for structural measures in 2000 .
It appears that EUR 14 190 million in commitment appropriations and EUR 7 988 million in payment appropriations were not implemented in 2000 .
This is a considerable problem which has been around for years .
However , I do share the rapporteur ' s view that something needs to be done .
The policy adopted hitherto cannot be sold to the citizens .
But what a surprise .
Both the Commission and Mr Colom propose , by way of adjustment , to re-budget the unspent amounts to the year 2002 .
I cannot quite follow this line of thought .
There is every reason to get to the bottom of this problem .
What , for example , is the reason for the payments falling behind the commitments to such an extent ?
Would that not be due to the fact that the Commission services are unable to properly manage all commitments with which the budgetary authority has saddled the Commission over the past couple of years ?
Is this not quite simply a question of far too generous budgeting ?
In my opinion , the solution can be found in the quote of Goethe .
We need to learn from the mistakes we made in the past , and economise as a Parliament .
The unspent appropriations should not always be transferred to the subsequent years .
We must tailor the appropriations to the Commission ' s implementation capacity .
Furthermore , the Union must cut back its activity to those areas of policy where European action clearly adds value .
Programmes which are not effective must be abandoned .
The Costa Neves report remains ensnared in woolly statements ; they can be interpreted in any way one wants .
I would like to gain a clear picture of his plans .
It is really beyond belief that enlargement - surely the top priority of the next couple of years - is missing from Mr Costa Neves ' list of political priorities .
I suggest including this major development in the report at this late stage .
Finally , we object to the Commission proposal on the statute and financing of European political parties .
It is not up to Europe , but the parties themselves , to decide how they want to organise themselves .
They are responsible for their own revenue .
Furthermore , parties organised at European level will only widen the chasm between the citizen and European politics .

Mr President , I should like , as others have done , to congratulate our two rapporteurs for introducing our budgets for 2002 and , in particular , referring first to that of Mr Costa Neves , perhaps as the bulk of my speech this morning , I would like to say to Mr Wurtz that he has indeed struck the right balance in terms of priorities , in terms of responsibilities which the European Union has to manage - agriculture is central to that - and social issues , as we noticed in the Lisbon run-up and the follow-on in Stockholm last week .
These are essentially national responsibilities , national budgets .
We can do very little at European level to have large social programmes of the kind to which I think you were referring .
What strikes me most in these two budgets is the emergence of interinstitutional cooperation , which ten years ago was perhaps more of a wish than a practice .
I have in front of me the Council priorities , although for the first time in history no one is here to represent the Council .
It is somewhat ironic that it says in the first paragraph of their document : " The Council welcomes the spirit of cooperation that governed work on preparation and emphasises the importance of continuing the good collaboration between the two arms of the budgetary authority and the Commission . "
Nevertheless one has to take at face value the statement that the Council wishes to examine closely the report which the Commission is to submit before 30 June 2001 on progress in reducing outstanding commitments to bring them down to a normal level .
Those who were present in December last year will remember that when Parliament put forward this joint declaration , no one in the Council actually welcomed it .
On the contrary , they seemed somewhat hostile to it .
So I certainly welcome the fact that they wish to cooperate with us in trying to reduce the backlog of commitments , in trying to make sure that there is a better parallel between the legislative and budgetary procedures and that performance targets are set , particularly in Category 4 in external policy .
Another area which reflects interinstitutional cooperation , which is important in Mr Costa Neves ' report , is information policy , where for years we have been trying to get good value for money , and for years we have met with little success , to say the least .
No wonder we find 50 % of the information funds still in reserve , still waiting for the Commission 's proposals .
I urge the Commission to come forward with these as soon as possible , hopefully having discussed things with Parliament 's own administration before doing so .
Lastly , on external policy , our rapporteur has indicated the need to set priorities .
We know that scarce resources in the budget will be with us for the foreseeable future .
In the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy there is a very good idea , although not one taken up in Mr Costa Neves ' report at the present time , that we should be seeking external advice on how to set priorities in foreign policy , so that we can begin to have some direction in the longer term as to how our money should be spent .
We should investigate that more .
Turning to the Buitenweg report , I should also like to emphasise the very clear emergence of interinstitutional cooperation in environmental and transport matters and as regards an interinstitutional recruitment office - which I very much hope will soon be up and running , to ensure that European citizens get the best value for money .
There are one or two areas where perhaps there will be difficulties regarding interinstitutional cooperation , not least as regards early retirement .
While we certainly support that , we would prefer to have a compulsory system , were that to be possible under the statute .
We have had our discussions on the 2001 budget on that particular matter , and will certainly be looking to have these proposals applied within Parliament if possible .
But most important - and here I address the Secretary-General of Parliament - is the letter which the president of my group sent to the President of Parliament yesterday about the absolute need to have a multi-annual plan for enlargement before the first reading of Parliament 's budget so that we can get a grip on what is likely to come in terms of expenditure in linguistic services and a whole range of other matters .
Please do not expect us to approve what you might propose later in the summer without having had a full debate with our political groups .
That is highly unlikely to happen unless we are given the time to examine them effectively .
To conclude , I welcome the fact that this interinstitutional spirit is emerging .
We would like to promote that , respecting the fact that each institution has the right to take its own decisions .
I hope that we will come to the right decisions concerning value-for-money for the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , I would like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Costa Neves , for the remarkable job they have done in getting these guidelines together in such a short space of time .
They are relative newcomers to our committee and they have shown their grasp of what our committee is about .
With this type of guideline we will not go far wrong as we go through this year .
I wish to comment on several items .
First , Mr Costa Neves ' report and the Commission 's budget .
The big problem that we have had in the last two years has been with Category 4 , especially the Balkans , trying to get the correct amount of money , having arguments with the Council , using the flexibility instrument and all in all not having a satisfactory procedure .
Hopefully those problems will be solved and we should not be in that situation for next year .
Having said that , we still await the World Bank report on the needs of Serbia .
But when the ad hoc delegation went to Serbia earlier this year , and we were discussing this with the World Bank , they made the point that they would be looking at the supply side to see what the needs of Serbia were .
To my understanding this meant that we will see what the donors can give before we decide what the needs are .
Even with that type of statement , we will not be in the same situation on trying to find the funds for Category 4 for next year .
We will see problems arising in the future with Category 5 .
The present SAB 2 for 2001 , as Markus Ferber mentioned earlier , is causing some people concern , not just about the needs of the Council in that SAB but also about what it is going to do to the margin of Category 5 .
When we had the trialogue last Thursday , the Swedish Presidency took on board , and were very amenable to , what we were saying .
We stressed that there is a need for the three institutions to get together as soon as possible to start talking about the margins - especially in Category 5 , but we have to start looking at Categories 3 and 4 as well .
On Category 1 , the BSE crisis and now foot-and-mouth are raging , if that is the right word .
Foot-and-mouth is certainly raging in the Member State I come from and in the region that I represent .
The Council and Commission have made it quite clear that there will be no new money next year in Category 1 .
Whatever the consequences of these two diseases , the money will have to be found from within Category 1 .
Members need to be made aware of that before they start expecting new monies to be made available by the Council .
The fourth point on the Costa Neves report is the Commission reforms referred to in paragraphs 7 , 8 and 9 .
These are essential .
I would ask the Council to give some indication as to what they will be proposing for a legal base for the early retirement scheme .
Until we know that we cannot really make our mind up as to what we should be supporting for next year .
On the Buitenweg report , can I comment on the fact that enlargement is a problem .
The Interinstitutional Agreement states that any needs for enlargement will be met through a revision of the financial perspective .
What then do we do when we want to plan for language training , new recruitment or adaptation of buildings ?
This is what Mr Elles was touching on and I am trying to be more subtle by saying that what we need to be doing is looking now at what the needs of enlargement are , and once again talking with the other institutions to look at a revision for enlargement .
We need to resolve this between the three institutions .
It is something that will not go away and as each week passes it approaches quicker and quicker .
The Colom i Naval report seems to have caused a lot of problems recently but hopefully we will have a solution in the very near future and those in the Member States who have been ringing around and those in the Commission who have been - dare I say - panicking can put their minds at rest .
Finally there is the Haug report which no one else has mentioned but I need to mention it .
If I were not the chairman of the Budgets Committee but just a simple member , I would say that I have doubts with Mrs Haug 's report and I would not vote for amendment 3 .
But , of course , I am the chairman and I cannot say those things , so I won 't .
Mr President , I would also like to thank the three rapporteurs for their fine reports and add that I definitely believe that these reports indicate that we consider the budget a political instrument .
The three reports establish a number of obvious political priorities .
In particular , I should like to highlight Mr Costa Neves ' report .
It contains a follow-up to the decision made at the Lisbon Summit last year and confirmed at the Stockholm Summit , namely that we must create the most competitive economy in the EU within the next ten years .
I think this is a splendid priority , and we must ensure that it is reflected in the Budget , especially within the area of what are called internal Community policies .
I am also delighted that we are continuing the work of ensuring that structural fund appropriations are followed up so that what we commit ourselves to is also what is put into practice and so that a proper balance between commitment and payment appropriations is established .
In collaboration with the Liberal group , I have put forward an amendment to the effect that we must continue with the reform of the funding under the so-called ' A 30 lines ' .
Some organisations are funded year after year and actually become dependent on these funds .
This is something that must be addressed .
As a parliamentarian , I believe we must support the Commission ' s work on ensuring transparent management of the funds so that taxpayers can be certain that efficient management is in place and that the political objectives are being fulfilled .
The argument that ' we are used to being funded ' must not be the decisive factor , and there must be the possibility of innovation and new initiatives .
Finally , I would like to add that it is important that we continue to support the Commission ' s reform through our prioritising of the Budget .
It is essential for the EU that the Commission has a good reputation externally and that there should be no doubt that we have a good and stable administration .
In this respect , we should obviously take account of the future significance of enlargement for our administration .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although we support the majority of the 2002 budget guidelines , namely those that give priority to food safety and the BSE crisis and some general measures on immigration , unfortunately , the resolution is guilty of abuses that our group cannot accept because they are detrimental to the interests of farmers .
To seek to call into question the common agricultural policy because of mad cow disease is not only immoral behaviour , but it is also a refusal to draw all the consequences from 15 years ' worth of oversights and cover-ups , which have led to the situation as we know it today .
Our group is not in favour , therefore , of paragraph 11 of the resolution , which not only demands that the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory spending be abolished , but also that agricultural legislation should now be brought under the codecision procedure .
With regard to Mrs Buitenweg ' s report , some of its provisions are unacceptable .
To call for administrative expenditure to be brought under differentiated appropriations is to pave the way for a swift and significant accumulation of further amounts remaining to be paid .
A final word on Mr Colom i Naval ' s report .
We are dubious about the proposed increases being introduced gradually , especially because the suggested plan would not prevent considerable amounts of non-committed funds from accumulating .
Mr President , no one would seriously question that food safety , food quality , consumer protection and sustainable agriculture should be priority economic policy objectives for the EU .
But as we all know , there is more than one way to skin a cat , so the real question is how we intend to achieve this objective in practice .
Off-the-shelf solutions are often used to achieve policy objectives - in this case , the Costa Neves report cites the new European Food Safety Authority .
We all know that new authorities need additional budgetary resources , but that these are hard to come by .
If we really want to achieve the economic policy objective I have mentioned , we cannot rely on doing this just by creating a new authority .
No , if we want to attain this goal , we have to reform the common agricultural policy , particularly , of course , with the planned eastward enlargement in mind .
In previous parliamentary terms , we have supported large agricultural concerns at the expense of small farmers .
We need to act quickly to put this right , so that the remaining small farms , which have always produced food of a very high quality , once again receive an income guaranteeing their economic existence . That is the only way we can translate these objectives into reality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the PPE-DE Group accepts Mr Costa Neves ' s budget guidelines with great satisfaction , principally , because they clearly demonstrate to the Commission and the Council the course that we wish to take in drawing up the 2002 budget .
We have always argued that interinstitutional cooperation is the best way to make progress in a budgetary negotiation .
We have even argued this at the most tense moments in relations between the Council and the European Parliament .
Nevertheless , experience tells us that clear and very specific guidelines promote consensus in this House .
That is why there are so few amendments and , furthermore , they promote the message which we must send at the beginning of the process , above all to the other wing of the budgetary authority .
Also , adjusting the financial perspective because of the lack of implementation of the 2000 budget has become a crucial issue for Parliament .
The consensus proposal presented by the Commission satisfies the two concerns of both budgetary authorities : firstly , it does not raise the overall figure for appropriations until the end of the programming period , as the Council wants , bound as it is by the budgetary limitations of the Member States ; and , secondly , it transfers most of the commitment appropriations until the end of the period , which favours compliance with the Berlin agreements , which is what this Parliament demanded .
We therefore hope that the Council can give the green light to this proposal , on which , through the Committee on Budgets , this Parliament has already expressed its favourable opinion .
It is true that modifying the scale of commitment appropriations could create certain negotiation problems for the Commission with particular Member States , especially in relation to programmes yet to be approved in Objective 1 .
However , the agreement we may reach envisages a further month of negotiations between both institutions and also provides a further four weeks to approve these new programmes in Brussels , especially those which relate to Objective 1 .
Ladies and gentlemen , I repeat that the worst option would be not to have the opportunity to rebudget , because that would mean losing more structural appropriations , which were possibly going to be lacking at the end of the period .
If the Council reaches an initial agreement today , we should not have any problems reaching a final agreement and , in any event , I repeat , we have sufficient time before 3 May for this agreement to come to fruition .
We would like to thank the Commission for playing the role of mediator between the other two institutions .
On occasions , we in this House complain about the Commission ' s lack of initiative , trapped as it is between two other institutions which hold different positions , and having very little room for manoeuvre .
But what we can never deny is the Commission ' s capacity for mediation and compromise in order to produce reasonable proposals .
I would finally like to congratulate Mrs Buitenweg on her guidelines for the budget of other institutions , which takes the route of consensus , which will be useful for us and will mean that , for her , the negotiation of the budget will be sufficiently fruitful , peaceful and calm .
Mr President , I too want to start by congratulating Mrs Buitenweg both on the report itself and on the way in which she has sought to accommodate and integrate different viewpoints .
I welcome the emphasis she has put in the adoption of ABB because I believe it is critical to the future transparency of all the EU institutions and will affect how they will work .
My group particularly welcomes the reference to the assistance statute and the funding for political parties .
I also wholeheartedly support the emphasis in these guidelines on enlargement and the implications of decisions taken at Nice .
However , what concerns me is the piecemeal approach taken to date by all the institutions when looking at the budgetary implications of this topic .
What is needed is the joint comprehensive strategy that this report calls for , encompassing all aspects of enlargement both in the short term and in the longer term .
It is crucial that we fully anticipate and evaluate the budgetary consequence that enlargement will have on all the institutions , because if we do not we will have difficulty maintaining budgetary discipline and efficiency .
We have therefore asked for each institution to present a strategy setting out how it sees the impact of enlargement on its services .
The strategy needs to be radical , especially in relation to interpretation and translation services , because this is likely to be the biggest area of growth : we could end up with a public service of something like 60 000 employees and that will hardly be value for money for the European taxpayer .
That is why my group is very concerned about paragraph 12 which asks for figures to be included in the PDB before we have actually debated a strategy .
That really is putting the cart before the horse .
Secondly , I have further concerns about the wisdom of including paragraph 19 in these guidelines because it asks for a full review of all the standing committees at the halfway mark in this Parliament .
All this will achieve is greater disruption and confusion , and it goes against the level of planning we are asking from all the institutions elsewhere in the report .
Therefore , I would urge our colleagues in the PPE-DE to withdraw these amendments .
Mr President , the Community budget is the blood supply to a sustainable common agricultural policy .
It is difficult to recall a more challenging time for agriculture and the future of European farmers .
BSE and foot-and-mouth have added a new and unexpected dimension to the European agenda .
The psychological impact on farmers and rural communities is considerable .
The consequences for farm income , and by implication the agricultural budget , are difficult at this time to comprehend .
The continuity of farming as a sustainable career for new entrants has again been brought into focus .
Consumers remain confused and bewildered .
There is still considerable misinformation on the safety of the food chain , and in particular meat products .
Hence the worrying decline in meat consumption .
Against this background I caution against any attempt to radically alter the administration and structure of the agricultural budget agreed in Berlin .
With both BSE and foot-and-mouth farmers by and large are innocent victims of circumstances beyond their control .
It would certainly be a serious mistake to allow the current crisis to panic us into introducing drastic budget changes which would militate against the sustainability of European family farming .
Mr President , first of all I want to say that we very often discuss the budget as if it were an end in itself .
We argue about amendments that the European public will not understand .
We debate the difference between commitments and appropriations and all sorts of technical details that mean nothing to the European public .
These things are necessary , but they should not be the picture that is presented to the people of Europe .
The people of Europe want a budget that serves their interests and a budget that serves the political objectives of the European Union .
This is extremely important .
The long-term objectives of the European Union should be served as best we can by the budget .
In sitting down to draw up our long-term plans we should recognise the interests of the Union , its cohesiveness , its solidarity and its influence in the world .
We are being misled at the moment on the whole question of the size of the budget .
Mr Wynn says that the Council says there is no more money : absolute rubbish !
There was a time when we had a limit of 1.1 % .
I went around the cities of Europe with Mr Colom i Naval and others and we asked them to sanction expansion of the budget by the 1.27 % - we needed at the time .
We got it - and very responsibly we did not spend it .
It is still there .
We now have a crisis in agriculture particularly and that crisis needs to be addressed .
In Berlin we did not foresee that we were going to have a foot-and-mouth crisis and we did not foresee the BSE crisis either .
We are , therefore , in a new situation and it is misleading and incorrect to say there is no money to resolve it .
When we had swine fever , we gave EUR 800 million to German and Dutch farmers .
Today , when the British farmers have a major problem , are we going to change the rules of the game and refuse to give the British farmers the assistance to which they are entitled under the Treaties ?
We cannot change the rules and we cannot deny it to them .
Their own government has crucified them by refusing to allow them into the single currency .
The European Union cannot add insult to that injury by saying that it is not its responsibility that they have a serious problem in the area of foot-and-mouth .
If the Council insists there is a limit , we have to insist that it is 1.27 % .
There is plenty of money to resolve the problem for the next two years and following that we can still have that 1.27 % which I hope will finance enlargement .
Mr President , I feel it is exceptionally important that the budget guidelines should address important and major issues .
We have in actual fact undertaken to receive new countries as Member States in time for the European elections in 2004 , and most of us are probably agreed that this is a great and historic commitment of ours and something which should also be reflected in the Budget guidelines .
In my view , that does not emerge clearly enough in the section relating to the Commission .
Our commitment to those countries now negotiating for membership means that those countries which fulfil the Copenhagen criteria in the negotiations are also entitled to become Members .
There is obviously a significant degree of uncertainty built into this .
We do not know to which countries this will apply , or how many of them there will be .
Nor , to relate the issue to Mrs Buitenweg ' s budget guidelines , do we therefore know how many new languages will have to be interpreted and translated from and into .
That point is worth emphasising . The future I am describing is just three years away from us .
The enlargement process does not only entail a commitment with which the applicant countries must comply , but also a commitment with which the EU must comply .
In this connection , I believe there are two things which must happen with immediate effect .
The first thing is that the Commission must come back with calculations of the budgetary consequences of different permutations of the enlargement process , depending upon which , and how many , countries are concerned .
The other thing is that we can no longer put off the language issue but must be completely serious about getting to grips with it .
Mrs Buitenweg ' s guidelines are excellent in the way they address the issue .
I assume , therefore , that it will also be vigorously pursued in the course of the year .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , each year , at the beginning of the budgetary procedure , we face the challenge of responding to a public which is justifiably concerned and to the challenge of discovering whether we are capable of achieving a serious and effective balance in order to guide the next budget in such a way that taxpayers will know on what , how and why the European Union is going to spend their money .
I would firstly like to express my satisfaction at the excellent work of the general rapporteur , Mr Carlos Costa Neves , and to congratulate and wish Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Colom every success so that they can reach the agreement we all need as soon as possible .
All of us are concerned , and with good reason , not only about achieving a financial regulation which meets the legitimate demands of this Parliament , but also about the Union ' s political will to deal with the phenomenon of illegal immigration .

I am grateful that Mr Costa Neves has had the political sensitivity to lend budgetary support to this priority . I would ask the Commission and the Council to show the same concern and sensitivity , which must be translated into programmes in favour of true integration , into effective support for the regions of origin and into the creation of a common immigration policy which will support and facilitate the work of the Member States in this area .
Although immigration , the repercussions of enlargement on agricultural spending , the animal health crisis and consumer protection generate disquiet and concern throughout the Union , the sectoral problems must also be responded to within these budgetary guidelines .
I would ask for solidarity for the fisheries sectors in Spain and Portugal .
Thousands of workers and hundreds of vessels are waiting for compliance with the safeguard clause laid down at the European Council in Nice in relation to aid for the restructuring of the Community fleet which has been unable to work .
Given Morocco ' s clearly hostile response throughout the negotiation process , the European Union must respond effectively and with solidarity .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to two areas .
Before I do that , I would like to thank both Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg for their clear explanation and the start they have made .
Allow me to begin with the fisheries sector .
Partly in my capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries , I have observed that this sector is facing a difficult time .
I would draw your attention to the cod recovery plan for the North Sea , which is having a major impact on the fishermen in the surrounding area .
An agreement with Morocco , which is failing to materialise , has , in turn , huge implications for Spanish and Portuguese fishermen .
There is increasing criticism with regard to the use of Community funding to finance agreements with third countries , and with good reason .
The spending of that funding , particularly in the developing countries , is not being monitored effectively .
In addition , the Green Paper is casting its shadow ahead , and it could be used as a crowbar to step up the involvement of the fisheries sector in the sustainable management of fish stocks , and to modernise the fleet .
The question is , therefore , to what extent a kind of set-aside programme , which would include nature conservation , as is applied in agriculture , could also be successful in fisheries .
There is hardly any room in the fisheries budget .
Neither is there any room for extra spending with regard to the social and re-training policy for the benefit of the fisheries sector , never mind extra investments for the working conditions and safety on fishing vessels .
This week , a report will be discussed which clearly shows that the fisheries sector claims no less than 24 000 victims a year as a result of accidents at work .
In agriculture , it is obvious that the crisis in the beef sector requires an in-depth discussion on the agricultural policy ' s overhaul .
A key element in this connection is that food is a basic necessity of life .
A high level of interaction is required between the farmer and consumer , the government being a vital link .
The current policy brings this insufficiently into focus , and one can question whether the Berlin Agreement provides sufficient room for such a switch-over .
If that is not the case , we must really examine how this overhaul can be financed , and it is questionable whether , for example , a consumer levy for food produced in a sustainable manner should not be introduced in the EU , given the fact that such a levy has been in place for many other products for a long time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , why does the Council want a competitive Europe ?
And why do we support this objective ?
For us , it is a case of safeguarding jobs in Europe and creating new and attractive jobs .
That is the number one priority .
The crisis in farming caused by BSE and other diseases will lead to employment problems in agriculture , the meat trade and many other businesses .
That means that we need to think about how we can plan for the future and open up new possibilities for the workforce .
There are two very well known approaches to moving forward here , namely investment in training and in research .
As regards research , money particularly needs to be invested in market research , that is to say into what products consumers buy , and also , of course , in product research - for example , how can renewable energy be produced in the agricultural sector to counteract Europe 's dependence on imports ?
There are two sectors that will create a great many jobs in the future .
One of these is the computer industry , including the development of hardware and software , the information technology of the future , and the other is that we all want to live to a healthy old age , which means that we need social support mechanisms , and we need research into biotechnology to guarantee a healthy old age .
To achieve this , we therefore need access to finance , particularly for micro-companies .
Nowadays , it is almost impossible for a company with less than 10 employees to obtain finance unless the family , or extended family , can provide security .
We must advocate concrete measures in this area , as companies with less than 250 employees after all account for 60 % of GNP and 60 % of employment in Europe .
Mr President , can I first congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg on their excellent presentation of the expectations for next year .
I am sure that Parliament is properly under control for that period .
This morning I want to concentrate on just one issue : structural funding .
Why it has not yet been fully used and what should its future be ?
I want to be both controversial and constructive .
Either through poor administration or delayed planning of what should happen and what should be approved by the European authorities , and perhaps in conjunction with the national authorities , we are behind on spending on structural funding both for inner-cities and rural areas .
Now , I want to be controversial and I am spelling out that word , because I do not agree that all we should do is push back the spending and get an enormous lump in four or five years time .
We should be looking ahead .
When enlargement takes place , the countries coming into the European Union will be expecting structural funding ; the very funding which our existing countries will be deprived of because they will not be able to benefit if we have to satisfy one budget on structural funding .
In other words , the new countries will expect and should obtain funding for their requirements .
My way around this is to say that the funds that have not been used so far should be lost to the system .
As we have heard , this is the intention .
But why not take advantage of that straight away ?
Why not send back the funding that has not been used to the countries who pay the contributions ?
They are mainly the ones hit by foot-and-mouth .
They need to use that money to compensate for the crisis in rural areas .
- Mr President , on behalf of the Environment Committee , I would like to add a few final words before the Commissioner sums up .
We have watched with interest the development of the budgetary process so far and we thank the two rapporteurs who have produced a good report along the right lines .
But I want to emphasise some issues and I hope Mrs Schreyer will take them up and endeavour to ensure that they are pushed through the Commission .
First , we have long called upon the Commission to do more with regard to greening the budget .
The area of agriculture remains largely untouched and much more work needs to be done on greening the Structural Funds and other areas of the Commission 's activity .
We would look for a fresh initiative from the Commission on this . Make sure the money is properly spent in a sustainable way .
With regard to the spending of money external to the Union , particularly in Eastern and Central Europe , we would hope that the Commission will focus its efforts , particularly through the Phare Programme and other projects guaranteeing the implementation and enforcement of European Union legislation .
These countries have signed up to the acquis communautaire and we expect them to satisfy its requirements before they enter the Union .
We cannot compromise on environmental standards in those areas .
I hope that monies will be directed towards ensuring that .
As regards public health , an area of competence that was enlarged during the Amsterdam Treaty and is currently undergoing reform , we would hope that the outcome of that reform will be an enlarged programme on public health issues and that the Commission will accept that and find the necessary funding - which inevitably will mean more than they are spending now .
Whilst the legal justification for action in the area of public health is clear , it seems to me that there is still a lack of clarity with regard to the legal basis for action by the Commission in some other areas .
I would ask the Commission to renew its efforts to clarify the legal basis for some areas of action in the field of the environment .
There are two other important issues which I want to bring to the attention of the Commission .
First , there is an ongoing confusion about the funding of certain NGOs and the monies provided by the Commission for their funding .
Please get this sorted out .
Finally , we have long argued in this Parliament about the problem of the subsidy on tobacco production in southern Europe and the other issues related to tobacco production .
We need a new initiative from the Commission on this .
It is time to break the deadlock .
The continued spending of money in that way is unacceptable .
I hope the Commission has heard what we say .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the present crisis in farming - the BSE crisis and the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease - has stimulated public interest in the EU budget .
People keep asking if it is still possible to finance it or if this crisis has shot the EU budget to pieces .
These questions demonstrate that the EU 's budget planning must be flexible enough to cope with unforeseen expenditure .
On the other hand , expenditure to which there is a legal entitlement has to be financed , multiannual programmes have to be implemented and there most also be scope for setting new priorities .
Today we are debating the priorities for the 2002 budget , and this is the first time , as has already been emphasised , that all three institutions involved in the budgetary process - the Council , Parliament and the Commission - have identified their priorities at this stage .
I would like to thank the Council , who are absent today , for this new form of cooperation through the General Affairs Council , which discussed external policy in its priorities back in January , and through the Ecofin Council , which discussed the priorities for the 2002 budget as a whole in March .
I would also like to thank the European Parliament very sincerely , and you in particular , Mr Costa Neves , as the general rapporteur on the coming year 's budget .
Mr Costa Neves , setting priorities is the first building block for cooperation on the budget for any given year .
It extends to the adoption of the budget and following on from that to the entire budget year , in the context of implementation .
For my part I would like to offer full cooperation so that we get a good budget and good budget implementation in 2002 .
The framework for next year 's budget is determined by the financial perspective , by Agenda 2000 , which has been referred to so often .
Overall , on the basis of this financial perspective , new financial commitments that can be entered into next year could rise by 2.9 % compared with this year .
The financial perspective would allow a far higher rate of increase in means of payment , namely 7 % , but just how much of this is actually necessary will become apparent when the preliminary draft budget is produced and after that under the further consultation process .
The financial perspective allows the highest rate of increase in agricultural expenditure .
I am stressing that point in particular because it has been touched upon in many of the speeches we have heard .
At any rate , in accordance with the financial perspective , an increase in absolute agricultural policy expenditure of EUR 2.5 billion is possible next year as compared with this year .
That is certainly not chicken feed .
But , of course , the question that arises is whether we can cope with this rate of increase without having to make decisions about structural savings .
We all know that this depends on market trends and , of course , also on certain decisions about common market organisations that have still to be taken : the COM in sugar and the COM for cotton , to name just two .
These are still on the Council 's table .
However , another key factor , of course , is how last year 's agricultural policy budget turns out and what the prospects are for the further spread of foot-and-mouth disease .
As you know , the EU budget has to reimburse 60 % of certain expenditure incurred by the Member States in connection with foot-and-mouth .
For several weeks now , there has been a working group of the Agriculture , Budget and Health and Consumer Protection Directorates-General , which makes almost weekly estimates of cost trends , and I have to say that because of the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease there has , of course , been a sharp rise in costs .
Estimated expenditure passed the EUR 100 million mark a week ago .
These reimbursement payments will fall due next year , in the 2002 budget , and will , of course , have to be provided for , just as a decision has still to be made on expenditure arising from the BSE crisis , in the form of a second package of measures to combat the effects of that crisis .
The subject of an interim review of agricultural policy has also been raised .
This is a process that will now be starting in order to examine our agricultural policy .
In all areas of policy , including agricultural policy , we keep asking whether all the expenditure is justified .
And for a great deal of expenditure that we have to set , such as that to deal with surpluses , it is worth asking if action is really being taken in the right area or if it would not be better to spend money elsewhere . In the case of agriculture , it might , for example , be better directed towards achieving objectives in the areas of consumer and environmental protection , animal and landscape conservation , and structural improvement in rural development .
When it comes to the agriculture budget - let me emphasise this point once again , as it was also confirmed in Stockholm - the upper limit in the financial perspective has to be observed , which is why a proposal for structural savings might have to be agreed for the 2002 preliminary draft budget .
We are currently examining whether or not this will be necessary .
But one thing is clear , and I think I can say that there is a consensus on this amongst everyone involved in the budget process : on no account will rural development programmes be cut .
This would be totally counterproductive if in the middle of a crisis during which everyone is talking about the need for reform , and in which everyone is talking about the need for more environmental protection , for more landscape conservation , for instance , if in those circumstances that programme were to be cut .
I believe it is fair to say that there is a general consensus within the EU that that would be totally out of the question .
This crisis has shaken consumer confidence in food safety , and President Prodi stressed in his first speech here as President of the Commission how important food safety would be in the Commission 's work programme .
And you , Mr Costa Neves , on behalf of Parliament , have made it clear both in your report and in your speech how important this is for the next budget . The same point has also been made very clear in other speeches this morning .
I believe that we can definitely say today that the European Food Safety Authority will be set up at the beginning of next year , and I believe that as regards budgetary provision there is a general consensus that the resources for this - by which I mean both operational appropriations and human resources for the European Food Safety Authority - will be included in the 2002 budget .
I think that is good news for all consumers .
Of course , full provision is made for important structural support programmes in the budget planning process .
The new period of support started last year , and because of the major changes not all programmes could be approved in time or the relevant funds committed .
That is why the wise precaution was taken of stipulating in the 1999 Interinstitutional Agreement that appropriations not committed in the previous year can be carried forward .
EUR 6.15 billion are involved here .
Mr Colom i Naval made some observations about this .
Of course , we need to find the must practical solution possible for this re-budgetisation and for adjusting the financial perspective .
I also regret that we have not managed to get everyone together so that we could agree the relevant figures today .
Nevertheless , I think that things are heading in the right direction , and to respect the IIA , a decision needs to be taken by 1 May .
Given that 1 May is a holiday , I think that 2 May would be just as good .
Mr Costa Neves , on behalf of Parliament , you have identified some further priorities for the next budget that I would like to comment on .
Firstly , the problem of illegal immigration .
I would like to point out once again that the 2001 budget already includes funding for an action to carry out educational and information work in the countries of origin , in order to tackle the problem at source .
Many people are brought here by gangs of traffickers .
This really is about trafficking in human beings , and we need to do everything we can to combat this .
And , of course , those people who said that in the field of legal policy it is not always a matter of providing new operational appropriations , but rather the appropriate human resources , were quite right , and Commissioner Vitorino 's Directorate-General , which is responsible for this area , has so far been allocated additional posts in every staffing round .
Secondly , there is the area of e-learning .
It has been pointed out how important this is for the objective of making Europe a knowledge-based economy .
Of course , the issue of equipping classrooms with computers or giving schools Internet access is above all a matter for the Member States , under the principle of subsidiarity .
We should not forget that .
But at the same time it is naturally a good thing if all the Member States adopt ambitious targets .
Financial aid for meeting these objectives is available from several EU programmes , and this should be made more visible to the public , so that it is clear to them what their money is being spent on at EU level .
In other words , this is a good example to demonstrate that EU taxes are not just spent on emergency actions such as culling cattle , but that these taxes are also being invested in the future of the rising generation .
Because of the frontloading of the Balkan programme over the last two years , it seems that it will no longer be necessary to increase the budget provision for external actions next year .
As Mr Wynn remarked , this still has to be confirmed by the World Bank report .
The Commission would like to prioritise the Mediterranean Development Assistance Programme , not so much by entering into new commitments , but rather by implementing existing commitments in concrete and visible projects from which the public benefits .
I would like to take this opportunity to stress how important it is for the reform of the Commission to bring the peer group evaluation process to a satisfactory conclusion , so that the 317 Commission posts in priority areas can be filled .
That is why we are once again requesting the budgetary authority for these posts .
At present there are 27 700 posts in all in the European Union 's establishment plan .
I believe that this is a number that we should keep reminding people about , because the public often imagine that far more people are involved .
The Commission accounts for 18 400 of these , the Council for 2 650 , and Parliament for 4 260 .
I would like to thank Mrs Buitenweg for her report , which makes it clear that the margin for administrative expenditure is rather tight and that successful cooperation is therefore needed if we are to get by here in future .
I totally agree with her approach , which is that administrative preparations for enlargement should be undertaken jointly by all the institutions and that this is genuinely an area for sensible interinstitutional cooperation .
I would like to briefly expand on the question of Category 8 .
These funds are made available for the new enlargement countries , so if there is no enlargement , this funding is , of course , not made available .
I do not think that it makes much sense at the moment to talk about topping up pre-accession aid .
In conclusion , the budget process does not just mean taking decisions about figures ; it is also about converting the figures into successful policies .
That is why implementation issues have quite rightly been addressed in priority setting by the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
Reducing old liabilities , reducing payment delays and making budgetary decisions easier to understand are cornerstones of our policy here and will be covered in the Commission 's progress report to Parliament .
The decision that the budgetary authority will present weekly figures on budget implementation means , and I am proud to say this , that the Commission will really be in the vanguard of the movement for greater budgetary transparency .
We are also working on making the budget plan more comprehensible , step by step , so that it is a source of information not just for budget experts , but also for the public .
Last year we introduced activity-based budgeting , and this year we are creating a clear link between strategic objectives and the allocation of resources , especially human resources .
This will make the budget process more transparent , and will gradually make the budget what it ought to be - an expression of our shared political priorities .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place - and , if appropriate , Mr Colom i Naval ' s may be withdrawn - at 12 noon today .

Determination of Member States ' payments to the VAT-based own resource
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0101 / 2001 ) by Mrs Haug , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for the European Parliament and Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2223 / 96 as concerns the use of ESA 95 in the determination of Member States ' payments to the VAT-based own resource .
Mrs Haug has the floor .
. ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since the adoption of the 1996 Council Regulation on the European system of national and regional accounts in the Community , we have had a new and modified system , ESA 95 .
However , this new system for budgetary and own resources calculation will not apply until the new own resources decision comes into effect .
When ESA 95 was adopted , it was assumed that the new own resources decision would be adopted in 1999 .
We now know that in fact that did not happen until September 2000 .
It will probably come into force on 1 January 2002 , if all the Member States ratify it without delay .
So that is the legal position .
It is evident that the Member States have now adjusted their own national accounting systems and that data is no longer available on the 1979 basis .
This means that the letter of the Commission 's proposal amending the regulation on the determination of Member States ' payments to the VAT-based own resource does not match actual practice .
We , the entire Committee on Budgets , are assuming that the switch from ESA 79 to ESA 95 will have no impact on the level of own resources , that is neither on the balance between the Member States nor , of course , on the total volume of own resources .
So far , so good .
Honourable Members will perhaps think that this is a rather dry subject , but we have taken advantage of this opportunity under the codecision procedure , and we should never forego any opportunity to emphasise the importance of own resources in setting the European Union 's budget and financial perspective .
When you do that , it does not seem so dry any more , because it is no secret that Parliament , as one arm of the budgetary authority , would like to have full budget rights , that is to say codecision not just on expenditure but also on the revenue side .
That is why we are now trying to take a tiny step towards that goal .
The Commission is willing to actively support us in this task .
I really wish to specifically thank the Commissioner very sincerely for that .
It is willing to present a working paper on the state of play regarding the collection of own resources to us at the beginning of the budget process .
This document will also provide information on good and in some cases not so good collection practice in the Member States .
And it will provide us with a good basis for discussion , for a debate with the Council on EU revenue .
However , it is also no secret that on this issue the Council 's approach is just as unwieldy as the rather long title of the regulation whose amendment we are discussing right now .
Not only will it not consider codecision with Parliament on own resources , as was apparent at Nice , it does not even want to talk with us in either a formal or informal trialogue .
And please note that we are not talking about negotiations here , just discussions .
The Council is simply refusing to cooperate with Parliament on this - and not just refusing to cooperate but refusing to grant Parliament some of its parliamentary rights .
This not only affects the budget , it seems to be a general trend at present .
Members are having to fight for their parliamentary rights as regards the framework legislation on financial services .
We are having to fight as regards the directive on the European Company statute .
We are having to fight over human resources for the common foreign and security policy .
I really do not claim that this is an exhaustive list , but one thing is clear : safeguarding Parliament 's rights is not something that can be taken for granted in 2001 - Members themselves have to constantly fight to secure these rights .
That is why I am utterly convinced that my colleagues , including the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , will firmly support us when we insist that there should at least be a discussion with the Council on our own resources .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group agrees with Mrs Haug ' s report on payments to the VAT-based own resources .
This Parliament has tried , through every means possible , to influence the Council on its new decision on own resources .
Unfortunately , and despite the fact that Mrs Haug last year played the roles of both general rapporteur for the 2001 budget and permanent rapporteur for the European Parliament on own resources , we were not able to make progress in the conciliation procedure with the Council in a manner which was satisfactory to us .
The Council continues to believe that revenues are its exclusive prerogative and does not allow any significant progress in relation to Parliament ' s participation .
This is an unfortunate circumstance which those of us who deal with own resources have to face .
Our role is purely consultative , and we believe that this involves the very definition of Parliament ' s competences .
The modification of the European System of Accounts , from the replaced 1979 system to the more representative 1995 system , is a good measure which will allow a more realistic and representative revenue since it will provide a more accurate reflection of the accounts of each Member State .
We fully accept the first amendment , in particular because it refers to the neutrality of this change in the system of accounts .
And , since our powers as MEPs are so limited in the field of own resources , the rapporteur ' s request for more information , even of a quarterly nature , will improve our position .
We therefore also fully recommend the second amendment .
The third amendment , if we take account of the comments of our Chairman , Mr Wynn , may be a little more complicated , but I believe we must vote in favour on this amendment and then we see what result it has later .
The result will possibly be the same as always : they will ignore us .
In any event , the Interinstitutional Agreement of 1999 allows us to hold a dialogue on own resources .
These amendments increase the possibility of such a dialogue and must therefore be accepted .
Mr President , Mrs Haug ' s report , which is being discussed , concerns a technical alteration that would provide a more accurate basis for collecting VAT-based contributions .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for her excellent work .
The collection system for contributions is a complicated political game that results in Member States attempting to maximise their own benefits and minimise what they pay out .
Although the size of EU contributions is determined as a share of GNP the structure of the contribution is very different from one country to the next .
In Member States where there are large ports revenue from customs duty is considerable and , for that reason , the amount of duty paid in contributions is substantial .
In Berlin there was a lengthy dispute regarding contributions .
As a result , EU financing is becoming more dependent on fourth resources , i.e. , direct transfers of funds out of national parliaments ' budgets .
The increase in portage from 10 % to 25 % was a clear concession to the countries with large ports .
The resulting gap in the EU budget is to be bridged by increasing the GNP share .
The other change is the progressive reduction in VAT-based contributions , which will also increase the GNP share .
This is leading to a situation where EU contributions are becoming tied more than ever to budget transfers from individual Member States and gross national earnings , which must now probably be considered only fair .
Only the question of the reduction in contributions made by the United Kingdom will remain open in the future .
In the future enlargement will wreak havoc on the EU budget .
There are a hundred million inhabitants in the new Member States , representing only 4 % of GNP , however .
As a result , the contributions from the old Member States will clearly increase from what they are now , and may even double .
In any future decisions taken we must ensure that a rise in contributions does not jeopardise development in the old Member States , especially in the matter of increased regional and social inequality .
. ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Haug , ladies and gentlemen , just now we were talking about the expenditure side of the budget , and we are now briefly discussing the revenue side , although only on a statistical basis , that is in relation to the European system of integrated economic accounts .
This data , which is collected via the integrated economic accounts system , is used for various important purposes , such as the own resources ceiling , the calculation of gross national product , the share according to which Member States ' contributions are collected and for determining Member States ' payments to the VAT-based own resource .
The legal basis that we are discussing now relates to the last of these .
What we are talking about now is instead of using the old 1975 basis to use the new statistical basis so as to avoid statistical double counting or costly re-accounting procedures that lead to many errors .
Here in Parliament this has been dealt with by the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The latter supports the Commission proposal without reservation , whereas the Committee on Budgets has now formulated various amendments .
Amendments Nos 2 and 3 do not relate to this proposal concerning the statistical basis . Amendment No 2 requests a document on the collection of own resources and Amendment No 3 calls in particular for the trialogue to consider own resources .
Mrs Haug , the Commission cannot accept these last two amendments , although we have agreed to comply with Parliament 's wish - the wish of the Committee on Budgets - to provide more information on the collection of own resources in a working paper .
This will mean a delay in the whole decision-making process .
The Commission regrets this , as the Court of Auditors and also the Committee on Budgetary Control have repeatedly criticised the Commission for using the old statistical basis for calculating VAT contributions when collecting own resources .
The situation will have been sorted out by 2002 with the ratification of the own resources decision .
Nevertheless , the Commission would have welcomed it if the statistical simplification and improvements that it proposed last September could have come into effect sooner .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Discharges
The next item is the joint debate on the following 6 reports , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the following discharges :
A5-0112 / 2001 by Mrs Stauner , on the Commission report on the measures taken in the light of the observations of the European Parliament [ COM ( 2000 ) 558 - C5-0560 / 2000 - 2000 / 2263 ( DEC ) ]
A5-0113 / 01 by Mr Blak on Section III of the general budget [ SEC ( 2000 ) 537 - C5-0310 / 2000 - 2000 / 2155 ( DEC ) ]
A5-0099 / 2001 by Mr Folias on Section I of the general budget [ SEC ( 2000 ) 539 - C5-0312 / 2000 - 2000 / 2157 ( DEC ) ] ;
A5-0108 / 2001 by Mrs van der Laan in relation to the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Dublin ) [ C5-0686 / 2000 - 2000 / 2166 ( DEC ) ] , and the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( Thessaloniki ) [ C5-0687 / 2000 - 2000 / 2165 ( DEC ) ]
º Sections IV , V and VI ( Part B ) of the general budget [ SEC ( 2000 ) 539 - C5-0312 / 2000 - C5-0617 / 2000 - 2000 / 2156 ( DEC ) ] ;
and
º the postponement of discharge in respect of implementation of the general budget [ SEC ( 2000 ) 539 - C5-0312 / 2000 - C5-0617 / 2000 - 2000 / 2156 ( DEC ) ] ;
A5-0097 / 2001 by Mr Seppänen in respect of the European Coal and Steel Community [ C5-0654 / 2000 - 2000 / 2167 ( DEC ) ] ;
and
A5-0109 / 2001 by Mrs Rühle in respect of the discharge of the 6th , 7th and 8th European Development Funds [ COM ( 2000 ) 357 - C5-0257 / 2000 - 2000 / 2164 ( DEC ) ] .
Mrs Theato has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I wanted to ask who is representing the Swedish Presidency here today for this important debate .
Can you give me a name ?
Yesterday , the State Secretary responsible , Mr Malmberg , informed me that to his great regret he cannot be with us today .
I regret this all the more as there will probably be a debate about Sweden 's national budget , and he will not be with us here .
Could you please tell us who is representing the Swedish Presidency in today 's debate at political level ?
Thank you .
Mrs Theato , as always , you are very well informed .
And as you are well informed , you will see that the Council is clearly absent .
I am not going to criticise the Council .
It will explain its reasons at the appropriate moment .
We take good note of its absence .
Mrs Theato has the floor once again for another point of order .
I trust that it is the last one , Mrs Theato .
Mr President , thank you for your trouble . However , I would like the Minutes to show that this House regrets that the presidency is not represented at this important debate .
Your words will appear in the Minutes .
Mrs Stauner has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my report winds up the 1998 discharge procedure .
As this is the first discharge to which the Prodi Commission has been subjected , it has been full of suspense .
The 1998 discharge decision was postponed in April 2000 and discharge was subsequently granted in July 2000 , but all this leaves a lot to be desired .
I would like to address just three particular matters of concern .
In 1998 , for the fifth consecutive time , the Court of Auditors declined to give a positive Statement of Assurance , or in other words to certify that European taxpayers ' money had been used carefully and thriftily .
Parliament therefore certainly did the right thing when it called on the Commission to arrive at a positive Statement of Assurance for the financial year 2003 at the latest .
Unfortunately , the Commission has failed up to now to take concrete and measurable steps in this direction .
It is not enough that the Commission has repeatedly referred to the general reform programme .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission if careful use of European taxpayers ' money should not be a priority theme for the Commission .
Or does the Commission perhaps want to celebrate an anniversary in 2003 - ten years of being refused a positive Statement of Assurance ?
We judge the Commission not by its words , but by its deeds .
That is why I specifically welcome the deadlines that we have set you for achieving this objective .
The Fléchard case in particular has made it clear that the role of an independent Financial Controller is vital in determining whether a fraud case is admitted or not .
You now want to scrap the independence of the Financial Controller and make him report to the relevant Director-General as part of the reform programme .
There can be no doubt that this would lead to a spectacular fall in the error rate , but probably not because no more errors or frauds were being committed , but rather because the authorising Directors-General would ensure that such matters never came to light at all .
The introduction of an independent disciplinary chamber able to carry out a fair and neutral disciplinary procedure , with the officials responsible being appropriately held to account , is also another long-standing request from Parliament that the Commission has failed to comply with .
The Commission has equally failed to seriously pursue the creation of a European Public Prosecutor to prosecute cases of fraud .
On the subject of access by Members of Parliament to information and documents , I would like to seriously ask the Commissioner how we are to carry out our verification duty if you refuse to let us have information and documentation ?
At the beginning of its period of office , the Commission espoused the cause of transparency and openness .
I myself saw during the 1998 discharge procedure how wide the gap is between rhetoric and reality here .
Nor was there any substantial improvement for the 1999 discharge procedure .
You only have to look at Annexes I and II to the Blak report to see that the rapporteur received 22 of the audit reports he requested and , believe it or not , did not receive 11 reports .
I think these figures speak for themselves .
The framework agreement between the Commission and Parliament has dealt a fatal blow as regards this inadequate access to information .
As you know , that agreement was approved here in the House in July 2000 without our having an opportunity to debate it .
This framework agreement is driving a wedge between Members and is creating a two-tier Parliament .
It is encouraging a policy of divide et impera - divide and rule .
We can no more tolerate this than we can tolerate a lack of access to general documents .
I would also like to remind you that last December we agreed , by adopting the Morgan report , that in future we would defer discharge if the Commission had not made available all the documents requested .
We have actually found ourselves in that position sooner than many people expected .
One more comment on the Fléchard case , and let me be clear about this : the Commission cannot in all honesty avoid making a clear admission that the procedure adopted at the time was wrong and that everything must be done to prevent such an unlawful decision ever being made again .
Mrs Schreyer , as the Commissioner responsible you have an opportunity to make a statement to that effect .
Please take that opportunity here today .
I will make no bones about it : my decision whether or not to vote for discharge will depend on what you say today .
Mr President , strangely enough , this is the first time in many years that the discharge is likely to be given on time .
Therefore , it will be a great moment , for Parliament as well as the Commission , when we put it to the vote tomorrow .
Has the Commission lived up to expectations , then ?
Maybe not quite yet . However , I think a general change of attitude has taken place in the Commission .
A shock wave went through the system when the Santer Commission was removed in 1999 .
The Commission is now aware that the threat is real .
Parliament can and will use the discharge to remove the Commission if it does not live up to expectations .
This year , there are certain MEPs who will refuse to grant discharge .
I believe that would be a very big mistake .
This is something we must only do in special circumstances when we have really good arguments for doing so .
If we do it every year , the threat , of course , loses its value .
We must cooperate with all those forces that wish to make European cooperation more efficient and open .
I think that this is what most MEPs want .
I have therefore collaborated with all the political groups represented in the Committee .
Undoubtedly , this has improved the report , as well as the atmosphere in the Committee .
The new Commission has initiated large-scale reform .
Mr Kinnock has promised us the best administration in the world .
We shall now see whether the fine words can be put into practice .
I have prepared a very critical , yet constructive report .
It also recognises the fact that the Commission is in the process of implementing large-scale reforms and , at the same time , addresses the sore points .
In 1999 , things were simply a mess .
There was no overview of the internal and external audit reports , and the archive was also in something of a mess .
We must hope that the reforms will remedy this .
I have drawn up a 10-point plan which is largely based on the spirit of the reforms but which goes further in some areas .
I look forward to hearing the Commission ' s response to my proposals .
We have received a lot of information this year .
We might have wished for more extensive and more timely information , but many of the delays can be attributed to the framework agreement .
In my experience , this is a poor framework agreement .
It is used to withhold documents and to keep documents confidential for , in the end , it is the Commission which decides whether a document should be deemed confidential .
I have respected the framework agreement because it is currently in force . However , I think it should be revised .
In my opinion , we should work towards a re-negotiation of the framework agreement .
One of the greatest dangers of this agreement is that ordinary committee members are reduced to second-rate members .
Considerable information is provided to the rapporteur and the committee chairman only , and so the taxpayers are not given the optimum guarantee that nothing is kept secret or swept under the carpet . It will never be discovered .
However , Parliament should certainly also ' look nearer home ' .
Why have we not yet arranged for a secure archive to be set up to which Members may come to read confidential documents under proper conditions ?
We must therefore ensure that the Commission can trust us .
I am delighted that the Commission has put its trust in me as rapporteur .
We have been provided with more information than ever before in the history of the discharge , and I should like to commend the Commission for that .
We could sense quite clearly that the Commission wanted a timely discharge .
Some of us can surely confirm this .
All in all , the Commission has taken the discharge very seriously this year .
It is the first time that so many Commissioners have been present in the Committee .
The Committee saw all 12 Commissioners .
This indicates that the new Commission is interested in , and respects , the discharge procedure .
However , I do not fully agree with the Commission ' s view of what Parliament ' s discharge should be based on .
Basically , the Commission believes that the discharge should be based on the various reports from the Court of Auditors . That is something I do not agree with .
Parliament should not be a detective agency .
We should concentrate on structural problems . However , we should have the same access to information as the Court of Auditors .
It is the Commission to which Parliament must grant discharge , and that is why we must hold the Commission primarily responsible .
However , there is a complex interplay between the Commission and the Council , Parliament , the Court of Auditors , OLAF and the Member States .
I therefore made a great effort to incorporate all the institutions in my report .
Both the Council and Parliament set limits upon the Commission ' s work .
Agricultural policy is a good example .
The Commission has fought hard to reform agricultural policy .
Time and again , it has tabled proposals for countering malpractice , fraud and over- charging and , time and again , Parliament and the Council have voted against these .
Unfortunately , there are many such examples , for example in the flax , milk and butter sectors .
Every year , the Council has given the Commission the green light in its discharge , so I became curious .
What do they really discuss behind the closed doors of the Council ?
I sent a letter to the Swedish presidency requesting permission to attend the Ecofin meeting where the discharge is adopted .
I was very disappointed in the Swedes , who normally boast about their openness .
They rejected my request . But then I was very impressed to receive the rejection in all 11 Community languages .
I have other things to say , but I shall return to these at the end of the debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I say how delighted I am that my report concerning discharge of the European Parliament for the implementation of the 1999 budget was adopted unanimously in committee and has been tabled before the House today for debate and voting with no amendments , something which , I am told , has not happened for years .
I hope that this will be the procedure from now on .
We have endeavoured , with everybody ' s help , to draft a constructive report based on two lines of approach : the quantitative and the qualitative .
On the quantitative side , we used the classic method of auditing the implementation of the budget and found things to our satisfaction and liking .
We identified a downward trend or , in fact , a constant reduction in the costs of missions between Luxembourg and Brussels .
We found that checks made to ascertain whether officials really have taken up residence where they are supposed to have taken up residence have , without any doubt , been stepped up .
We found that the number of contracts awarded through open competition is gradually increasing and we hope that this positive development will be put to more frequent use in the future .
The inventory of Parliament ' s property has been started , albeit somewhat late , and is making headway .
Of course , it is disappointing , as we have pointed out , that a price has still not been put on this building , which we have been using for about eighteen months now .
We still do not know what it is worth , what it cost or where we stand and everyone involved would do well to bear that in mind .
On the qualitative side , we found that the European Parliament administers a huge budget .
But what do we give out , what image does Parliament project to the outside world as it operates this huge , serious institution ?
You know , it is tiresome to read nothing but critical comments and critical articles in the press , given the tremendous , fundamental job done in this House , which is precisely why what we have tried to do in this report is to help increase the transparency , acknowledgement and the understanding of what happens and what we do in this chamber of democracy .
What we want is to be able to quantify the European Parliament ' s contribution to the legislative work of the European communities .
We want to start making use of the opinions expressed by the groups of visitors who come and visit Parliament .
It would be a good idea if we knew what these citizens , for whom a large sum of money is earmarked so that they can visit and get to know Parliament , feel about the European Parliament , and use them to show us a better way forward .
We want to improve the efficiency of the information offices in the various capitals of the fifteen Member States , so that is the direction we are moving in .
And we also want continuous support between the services of the European Parliament and the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , so that we can implement what we decide and vote on .
Hence the proposal and the decision to create a standing committee consisting of the rapporteur for discharge and the person responsible for Parliament , together with parliamentary officials , to monitor progress in and the implementation of the measures which will be proposed and which we shall vote on here tomorrow .
This would turn discharge from a one-off issue into a continuous , constructive procedure .
Finally , we want the staff , the officials working on economic affairs here at the European Parliament , to receive continual training , additional training and reintegration into new technologies , so that we can achieve the best possible results .
Before closing , may I thank all my fellow members and all those who helped draft this report , because I think that we have done a fine job and I hope that it will be used as an example at all levels .
Mr President , the low turnout at the elections might well give people the impression that this Parliament has little say .
Nothing could be further from the truth , as is once again borne out in the annual discharge debate .
The dismissal of the Santer Commission was the turning point in the Union ' s financial management .
Whilst the Council granted discharge to the same Santer Commission unthinkingly , this Parliament did take its responsibilities seriously .
Not only has this increased the political weight of discharge , at the same time , a U-turn has taken place from a bookkeeper ' s mentality to one which is focused on content and effectiveness .
The representative body of the people should not only ensure that all receipts are in , but should also check whether the tax money has been spent wisely and whether a result has been achieved .
In this respect , assistance from the European Court of Auditors is at hand .
However , the Committee on Budgetary Control believes that the monitoring procedure could be far more effective still .
For that to happen , the Court of Auditors would need to embark on a consistent naming and shaming , in other words the public pillorying of those Member States who fail to get their act together .
In addition , we would like to see the percentage of errors at national and sectoral level clearly quantified in order to gain a better insight into the problems which spending entails .
Should this not be possible this year , then the Court of Auditors should in any case draw a distinction between major and minor errors when introducing a so-called Richter scale of errors .
Furthermore , the Court of Auditors must realise that it is not above the law itself .
It should stop resisting a true audit on itself and must publicise its financial interests on the Internet .
Unfortunately , we have to establish time and again that Europeans , whether they hail from north or south , east or west , have little faith in the European Union ' s bookkeeping .
It is the costly duty of each and everyone who is involved in the financial monitoring of the European expenditure to win back the confidence of the European citizens .
This confidence is a pre-condition for the further political success of European integration , and that confidence can only be regained by maximum transparency .
The Europeans want certainty that their money is being spent in the best possible way , and where that is not the case , that the organisations and Member States involved are actually called to account .
There is another institution - quite a major one at that - which believes that it stands above the supervisory power of the EP : the Council of Ministers , which was once again of the opinion that its presence was not required today .
Via a so-called gentlemen ' s agreement , Parliament and the Council have agreed not to monitor each other ' s spending .
This was done in the spirit of ' If you do not check me out , then I will not cast a critical eye at you either ' .
Needless to say , this hardly contributes to restoring public confidence .
As long as this approach involved purely administrative expenditure , this was perhaps justifiable to some extent .
However , we now see that the Council is assuming further operational responsibilities .
Not only does this undermine the position of the Commission , it is also subject to little democratic control .
This is why the Committee on Budgetary Control has reached the conclusion that the agreement is due for an overhaul .
The Court of Auditors must report on the Council ' s spending in the same way as it does for other institutions .
The surreptitious manner in which the Council is drawing power towards itself without accounting for it contravenes all basic principles of democracy .
Budgetary legislation , and powers concerning budgetary control , have always been strong weapons for this Parliament when it came to plugging the different democratic holes .
We owe it to our electorate , where possible , to exercise democratic control .
Especially in the case of the Council , where the democratic hole is the biggest and is only threatening to get bigger , this form of control is crucial .
Also as a message from this Parliament to other institutions , this is , therefore , an important choice to make .
I can be brief about the committees and agencies .
Europe is still under construction and is , as all dynamic processes , subject to change .
It is thus no longer logical to scrutinise structures from time to time in the light of all the changes .
All European institutions must continue to demonstrate their added value .
They must ensure that the money of the European taxpayer is spent wisely .
How do they impact on legislation ?
Do they operate efficiently ?
It is , naturally , regrettable that the discharge of the Economic and Social Committee has been postponed for the fourth consecutive time due to deception involving non-existing airline tickets .
We should really close this chapter once and for all .
All that remains for me is to congratulate the many honourable Members who have been involved in the discharge , on their reports .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has mainly adopted a restrained and intelligent stance by granting discharge to the Commission , but under strict conditions .
We are stepping up the pressure to bring about reforms within this Parliament too .
Only if we subject our own actions to the same strict requirements which we impose on other institutions , will we remain a credible reform mechanism .
Mr President , the European Coal and Steel Community is being wound down .
In accordance with decisions taken earlier , it will cease in July 2002 .
Preparations have been made for its expiry , and in the last few years , the ECSC has not collected tax payments from companies in the coal and steel industry to finance its operations .
Over the last decade , the way the ECSC has acted is reminiscent of banking .
It received credits , which it distributed in the form of loans to develop the coal and steel sector .
Borrowers received a sort of interest subsidy with these loans , and its importance to the development of the sector must not be overrated .
The importance of the interest benefit has not been examined closely , but it is probably so little that it is fully justifiable to end the work of the ECSC .
In 1999 new credits were no longer granted and the ECSC was mainly involved in the claw-back of credits , the repayment of credits it received itself , and the management of surplus funds .
The Commission has been responsible for the ECSC .
In recent years preparations have been under way to wind it down in July 2002 .
Then the ECSC will still have amounts outstanding on credits it granted , but the money it borrowed itself should have been paid off .
After the repayment of credits it is estimated that the ECSC will still have more than a billion euros in surplus funds , to be transferred from its own balance sheet to the joint EU balance sheet .
In accordance with decisions taken earlier on , these will form a research fund , managed by the Commission .
The fund will provide support for activities related to the main ECSC areas of industry .
There is probably no lack of subjects for research .
In the opinion of the committee , some sort of research should be carried out on how subsidies to the coal industry in some Member States have an impact on the competition situation between different forms of energy .
The most striking observation made by the Committee on Budgetary Control on the accounts for 1999 is that it was impossible to assess how efficient the Commission had been in managing ECSC funds .
In any evaluation of how efficiently the ECSC has been managed , in its capacity as something akin to a bank , it is necessary to know the actual yield on cash investments and what the share of administrative costs was in attaining this figure .
The information is not now available .
The committee did receive from the Commission , however , an undertaking to produce this information for the year 2000 , after which it will be possible to compare the market return the Commission received on investments with possible earnings received via other channels .
For decades , loans have also been granted to EU personnel out of ECSC funds .
When the ECSC Treaty expires these loans will be incorporated in the EU balance sheet and be managed by the Commission .
After that EU staff will be in debt to the EU .
It is not appropriate that the EU should act as a mortgage bank for its staff .
The committee believes these loans should be transferred to banks .
The committee offers this for the Commission to consider in connection with the granting of discharge .
The matter will be returned to in connection with the granting of discharge in the years to come .
The EU cannot be a mortgage lender for its personnel .
In connection with the granting of discharge the work of the Commission will thus be assessed also from the point of view of administrative rationalisation .
The minor irregularities discovered in the ECSC accounts from past years were corrected after 1999 , and the committee has no special remarks to make with regard to granting discharge in the normal manner .
Mr President , I would particularly like to support what Mrs Theato said in her speech .
I too regard it as an enormous problem that the Council is not present for this debate .
When you look at the Council 's report on the discharge , you really get the impression that in many areas the Council does not know what it is talking about .
For instance , when it comes to the Development Funds , you get the impression that the Council has simply dusted off the same opinions it delivered years ago , instead of really coming to grips with the subject .
I think this is particularly scandalous given that the Council is partly responsible for the fact that there are problems in this area in the first place .
There are still unresolved conflicts of responsibility between the Member States and the Commission here .
So I expect the Council to display a rather greater sense of responsibility and to accept more responsibility .
Parliament is making an effort in the case of this discharge to strike a very careful balance between the urgently required verification work needed , on the one hand , and on the other hand , and this is just as important , the issue of a further loss of confidence in the European institutions .
So as rapporteur for the Development Funds I have given considerable thought to whether I can really call for postponement of the discharge .
But this is a clear decision , and I have the full support of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
However , I would like to emphasise once again that we are not refusing to grant discharge , as it said in one newspaper today , but rather that we are postponing the discharge .
The reason we wish to postpone the discharge in this way is that we believe the Commission is most definitely heading in the right direction , but that it still needs some pressure if it is to go all the way .
So this is not a question of a lack of confidence in the relevant Commissioner , but rather an attempt to make it clear that the action plan he produced in conjunction with Parliament during the 1998 discharge one year ago is precisely the right answer to the problems before us , so that we as the Committee responsible and as Parliament wish to incorporate the first results from this action plan in our discharge procedure .
As the first results are due in April or May , we wish to postpone the discharge until then .
Another reason why we believe that this is undoubtedly necessary is that many improvements still have to be made regarding the Development Funds , or rather the management of the Development Funds , in terms of auditing and cooperation with the Member States .
In this context I would like to express my thanks once again for the excellent cooperation we have had with the European Court of Auditors , which was very helpful in its assessment of the management of the Development Funds .
I wish to point out that the positive DAS contained in the Court of Auditors ' report has to be seen in relative terms , because the Court of Auditors has responded to oral and written questions by commenting that it naturally has some problems here , and that it cannot audit 77 countries and 205 projects itself , so that it is dependent in this area on cooperation with the countries in receipt of aid , and that a great deal of work still remains to be done in this field .
On the one hand , the local delegations have to be strengthened , and on the other administrative structures in these countries also have to be reinforced , and there must be joint projects through which those in positions of responsibility in those countries can obtain the information they need from the EU , that is from the Court of Auditors , and also exchange projects with the Court of Auditors for administrators in positions of authority in the ACP countries .
We urgently need to improve administrative structures so as to deal properly with the work required in the area of development aid .
But I must stress that I am also calling for postponement of the discharge because there has been a singular lack of transparency in my field .
The Commissioner responsible for my area seemed to be far too tentative and anxious , and in my capacity as rapporteur I received information late , after the deadline or not at all .
I also think that his staff 's reference to the framework agreement with Parliament is not very helpful as a means of creating confidence on the part of the rapporteur and as a means of ensuring that we work together constructively on this .
The Commission must in future act in a more transparent and impressive way , and display greater confidence in its dealings with Parliament , so that we can jointly bring the discharge procedure to a satisfactory conclusion .
I would also like to stress once again that many things need to be improved in relation to the Development Funds .
The Commissioner has some difficult tasks before him .
There is a backlog of commitments that he has inherited from the old Commission .
The administrative structures are inappropriate and understaffed .
In the recipient countries themselves there are problems with wars and other crises , and we have taken all this into account .
We are certainly willing to admit that in this area control needs to be handled more carefully .
The control process in a developing country must take as its starting point the notion that there is always corruption with development aid and consideration needs to be given to what sort of action to take in a given country .
That means that we are certainly willing to meet the Commission half wayand recognise the major problems that exist .
But we would also like to stress again that if the EU and the Commission want to win the confidence of the public in the important field of development aid , they will , of course , also have to make appropriate adjustments to their management structure to reflect the regulations .
And it has to be said that the backlog of payment appropriations has certainly reached a worrying level now .
Thank you very much , Mrs Rühle .
Given that voting is imminent , we shall suspend this joint debate until 3.00 p.m. , and it will be resumed with the presence and intervention of Commissioner Schreyer .

VOTE
Does any Member wish to speak against this proposal ?
As no one wishes to speak , I shall put to the vote the request to postpone the vote .
( Parliament gave its assent to postponing the vote )
Report ( A5-0106 / 2001 ) by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication on upgrading the investment services directive ( 93 / 22 / EEC ) [ COM ( 2000 ) 729 - C5-0069 / 2001 - 2001 / 2039 ( COS ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0105 / 2001 ) by Mrs Kauppi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication on the application of conduct of business rules under Article 11 of the investment services directive ( 93 / 22 / EEC ) [ COM ( 2000 ) 722 - C5-0068 / 2001 - 2001 / 2038 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0092 / 2001 ) by Mr Sacconi , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Commission Green Paper on environmental issues of PVC [ COM ( 2000 ) 469 - C5-0633 / 2000 - 2000 / 2297 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0102 / 2001 ) by Mr Costa Neves , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the guidelines for the 2002 budget procedure , Section III - Commission [ 2000 / 2324 ( BUD ) ]
Before the vote on Amendment No 2
Madam President , we have made a further improvement to one part of the amendment , in agreement with the rapporteur .
It reads as follows : " Hopes that true to the rules of social dialogue the Commission will continue to consult with the parties concerned . "
The change is in the word " continue " .
This is the only change , and as I said it has been agreed with the rapporteur and so he accepts it .
Madam President , I also propose that when this amendment is adopted , it should be considered to be an appendix to paragraph 7 and not a paragraph in its own right .
( Parliament gave its assent to the oral amendment being tabled )
Before the vote on Amendment No 13
Madam President , I do support this amendment , but , for technical reasons , I would ask honourable Members to consider introducing a sub-title , which we would call the ' European Coal and Steel Community ' , in order to ensure coherence within the text .
Mr Turchi tabled the amendment and since he has no objection to this , I shall put Amendment No 13 , as amended by Mr Costa Neves , to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0103 / 2001 ) by Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Commission on Budgets , on the guidelines for Sections II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII and on the European Parliament ' s preliminary draft estimates ( Section I ) for the 2002 budgetary procedure : Section I - European Parliament ; Section II - Council ; Section IV - Court of Justice ; Section V - Court of Auditors ; Section VI - Economic and Social Committee ; Section VII - Committee of the Regions ; Section VIII - Ombudsman [ 2000 / 2325 ( BUD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- Roth-Behrendt Report ( A5-0095 / 2001 ) :
Madam President , I explained most of my considerations on this report yesterday , but , this morning , I would like to add that the desires and expectations of the left , of the Greens and of Mrs Roth-Behrendt are , in my opinion , destined to remain just desires and expectations .
Women must choose between make-up and consideration for animals .
Here , I am afraid to say that I am in no doubt : they prefer make-up , for that makes them look younger .
I would therefore draw the attention of the House to the fact that I abstained in the vote on this report , but that the lady pensioners have instructed me to say that they are willing to renounce all cosmetics if the national governments and Europe decide to take five years off their age , stating their dates of birth as five years later and thus making them five years younger without the need for cosmetic make-up .
Madam President , unlike the last speaker I do not think this is an issue that should be trivialised in this way .
Last night , I was astonished by Mr Fatuzzo 's speech .
This is an issue which concentrates on cruelty towards , and inhumane abuse of , animals .
It is nothing to laugh about .
We should not be making jokes about these issues .
This is an extremely important issue . There is a lot of hypocrisy in this House .
Last night people were using the excuse that we need further testing but we have to be sure that we do not cause any damage to children , that we must protect them .
It is ironic that those same people voted against our amendment in committee in relation to the fact that fragrances are included in baby products .
If we really want to protect children then surely those people would have voted to ban the use of fragrances in baby products .
They are completely unnecessary . They also expose babies to unnecessary risks .
I want to re-endorse the fact that this is not a trivial issue .
It is extremely serious .
The general public throughout the EU are very much opposed to the use of animals for something that is completely unnecessary .
This is basically cosmetics - things to boost people 's egos , making a huge amount of money for the industry .
We really should take account of animal welfare .
It is unjustifiable in the twenty-first century that we are using such prehistoric practices .
Madam President , I should just like to briefly explain why I supported Amendment No 35 , which could be described as a " wrecking amendment " .
It was not the intention of this amendment to wreck the directive . But because the changes Parliament wants to make to this directive are so fundamental , we would like to send it back to the Commission to allow them to rewrite it to take into account the marketing ban and take a more realistic view of the alternative testing methods that may be available , not using animals .
Therefore I would not like my vote and those of the others in my group who supported that amendment to be misconstrued .
The United Kingdom has already banned animal testing .
We would like to see that taken forward in a realistic and practical way .
Our group has decided to abstain from the vote for the following reasons :
Firstly , because an amendment has been tabled proposing that the Commission ' s proposal be rejected by Parliament and because we do not believe that this proposal responds to this Parliament ' s minimum expectations .
The PPE-DE ' s amendment was rejected by a margin of 11 votes , and we therefore feel it is coherent with our initial position to abstain from the final vote on the text .
Secondly , our group considers it necessary to abstain because its two amendments on time limits for the end of marketing and for the end of experimentation have not been accepted .
Since our group is in favour of setting dates , both for the end of marketing and for the end of experimentation , we consider it appropriate to extend the deadlines proposed by the rapporteur in such a way that the prohibition of marketing will take place within ten years of the approval of the revision and the prohibition of experimentation will be delayed by two years , in the event that alternative available methods are not found for cases in which ingredients , or mixtures of ingredients , may cause serious dermatological or ocular damage
I welcome the adoption by the European Parliament of the report by German Socialist MEP Dagmar Roth-Berendt , which calls for a ban on the testing of animals and the introduction of proper labelling so that consumers can make an informed choice .
At a time when people are demanding higher standards from the food industry , the cosmetics industry continues to market products which contain potentially harmful ingredients .
Today 's debate on a report on the use of animal testing and ingredients in cosmetics and toiletries raises concerns about the use of allergy-causing ingredients , as well as substances used in cosmetics which have been linked with cancer and hormonal problems .
While EU legislation provides for strict limits on the use of certain chemicals in cosmetics , this does not guarantee the user will be unaffected by their use .
The time has come to re-examine entirely the use of chemicals that are known or suspected to be harmful .
In Sweden and Japan the use of formaldehyde is completely banned because it is claimed to be carcinogenic .
However , in the EU it is commonly used as a preservative in " family " hair shampoos .
Not only is it not banned in the rest of Europe , but we are not even told it is present in the products we buy .
In addition to banning certain ingredients , there should be better labelling of cosmetics and toiletries so that the consumer can make an informed choice .
We wish to expand on our reasons for supporting the key principles of the Roth-Berendt report today .
We believe it does a singular service by demonstrating to the Commission and the Member States the scale of public exasperation at the delays in phasing out live animal testing for cosmetic products .
We are sure the Member States will note the emphatic majority expressed here .
It is a vote to ban animal-tested products where alternative tests exist , to phase out animal tests over a 4-year period and to phase in a marketing ban in an agreed period thereafter .
We hope the industry in general will heed these proposals .
Some of its leading practitioners already have .
We understand that , of the principal tests , roughly one-third can now be done by alternative methods , one-third are modified and one-third await effective resolution .
We believe our proposal will speed up the necessary research , if it is taken seriously .
The industry has everything to gain from using its considerable resources to advance alternative testing , and not for expensive campaigns of procrastination .
Similarly , its products will gain and not lose by being accurately labelled , so that the public is warned of possible allergens .
We are convinced that today 's vote is , in the long run , good for the health and profitability of the European cosmetics industry , as well as the public it serves .
For centuries , many people considered animals to be objects that existed for their benefit , which they were allowed to hurt or abuse , there to provide for our comfort , to pull our carriages and ploughs , to supply our food and for us to experiment on .
We have now become slightly more civilised and animal-friendly , except if there is money to be made .
In Europe , 38 000 animals are used annually for testing new substances and end products of the cosmetics industry , after which they are systematically slaughtered .
As long ago as 1993 , this Parliament decided to institute a sales ban on cosmetics tested on animals , but the introduction of this ban has been continually postponed under pressure from the industry .
The European Commission now wishes to tone down this sales ban and establish a ban on tests within the EU countries , as a result of which products will continue to be allowed on the market here which have been tested on animals elsewhere .
If that is the case , the tests will be transferred to other countries .
This begs the question whether there are really no standards other than the lowest possible production costs , free trade and WTO rules ?
The downside of these are bad working conditions , low salaries , further destruction of the environment and an increase in animal suffering .
It is high time that the European market closed its doors to the import of all products obtained in an unacceptable manner .
I have based my vote on the recommendations of the " Eurogroup for Animal Welfare " .
Haug report ( A5-0101 / 2001 ) :
Madam President , in reply to Mrs McKenna 's remarks , I would like to say that there are over 600 of us here , each of us different , over 600 brains , each of them different , and that I am never more serious than when I am joking and never more light-hearted than when I am serious .
Having said that , in relation to the Haug report , which I voted for , I have to say that the European Union needs greater financial resources .
The budget itself , as it stands , is too small .
The Member States must decide whether they want Europe or not , and if they want Europe and consider it useful , they must furnish it with the necessary means for it to run smoothly and properly .
Katiforis report ( A5-0106 / 2001 ) :
Madam President , I voted for Mr Katiforis ' excellent , important report on the Commission 's communication updating the directive on investment services .
My feeling is that we should continue with the Community regulation of the circulation of our currency and of the financial investment services until we succeed in establishing a single European Stock Exchange .
I know that such a Stock Exchange does not exist at present , but we have the European currency , the European flag and the European Parliament : we are already proceeding in that direction . Let us endeavour to create a European Stock Exchange as well .
It would certainly be greater than the New York Stock Exchange .
Kauppi report ( A5-0105 / 2001 ) :
Madam President , on this European Stock Exchange which I hope to see established - and I regret that Mrs Kauppi 's report , which I voted in favour of , does not contain this proposal - I would also like to see European public pension funds quoted as well .
It would be important for those who work to see that the contributions that they pay , in the hope that they will be able to recoup them later on when they are elderly and live on their pensions without having to work , are contributions and funds which are invested well , invested in a European Stock Exchange which will generate a much better , much larger European pension than national pensions would be .
The June movement will not vote for rules which enable officials to legislate instead of elected representatives in open assemblies whose work can be monitored .
Sacconi report ( A5-0092 / 2001 ) :
Madam President , I voted against the Sacconi report on the environmental problems of PVC , which are therefore problems that also relate to differentiated waste collection as well .
I would like , if I may , to relate in this important parliamentary Chamber the suggestions of some pensioners of Bergamo , who were aware that we were due to deal with this important issue of differentiated waste collection .
They said to me : " If they double my pension , even though I am a pensioner , I will personally go round all the houses in all the villages around Bergamo to collect all the differentiated waste , including waste containing PVC and any other types of waste .
I will willingly contribute to this recycling on condition that my pension is increased " .
Well then , I am putting these proposals to the House .
Madam President , the way in which this Parliament has passed its verdict on the PVC report fills me with great sadness .
Why am I sad ?
Because the House has displayed little professional expertise in its voting behaviour .
Allow me to quote a few examples .
The first example is the banning of PVC in buildings .
Madam President , if PVC had been used in Dusseldorf airport , for example , the fire would not have been as fierce .
The claims made here are therefore nonsense .
The same applies to a number of observations regarding incineration .
It is not PVC , but particularly vegetable , fruit and garden waste which is generating the chlorine compounds .
What disappointed me greatly , is that the area where legislation could be put in place easily and promptly by means of self-regulation - the industry is keen on that - is the area which the majority of this Parliament voted against , especially the liberal group , where I had most certainly hoped to find supporters .
The outcome is disappointing , and I am holding on to what the Commission said yesterday , namely that it will not introduce further legislation , but only present a communication .
For the best part of the history of mankind , we have had to make our tools from wood , metal and stone .
The invention of plastics and the development of a chemical industry appeared to offer unknown opportunities for a long time .
We now know that all kinds of new substances which were valued by everyone initially , such as asbestos and polyvinyl chloride , are harmful .
The negative effects are not apparent until afterwards .
After a certain length of time , PVCs release chlorine , as well as phthalates or other plasticisers and , if stabilisers are used , lead or cadmium .
Toxins are released as early as at the production stage and also when substances are added .
When PVC is reused , toxic substances are released again and , for the time being , a qualitatively inferior product is made .
Chlorine and dioxins are released during incineration .
Consequently , the dumping of PVC waste seems to be the only solution , but polluting substances are released even then .
Both the European Commission and the rapporteur adopt the voluntary commitments with industry in order to curb the drawbacks .
For the time being , an import ban on PVC of a quality which does not meet these voluntary commitments is considered too bold , because it could contravene WTO rules .
The rapporteur is right to press for the reduction in the use of PVC and for more research into alternatives .
I support him in this view , but believe that these proposals are inadequate to actually solve the problem .
Costa Neves report ( A5-0102 / 2001 ) :
I voted against the Costa Neves report on the Commission 's 2002 budget lines .
Madam President , I should be very pleased if the European Commission were given more money for its budget .
In the eyes of Mr Fatuzzo , however , what should the Commission do with this extra money that I hope to see made available in 2002 ?
I would like to see a new Directorate created , for the sole purpose of looking into and implementing ways of improving the living conditions of elderly people and pensioners throughout Europe and the States which will soon be joining the European Union .
There is a great deal to do , to propose and to achieve in Europe , particularly in terms of hospital and home medical treatments for elderly people , particularly elderly people who are not self-sufficient .
In our view , the reports on the main guidelines for the 2002 budget of the European institutions seem to be incomplete , or vague , in three main areas .
Firstly , agriculture .
Additional agricultural expenditure will be necessary , as a result of the BSE crisis , which will be substantial ; however we quite rightly do not wish to revise the whole financial perspective adopted in 1999 .
How can we reconcile these two requirements ?
According to the reports , we would have to do our best to find the money through an internal readjustment of heading 1 ( agriculture ) , which , in our view , is impossible in light of the commitments that have been given .
As we already stated during the recent debate in this House on the revision of the 2001 budget , we hope that a greater contribution to heading 2 ( structural operations ) might be considered .
Secondly , enlargement .
The 2002 budget guidelines seem too sketchy on the cost of enlargement .
The implications for agriculture or for the Structural Funds have not yet been determined , but will become clear in time .
On the other hand , we must now start to consider the financial consequences for the operations of the European institutions .
They should form part of a multiannual plan building up to enlargement , beginning in 2002 .
The third area is the Treaty of Nice .
Political statements have been made in various quarters , claiming that the Treaty of Nice should be ratified by all Member States at the end of 2001 .
Furthermore , the ECSC protocol , as an annex to the Treaty , is due to come into force in July 2002 .
We are dubious as to whether this timetable will be respected , but since this commitment seems to have been made , the 2002 budget guidelines should at least contain an estimate of how much the new provisions of this Treaty will cost .
Yet , this is missing .
This expenditure is , however , likely to be substantial , whether it involves , for example , a unified statute for MEPs , funding of the so-called ' European political parties ' from the Community budget , or even this very budget assuming the administrative costs of the rapid action force , pursuant to Article 28 ( 2 ) of the EU Treaty .
As usual , we are going to make Member States ratify the new provisions , the cost of which we are trying hard to conceal .
We voted against the budget guidelines proposed in this report and in the following reports , since this is a budget that is entirely geared towards satisfying financial groups , industrial and agricultural lobbies and , incidentally , is designed to fund a foreign policy that the big investors in Europe deem to be in its interests .
Each Member State of the European Union is cutting the redistributed share of its expenditure in their budgets by sacrificing public services , hospitals , education , transport and by drastically limiting social expenditure so as to generate greater profits for large companies .
The European Union ' s budget , using subsidiarity as a pretext , is pushing this tendency even further by cutting social expenditure to a negligible level .
This is one of the ways in which it is showing its refusal to work towards a levelling upwards of social protection and benefits and salaries throughout the European Union .
Since the funding of both Member States and the European Union is inextricably linked , we once again express our opposition to every type of budget revenue that primarily affects the working classes , such as tax on spending , such as VAT , etc . , and our opposition to all expenditure that benefits large companies and the rich , such as subsidies , grants and tax breaks .
In line with the changes to the financial perspective , the 2002 budget will not exceed 1.1 % of the Community GNP , which means that we will be able to stipulate a non-growth budget for the coming year .
As a matter of fact , the rapporteur has accepted this approach , to the extent that he sets the implementation and the quality of expenditure as major priorities for the coming year . This would relegate to the status of footnote issues such as employment and social issues or the budgetary effects of enlargement and the introduction of the euro .
Food safety is mentioned , in the light of the BSE crisis and foot-and-mouth disease , and the report argues for a long-term strategy , but there is no assessment of the costs of these crises to spending on agriculture . Nor are any measures included for compensation to farmers , as we suggested there should be in our proposal to create a special reserve for BSE-related issues , and nor does the report provide for the essential adjustment and setting of upper limits for issues relating to CAP aid .
In the meantime , I feel that the rebudgeting of the Structural Funds should be carried out as a matter of urgency , in order to ensure that the sums budgeted for are properly applied .
As a matter of fact , I would point out that , in this context , we refused to undermine our post-2001 spending objectives in Agenda 2000 .
Lastly , I think that it is of particular concern that , in his report , the rapporteur explicitly regrets the fact that decisions on the financial regulations will only be taken by qualified majority from 2007 onwards , ' forgetting ' the fact that otherwise , the country would then be losing a fundamental instrument - unanimity - for setting the next financial framework , including the part concerned with the Structural Funds and the cohesion fund .
Paragraph 25 of the Resolution , concerning e-learning , calls upon the Commission to ' explore the possibilities of providing an adequate legal framework to complement the action taken by the Member States and to enhance it with a real European added value ' .
I have voted against this request on the basis of the Swedish Christian Democrats ' view of , and concern about , the principle of subsidiarity established in the Treaties of Maastricht and Amsterdam , since it cannot be the European Union ' s responsibility to legislate on issues concerning education , in this case e-learning .
Justifying this request for increased legislative powers for the EU in terms of ' European added value ' is a traditional way of trying to gain understanding for the transfer of further power and legislative responsibilities to the EU and for a trend towards centralisation .
Nonetheless , this is an argument that does not hold water .
Instead , the EU ' s task is to limit its responsibilities and to focus upon its core areas of concern .
Buitenweg report ( A5-0103 / 2001 ) :
Madam President , I also voted for the Buitenweg report on the European Parliament 's estimates , also in relation to the 2002 budget , on the different areas of activity of Parliament and its bodies .
I voted for this report , but , I was thinking of something which is always on my mind when I am in Parliament , particularly when I hear some veiled criticism here and there - although very infrequently if the truth be known - that I might be wasting Parliament 's time with my explanations of vote .
I am thinking of all those debates and votes which we hold - and which you direct so well , Madam President - on opinions , statements and Commission proposals , that is to say on all non-legislative measures .
In my opinion , we should decide to leave these debates of minor legal importance to the Parliamentary committees rather than holding them in the Parliamentary part-sessions .
During the debate on the 2002 budget guidelines , we heard some speakers welcome the fact that the steps to introduce the single currency would be of little cost to the European budget .
In our view , this comment seems somewhat cynical , since a relatively large part of the costs will be paid by small traders , who will reap hardly any of the benefits and who have no one to come to their rescue .
Many other small businesses are in the same situation .
On the other hand , large businesses based in Europe will reap the benefits , directly or indirectly , from the changeover to the single currency and thus will be able to offset the costs of reorganisation and investment that are involved .
What about the others though ?
This particular view - but many others of a similar nature can be found - shows how much consideration has been given from the outset to resolving some of the problems facing large companies , but not those facing small businesses .
That is why , in our view , the European Union - or the Member States by delegation - must provide immediate financial support , at least to small traders , as a matter of urgency .
It is not acceptable for Member States and the European institutions to take decisions involving huge costs that others have to bear .
Lastly , the actual changeover to the euro , with the introduction of coins and notes , is at risk of being hampered by the very people who decided that it would go ahead .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Discharges ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on six reports on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge .
, Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the budget process for any given budget year starts with priority setting , and this morning we debated the priorities for the 2002 budget . The conclusion of the budget process is the discharge granted by the European Parliament , which we have been debating today in respect of the 1999 budget .
The discharge decision is a vital moment for the Commission and Parliament , as Parliament 's democratic control functions come into full play at this point .
This control extends to many areas , as the EU budget is very substantial - it amounted to EUR 84 billion in 1999 - and above all it covers a wide variety of activities , ranging from support for olive oil , nuts and school milk to student exchanges ; from the development of petrol-saving cars to space research or information on the euro , from support for educating women in Africa to the restructuring of the fishing fleet or to food aid after an earthquake or after a civil war .
In view of this wide range , which I have just listed by way of example , control of the budget process covers nearly all the Commission 's activities .
Mr Blak , the general rapporteur for the budget discharge , adopted exactly this approach to the wide-ranging control of a broad spectrum of policy areas in respect of which public money is spent .
This was hard work for everyone concerned .
This is demonstrated by the detailed questionnaires , but also and above all by the report before us .
Mr Blak , you have a reputation for being a very harsh critic of mismanagement .
Having worked with you over these past months , I can really confirm that and bear witness that you have lived up to your reputation .
At the same time , I would like to thank you for the balance and fairness of your report and for the clear approach that you adopted in it . The aim of that approach was to highlight both good and bad features in all areas , and to insist through your decisions and evaluations on achieving an improvement in Community policy .
The Commission will be taking measures in response to your most important findings .
As all good chefs know , the key to culinary success is to cook the right ingredients at the right temperature .
The committee has devoted many hours of meetings to the discharge process , and above all it has held various hearings with the Commissioners responsible .
I would also like , on behalf of the Commission , to thank you for the excellent cooperation and work in the committee , and to extend those thanks to the chair of the committee , Mrs Theato .
The basis for the annual discharge procedure is the Court of Auditors ' annual report .
For 1999 , the Court gave the Commission a positive Statement of Assurance on the revenue side , for commitment appropriations and for administrative expenditure , but not for other payment transactions , as has also been the case in previous years .
The committee and the rapporteur have not only relied on the professional work of the Court for their reports , but also on material provided by the Commission , and on detailed replies , on several extensive questionnaires and on a summary of a great many audit reports and on the audit reports themselves .
The rapporteur , Mr Blak , examined over 60 of the documents provided by the Commission , running to several thousand pages .
One of the key documents for the whole discharge procedure is the Commission 's discharge action plan .
In this document the Commission presents the precise measures it is taking in order to respond to the Court of Auditors ' criticisms .
These are not vague promises - the plan specifies in precise terms what is to be done and when .
The same applies to the follow-up report - 48 pages in all - to the European Parliament 's discharge decision for the 1998 budget .
This report gives a detailed response to the requests made in Mrs Stauner 's report from last year .
Follow-up actions to this are presented such that they can be verified .
In order to implement the action plan for the European Development Fund the Commission last year undertook the necessary work in conjunction with Parliament .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Rühle , for her work and for making it clear that the discharge for the European Development Fund has not been rejected , but postponed .
The proposal to postpone the discharge is , of course , still a matter of regret for the Commission , because it unilaterally decided to considerably extend inquiries into macroeconomic aid in Africa , for example , in order to get to the bottom of some problems in that area .
Mrs Rühle has recognised that these are steps in the right direction .
I can safely say that overall the administration of European Development Fund money is by no means worse than the administration of development aid from the EU budget .
But I can in any case assure the Mrs Rühle as rapporteur that the Commission will make good use of this time to complete the outstanding documents without delay and to take the necessary steps here .
I would also like to thank two other rapporteurs , Mrs van der Laan and Mr Seppänen .
Although the ECSC Treaty expires next year , the relevant research activity will continue .
The audit findings here are also very important .
My personal objective and the Commission 's objective is to improve financial management , to reduce fraud , to avoid errors , be they purely formal errors or errors with budgetary implications , and also to improve efficiency and ensure that public funds are used more effectively .
These are very important objectives which require a joint effort to achieve .
I have in mind above all the joint efforts of the Commission and the Member States , as 83 % of the funds under the EU budget are administered by the Member States .
The primary duty of control falls to them .
We have also had detailed discussions in the Ecofin Council on these duties for the Member States .
However , I still cannot say that I am entirely satisfied with the Member States ' responses to the Court of Auditors ' report , but at least more detailed information is now available about what the Member States have done in recent years to combat fraud .
Some of the areas of Community policy implemented by the Member States are , as we all know , also very much prone to fraud .
One such area that I would like to mention here is that of agricultural export refunds .
In this area , it is necessary to continuously check not only the procedures themselves , but also the control mechanisms . I say this because the control systems are not only weaker the further south you travel - which is a common perception - but also , in some regions which claim to have Prussian efficiency , there is in fact a somewhat laissez-faire approach to control systems .
In this case , the Commission relies not only on it own audits but it can also hit Member States ' purses , by which I mean the use of financial sanctions by reducing payments to Member States .
This sometimes - relatively often even - leads to protracted disputes and sometimes actual litigation .
But I do not believe that that financial sanctions are discredited because of this , that is just how things are in a state bound by the rule of law .
However , what is important is that the Commission should also use legal means to secure its position .
Export refunds are also an example of the fact that the legal bases are sometimes so detailed and specific that they can almost act as an incentive to fraudulent behaviour .
For that reason it has also been agreed , under the administrative reform , that proposals for regulations put forward by the Commission should in future be scrutinised with regard to their susceptibility to fraud .
In this respect I would also like to request extra cooperation from Parliament in its legislative role and special support from the Committee on Budgets , because stricter control procedures are not always welcomed with open arms by the relevant specialist committees or even the countries affected .
Cooperation with the legislature is absolutely essential for good financial management .
Let me mention a very topical example of this : the Council recently decided in Stockholm - and this is actually supposed to be something positive , at least in the Council 's eyes - that the Sixth Framework Programme on Research would be adopted in July 2002 but actually start as early as 1 January 2003 .
However , that simply does not allow enough time to properly carry out the tendering process and the preparatory work .
If this timetable is not changed , we will quite consciously be embarking on a course leading to the kind of errors that the Court of Auditors and above all Parliament criticised with the last Framework Programme . I believe that we should not let history repeat itself .
We must learn from our mistakes .
The " Fléchard case " started with the export of surplus intervention butter as aid to the former Soviet Union .
The decisions concerned were made by the previous Commission between 1991 and 1994 .
Parliament investigated this case very thoroughly .
The Court of Auditors analysed this case in detail and UCLAF and OLAF carried out various investigations . The present Commission has also examined the case from all angles and it has made all the information in its possession available to you as discharge authority .
We all agree that it is not possible to undo what was done at that time .
That is why you as discharge authority are justified in asking what would happen now if a similar case arose .
Many of the arrangements have changed since 1994 .
The regulation on the clearance of accounts procedure in the field of agricultural policy has been amended , and the division responsible for clearance of accounts in the relevant Directorate-General has been organisationally separated .
In 1995 the regulation on the protection of the Community 's financial interests , the " black list " , was introduced , which the Member States are supposed to use to list companies who have shown gross negligence or have deliberately acted against the financial interests of the EU .
Mr Blak is pressing here for an improvement in the procedure for drawing up this black list .
I can assure you that we are already working on this .
OLAF would then become the Community 's independent investigatory authority , an important step .
As regards the future , not only have important changes been initiated through administrative reform , the new version of the Financial Regulation will provide a clearer framework , especially for the recovery of payments .
This means that the recovery of payments can only be waived in part or in full if the Director-General responsible so decides , and in particular the decision to forego recovery must be justified .
In case of doubt the Commission must decide .
During the debates the Commission has also given Parliament an assurance that it will base the application of the administrative and legal principle of proportionality on clear , solid and transparent guidelines .
That was the long answer to the question " Would the Commission handle a similar case in exactly the same way now ? "
The short answer is " No ! "
It would take a different approach in comparable cases today .
The clear objective of the administrative reform of the Commission is to improve financial management .
That is why the control functions of the individual Directorate-Generals have been beefed up , and why the Internal Audit Service has been strengthened , and that is why a central financial service has been created , the early warning system reinforced , and the recovery arrangements tightened up .
We are improving the implementation of programmes of expenditure and we are building up the network of controls , and will not hesitate to impose financial sanctions .
The 10-point black list in the report on reform will help us to take these further steps .
I can assure you on behalf of the Commission that a decision by Parliament to grant a budget discharge within the specified time will act as a great incentive for the Commission to implement the reforms and persevere in its efforts .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the Commissioner has pointed out , this budget covers a broad spectrum of activities .
This broad spectrum of European funding tasks also includes foreign policy .
Europe is a major player on the foreign policy stage , especially in non-military crisis management , and the Committee knows that different problems arise with these budget headings than with funds administered within the European Union by the Member States .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs has therefore made it a priority to ensure that the decisions adopted by this House are also implemented .
It is unacceptable that year after year , billions of euro are not spent because the services , the cooperation with the Directorate-General , do not function effectively .
That is our criticism of this budgetary procedure .
There has been restructuring within the new Commission .
Europe Aid has been launched , and we expect that as a result , the programmes agreed by Parliament will be implemented more speedily in future .
But at the same time , we expect the Commission to refrain from setting up its own new implementing organisation and to draw instead on Member States ' competencies , as they should be playing an active role in this area as well .
We want the political management of all these problems to be undertaken in Europe , but we also want the allocated funds to be drawn down .
In a year 's time , we will measure your success in terms of what you have done with the many additional posts which have been created . So this issue will undoubtedly arise once again during the next budgetary procedure , including the discharge procedure .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I would firstly like to express our admiration for Mr Blak ' s outstanding and remarkable work and particularly because he has duly taken into account the work of the rapporteurs of the specialist committees .
In the justice and home affairs sector , Mr Blak ' s report quite rightly focuses on three issues , as we ourselves have done in our opinion .
Firstly , the obvious poor management of some of the budget lines , where the rate of implementation of appropriations is below 50 % .
Secondly , the need for the European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia to update its techniques and to enforce stricter management .
Thirdly , the need to understand what really is happening with the European Union Migrants ' Forum - is it just downright negligence , is it basically poor management or is it fraud , pure and simple ?
These three issues must be closely followed up by our committee and by Parliament .
We shall ensure that this happens .
. Mr President , I speak on behalf of our rapporteur , Mrs Matikainen-Kallström , who is unable to be here today .
The committee took a common approach in its opinion on the need to improve the quality of action and performance as a way of achieving better value for taxpayers ' money .
For example , we wish to remind the Commission of the need to achieve higher standards in auditing the research programmes , particularly in the context of the European research area proposals .
We also look to the Commission to improve the management of contracts by the Joint Research Centre .
This is a theme continued from the past .
We are looking for improvement in the management of TACIS and other programmes in the field of nuclear safety in Central and Eastern Europe .
We put forward the suggestion of creating a separate budget line for strengthening cooperation on nuclear safety in northern parts of Europe .
We observe that the SYNERGY programme seems to have lost some of its priority in the Commission and we wish to see this programme continued successfully .
We want more spending on SYNERGY .
I turn now to the other report on the coal and steel part of the budget .
The committee is very keen on seeing maximum transparency in the disclosure of data concerning the value of the ECSC 's assets .
We note the Commission 's undertaking on the provision of information about these assets and expect this information to be delivered .
Mr President , culture is certainly not a high priority for Parliament or the Commission .
We are very fortunate to get something like half of 1 % of the budget and I only get one minute to present our concerns .
It is tremendously important that the very little amount of money we have should be spent efficiently and effectively .
Fortunately we tend not to suffer from the allegations of fraud and mismanagement that one sees elsewhere but we do have a problem about the very worthy organisations that want support from Parliament actually receiving the money .
Just to give three examples for the 1999 financial year we are looking at : the European Youth Orchestra , the European Youth Parliament , the Yehudi Menuhin Foundation only received their grant from the European Commission in the last days of the year .
This causes real problems for those organisations .
We accepted it for 1999 , but I hope it will not recur in the year 2000 .
I would say to the Commissioner : please ensure that if we are going to give money , we do it efficiently and effectively so that it does good rather than damage to the European cause .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation . Mr President , the Committee on Development and Cooperation has focussed its work on the discharge on the single most important point of whether the Commission is achieving its stated aim of using the development assistance budget to combat poverty by shifting significant additional resources to the provision of basic health and education in developing countries .
I am sad to report that the figures for 1999 show that this was the first year ever when the least developed countries received under 50 % of overseas development aid administered by the Commission .
This is a trend we desperately need to reverse .
As Mr Blak 's resolution states in paragraph 8 , point 19 - and I thank him for this - when 880 million people world-wide lack any access to health services , just 1 % of the Commission 's external assistance budget went to health in 1999 and we do not have any figures at all for education .
Is this a discharge issue ?
Yes , quite clearly , when the Community Action Plan in response to our parliamentary resolution on the 1998 discharge said : " Since health and education will receive more emphasis , the implication is that a greater amount of financing than in the past would be dedicated to these sectors . "
It goes on to say , " Adopting OECD standards on reporting should be feasible by 2001 . "
Mrs Schreyer , we insist that the Commission must fulfil these promises .
Your so-called reservation against the output targets properly voted by Parliament precisely to increase spending on basic health and education is contrary to the agreed budget .
Whatever happens this year , you cannot expect discharge for 2001 unless they are fulfilled .
On the essential reporting needed , using the OECD Development Assistance Committee methodology to enable us to achieve this poverty focus , we have more concern over whether this is achieved for Asia and Latin America as against our aid for the ACP countries .
That is why the Committee on Development and Cooperation did not vote to postpone discharge for the European Development Fund .
We did not want to send the wrong signal against the strong support we wish to demonstrate for the reform process .
But if discharge is postponed , I thank Mrs Rühle for her insistence that the latest figures using the DAC methodology are brought forward by May .
This will ensure that the poorest people actually receive the aid .
I defy anyone to disagree with that .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities considers that the implementation results of the budget-lines covering the promotion of equal opportunities between men and women were in general satisfactory .
However , we have no line for the horizontal policy of gender mainstreaming , i.e. incorporating equal opportunities for women and men into all Community policies and activities .
We therefore call upon you to continue to give high priority to this policy area and invite you to carry out a gender impact assessment of expenditure , especially as regards the Structural Funds , the research programme , and all investments in the information society .
I think it is important for us to obtain precise data on how the resource outflows are taking place , and so the Committee on Women 's Rights calls upon the Court of Auditors to produce a special report on the financial implementation of gender mainstreaming .
This was done once before , in 1998 , and the policy measures were clearly defined in the report .
This would enable us to target our policies more strongly on this area .
Mr President , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy effectively does not have much supervision over large parts of the budget .
However , over those lines that we do have supervision we express our concerns and have done so in the past .
I am pleased that as a result of our concerns about the LIFE programme the monies that are dispensed through the LIFE programme , both within the Union and externally , are going to be examined by the Court of Auditors .
I understand the Court of Auditors is looking at this budget line for this year and on that basis we would be happy , despite our reservations , to grant discharge or to recommend the granting of discharge .
Regarding the other lines , we do not have many concerns about the consumer lines where we see that the work is going on quite effectively , but I would draw the attention of the House and the Commission to the health programme and the health budget lines .
Although that programme is currently under review and is due to be reorganised , we felt when we examined it last year that there were a great number of small projects without a great deal of clarity or order to them .
Whilst we expressed some concerns about this , we are prepared to support the idea of discharge on the basis that the new head of the DG for Health will investigate these issues and bring forward a report to the House .
Mr President , I welcome the various reports , the Blak , Stauner , Folias , Seppänen , van der Laan and Rühle reports , because I know so much work went into them .
I want to restrict my comments to Freddy Blak 's excellent report on the Commission discharge for 1999 .
1999 - what a year that was .
Not only was it the first year that I was elected - and hold back your cheers now - but in budgetary control terms it was fascinating .
It was the year of three types of Commission : two months of the old Commission that had a number of problems that we all know about ; six months of no Commission whatsoever because they were not taking any management decisions ; and then the rest of the year was with the new Commission who had no time to implement any of the reforms .
1999 - another year with an error rate of about 5 % or roughly EUR 4.5 billion .
1999 - the sixth year running that the Court of Auditors refused to write off the accounts .
1999 - the year in which Freddy Blak found huge errors , fraud and problems in the accounts , scandals all of them including , for example , the wonderful Washington delegation that warranted a whole two paragraphs in the report .
I believe the Commissioner will be able to confirm that the building was bought for USD 0.5 million , refurbished to the tune of USD 2.2 million - that is four times what it was bought for - whilst renting somewhere else for about USD 18 000 per month which was cheaper than where the Commission 's residence was beforehand because I believe it was in the Four Seasons Hotel .
There were other problems with IRELA , flax and Fléchard , too , and all we have to do in this House is look at our previous reports .
We have consistently said that if the error rate does not improve in the 1999 year , then we could not and should not pass these accounts .
The error rate quite simply did not improve .
I checked with the Court of Auditors and they confirmed that the error rate was the same or marginally worse .
What conclusions should we draw from this ?
It is fairly obvious : the error rate did not improve ; EUR 4.5 billion lost , unaccounted for , mismanaged ; we do not give discharge .
I hear that the Socialists and other Groups are actually thinking of granting discharge and I cannot think why .
How on earth are we going to explain that back home ?
Please do not be scared that by not granting discharge you will cause this Commission to fall . You simply will not .
There is nothing in the Treaties that says that must happen .
1999 is not the year for which this Commission is responsible .
What you will be doing , however , is sending a message to this Commission and the public who elected us here - you remember them , some of them actually bother to visit us occasionally - that we are steadfastly against waste , fraud and mismanagement ; that we are drawing a line in the sand , that what went before 1999 was completely unacceptable and what happens now and in the future must be better .
Commissioner , I would appreciate your answer on the Washington delegation because it is very odd that we do not get to see a number of these facts until we actually ask for them .
I also ask you to promise us that the error rate will improve .

Mr President , by my reckoning Mr Heaton-Harris 's speech contained an error rate of about 50 % and I hope he manages to bring it down in time for next year 's debate on the discharge .
- Mr President , I endorse the proposal to grant discharge to the Commission for three reasons .
Firstly , things have improved .
Both the Court of Auditors and Parliament have been able to establish that .
The first results of the Commission reforms are now visible , especially in the field of financial management and control .
Secondly , the Commission has carried out some sterling work .
There has been effective consultation between the different rapporteurs and the Commission . The Commission has taken us seriously .
As far as I am concerned , there is a break in the trend compared to the previous Commission , which did not take the discharge process and this Parliament sufficiently seriously .
Thirdly , I think that we should deploy the discharge tool , which this Parliament has at its disposal , selectively .
Instead of wielding the axe , as is sometimes referred to in this Parliament , we should use Mr Blak ' s surgical filleting knife , which will yield us more results .
I would , however , like to draw your attention to a number of aspects .
Firstly , financial supervision will soon be divorced from internal audit within the European Commission .
This Parliament will be voting on this on Thursday .
It is one of the most important recommendations which the Committee of Wise Men have made .
It is also the first reform which is being enshrined in legislation .
This reform does not only apply to the European Commission , but also to the Council and Parliament .
I notice that the Secretary-General is present today , and I would call on him too to implement this reform in Parliament itself at the earliest opportunity .
The other institutions should take a long and hard look at this too .
Secondly , we need to further refine and further politicise the discharge instrument .
The DAS , the Statement of Assurance , must be improved .
We need to focus more on the different sectors so as to be able to draw a distinction between the different areas of policy .
We must single out Member States if they make mistakes - we will hopefully do this also by means of an amendment to Mr Blak ' s report - and we should not only look at figures , but also at the quality of policy .
Mrs Van der Laan is right to make the first move in this connection in her report on other institutions , which I , by the way , congratulate on their policy .
We will postpone the discharge for the Economic and Social Committee , but I have a feeling that this will be granted soon .
Thirdly , officials who make mistakes within the Commission and within the other institutions must be disciplined if these mistakes involve financial problems .
We call for a committee on financial irregularities to be set up which can deal with this kind of matter and can make referrals to the disciplinary procedure .
Finally - and I would echo the opinion which Mrs Van der Laan expressed this morning in the debate - it is necessary for us to call the Council to account now .
The budget of the Council is taking on ever increasing proportions .
In areas such as justice , home affairs and foreign affairs , the Council has more or less exclusive rights .
It is no longer acceptable that in this discharge procedure , in which we not only verify the figures but also the quality of policy , the Council ' s increasing budget is still not subject to proper democratic control .
Mr President , every year , the discharge is the highlight of the year in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I wish all rapporteurs every success in their work , and Mr Blak , in particular , who will probably ensure , for the first time in many years , that the Commission will be granted discharge on time .
I hope I can congratulate him on that tomorrow .
In fact , I also hope that he has enjoyed reading the answers to his questions .
They turned out to be rather lengthy , and got the better of me at times .
The hallmark of this budget is the fact that the Statement of Assurance is still not positive .
This has to become positive , and Parliament must also be able to judge whether any progress is being made in that respect .
We as a group support every effort to secure this Statement of Assurance and we believe that it should be extended to include every sector , or maybe to include every Directorate-General .
I would like to make a few general points .
The figures which we are familiar with show that agriculture is in a considerably better position than the other sections of the budget .
That is very positive .
Compared to the other sectors , agriculture can afford to present the margin of error of 3 % , although this is probably still far too high .
The Commission must apply this as soon as possible to the other sections of the policy , and other Commissioners must follow Mr Fischler ' s lead .
I would like to comment on the superlevy in agriculture .
We all know the system of milk quota .
All farmers in Europe pay extra if they produce too much milk .
There is one country which forms an exception to this rule , namely Italy .
The Italian government pays the levy on behalf of the farmers .
Is this not a case of distortion of competition ?
Should the Commission not do something about this promptly ?
I am pleased with the Commissioner ' s reply further to the Fléchard affair .
Although we do not have all the facts of what happened between 1991-1994 , there is every reason to believe that it was unacceptable .
We are pleased with the fact that the present Commission has dissociated itself from this and that it is submitting proposals as soon as possible , which pertain , among other things , to the way in which the proportionality principle can be applied .
What is the responsibility of the officials in this respect ?
When should it be assessed by the Commission or Commissioner himself , etc . ?
What are the exact procedures to be followed in those cases ?
There are still many ambiguities surrounding flax .
What will be important for this Parliament is the question as to what will ultimately be the financial correction which the Commission will apply to the countries which are involved in this .
This will probably not only affect Spain .
My conclusion on behalf of the group is that we will be granting discharge .
We are aware that this is the last year for which the Commission can say that it was not responsible .
The real test for the current Commission will come with the examination of the accounts for 2000 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to concentrate on Mr Blak ' s excellent report .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has worked very hard for the past four months , and held meetings in quick succession .
We are inclined to grant the Commission discharge for the 1999 budget .
Does this mean that everything is smelling of roses , or that nothing is going wrong ?
No .
After all , the Court of Auditors is refusing to guarantee that the payments were , generally speaking , legitimate and regular .
Commissioner , we are extremely dissatisfied with this state of affairs .
We would therefore ask you to ensure that you will receive from the Court of Auditors a positive Statement of Assurance by no later than 2003 .
Ladies and gentlemen , we should still be mindful of the fact that the Member States are responsible for more than 80 % of all expenditure .
I would once again like to lodge a complaint against the Council for its absence , and against the Economic and Financial Affairs Council for the nonchalance which it is displaying in dealing with the discharge .
This is shoddy work and cannot be taken seriously .
The Member States are still insufficiently aware of the fraud issue .
I therefore urge the Irish , Luxembourg and Belgian parliaments to ratify the anti-fraud agreement , which was concluded in 1995 , without delay .
I myself am starting a campaign today to convince my national counterparts to ratify this agreement in Belgium before July of this year .
As far as I am concerned , this is absolutely crucial if the Belgian Presidency is to build up any credibility with regard to anti-fraud policy .
The Blak report contains many positive statements with regard to the Commission .
As permanent rapporteur for the former Yugoslavia , I can bear witness to the excellent work of our delegation in Sarajevo .
But we should also turn our attention to a few of the less attractive issues : the flax case , the latest developments of which , it is true , we are not yet fully conversant with , the mafia case involving adulterated butter , and , indeed , the Fléchard case .
Commissioner , you were right in saying that we have spent a generous amount of time on this issue .
There is indeed something peculiar about it , and I have listened very carefully to your statement and pledges in this connection .
With an unqualified ' no ' , you have told us that this will not happen in future .
You promised a solid basis for the application of the principle of proportionality .
You also promised to change tack as regards debt collection .
As far as my group is concerned , you herewith comply with the conditions contained in Paragraph 8 , I d ) of the Blak resolution , and I can inform you , on behalf of my group , that we will be granting you discharge .
Mr President , the Court of Auditors has not recommended that discharge be granted to the Commission for 1999 , just as it did not for previous years either .
When Mr Santer ' s Commission had to resign in connection with the debate on discharge in 1997 , despite the support of the Social Democrat group , the GUE / NGL Group was consistently in favour of resignation .
There were too many irregularities and the administrative culture it represented was a spurious one .
The situation in 1999 was different .
Responsibility was unevenly divided between Mr Santer ' s Commission that had resigned and the new Commission .
It was hard to say which of them was responsible for what .
Now it is harder to come up with detailed arguments as to why discharge should not be granted .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has not uncovered any instances of malpractice or unclear areas that are so major that they cannot be left until the discharge debate for 2000 .
When deciding on discharge for 2000 it is known that the present Commission is responsible for everything , including those matters that were not brought to a conclusion for 1999 .
The majority of our group on this occasion is in favour of granting the Commission discharge .
With regard to Parliament ' s own discharge , attention should be paid to those abuses that the political groups were guilty of in connection with financing the Europarties .
These have been spoken of with unwarranted sensitivity .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Stauner : a framework agreement with regard to the supply of information from the Commission is not enough .
We now have to take stock of the experience we have gained and return to the matter in association with discharge for 2000 .
Mr President , we carefully considered what position we would adopt on the discharge for 1999 .
This is a year when the present Commission was only able to influence the final quarter of the year and so cannot be held responsible for a very great deal .
The reason why we decided to vote against the discharge was because , in 1999 too , there were so many instances of citizens ' money being mismanaged that it would have been wrong to give the seal of approval constituted by the discharge .
I do not have enough speaking time to mention all the scandals but would refer to my good colleague , Mr Heaton-Harris , and my other capable colleagues from the Committee on Budgetary Control who mentioned a number of the problems with which we have been confronted .
My good colleague , Freddy Blak , has written an excellent report , and I really only disagree with him about the actual conclusion , namely that discharge should be given .
Mr Blak has made a great effort to find answers to quite a few questions .
The more harmless questions have been answered , but the evasive or inadequate answers to other questions are unacceptable .
We are still waiting for a clear indication of responsibility and for those responsible for the mistakes to suffer the consequences .
Construction policy , development aid , modernisation and improved efficiency in both agriculture and structural funding are all areas in which the Commission has still not made sufficient progress .
Commissioner Schreyer stated that a black list of fraudulent businesses had been drawn up .
I cannot help noticing that the ' Fléchard ' company , which is now for the second time reported to have taken part in serious financial and health-related fraud , is missing from this list .
Mr President , Mr Blak has indicated that the granting of discharge is a political decision of the first order .
This almost creates the impression that the facts are irrelevant .
That is , of course , not the case .
The Members of this Parliament do , however , reach different conclusions based on facts .
And this is all tied in with the interpretation of the facts and the trust in the Commission .
When it took up office in 1999 , this Commission was facing a huge challenge , namely to carry out the necessary reforms in its official apparatus , clean up its image and handle old fraud cases .
With regard to the discharge for 1998 and 1999 , I wonder to what extent we can hold the new Commission responsible for the mismanagement of the old one .
The facts are there for everyone to see : fraud involving subsidies for flax in Spain , artificial butter in Italy , and ESF funding in the Netherlands .
Interpreting these facts is a great deal harder .
The cited instances of fraud all took place before the eyes of the Member States , and they should be penalised for this aspect , in particular .
The fact that the Court of Auditors is refusing to issue a Statement of Assurance with regard to the Commission ' s accounts weighs heavily upon the Commission .
Any other business would be threatened in its very existence .
In this respect , if the Commission were to give off the air of confidence that it was aware of its political accountability and would act accordingly , I would be in favour of discharge .
However , the Commission ' s conduct left a great deal to be desired during the hearings of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Unfortunately , my confidence has taken a proportionate dive . That is why I would be in favour of postponing the discharge .

With the exception of Commissioner Patten , who has shown his political accountability by bringing the subsidies to IRELA to an end , Commissioner Schreyer and Lamy , in particular , have demonstrated that they excel at talking without saying anything .
Whilst Commissioner Fischler recognises that the Commission ' s conduct in the Fléchard affair is far from exemplary , Commissioner Schreyer refused to make a declaration that this kind of behaviour cannot be tolerated in future .
I appreciate what she said at the beginning of this afternoon ' s session , but to make such a declaration under pressure of postponement of the discharge is hardly credible .
When it took up office , the Commission had the trust of this Parliament .
It is now high time that they proved to us - in word and deed - that they are worthy of this trust .
This may well mean that Commissioner de Palacio may need to stand down if it appears that she was actually aware of the flax fraud in Spain .
The entire Commission can start by addressing the ten points in the resolution with regard to the discharge .
Mr President , I also welcome the reports which have been submitted to us , particularly the excellent report by Mr Blak , who should be congratulated for his equally serious and positive approach to this task .
We must certainly accept the idea that the discharge is not a populist denunciation in itself . However , once we appointed the Commission and it therefore enjoyed our trust - until we censured it , that is - the discharge procedure was a joint process of negotiation between players working in good faith and seeking to improve the management of the European Union ' s budget .
We must be aware that the discharge procedure is a specific task , carried out within a limited timescale - it is a financial task , which has well defined scope , we can grant the discharge or we can postpone it , but we can never reject it outright , because that would require upsetting the sequence of balances .
The aim of the discharge , at the end of the day , is not to repeat the act of authorising the budget .
The discharge is not an opportunistic step , but a step to punish irregularities and to punish a possible lack of optimal management .
The discharge is a framework which we must hold onto if we wish to avoid certain dramatic events being repeated .
Personally speaking , I welcome all of the above .
I shall make three comments on what has happened here this year .
First of all , I acknowledge that there is a serious problem , namely the imbalance between the Commission and Member States ' responsibilities in relation to the discharge .
Eighty per cent of the appropriations are still spent by Member States and we grant discharge to the Commission .
That is why I believe it is difficult for us to demand in a suitably effective manner the improvement of a positive Statement of Assurance .
We are punishing those who are only partially responsible for what is happening to them .
Before imposing sanctions on the Commission , I would like the various pockets of Eurosceptics to allow more extensive monitoring in their own countries on the way in which spending is carried out in Member States .
My second comment - and I am hurrying through this - concerns relations between OLAF and the European Parliament , which have not yet settled .
In this case , the need for transparency must be reconciled with maintaining the confidentiality of certain information and of the individual ' s right to protection .
That does not always happen .
Lastly , we are being very badly affected by an imbalance , on the issue of fraud , between a repressive and largely administrative unit and a judicial unit with powers of jurisdiction that is still in its infancy .
That is what constitutes the real scandal in the Fléchard affair .
The misunderstandings of the Fléchard case can be explained by the fact that we , the European Union and the Commission , were in a position to levy punishment in administrative terms , without showing consideration for the individual ' s right to protection .
It is essential that we correct this imbalance by enhancing our powers of jurisdiction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there was one sentence in Mr Blak 's report which I particularly liked .
On page 34 , in his Explanatory Statement , he says that the discharge procedure will ideally result in a win-win scenario .
In other words , everyone will win : the Commission as the auditee and Parliament as the auditor , and therefore , of course , the taxpayers as well , some of whom are sitting up in the public gallery .
But this means that a change of approach is sometimes required too .
Unfortunately , there are quite a number of areas in which the Commission has failed to do this - but it has done so , at least , in the field in which I am slightly more involved , namely the fight against fraud .
Less than three weeks have passed since we adopted a resolution here in Strasbourg demanding access to a whole series of reports by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) .
Until then , we had been systematically denied access to these reports .
Mr Brüner , the Director of the European Anti-Fraud Office , has now made all of them available to us .
He has thus asserted his position against those in the Commission whose motto when providing information to this House is ' as little and as late as possible ' .
This has also been the stance of the Commission 's apparently omnipotent Legal Service until now , and we can only hope that the forthcoming change-over at the head of this service will prompt a change of attitude in this respect .
So what information can we glean from these OLAF reports ?
Even for someone who has worked on this material for a long time , it is staggering to witness the scale and sophistication with which cross-border Europe-wide fraud is orchestrated at the expense of the EU budget .
Let 's take the example of adulterated butter .
This mixture of beef suet and chemical substances was produced under the control of the Mafia in Italy , but was marketed primarily by companies in France , and to some extent , and rather circuitously , through a firm in London , in order to conceal this major fraud even further and erase any leads .
This was the prerequisite , as it were , for the fraud - which was unprecedented in its scope and scale - to operate successfully for so many years .
Or let us take the case of flax .
At first , this focussed solely on Spain .
Then we found out that other Member States were affected as well and that ultimately , the fraud in Spain was only possible because a company in Belgium was issuing purchase certificates for non-existent deliveries .
I am pleased to say that despite the stormy political debates in Spain , the cooperation between the Spanish authorities and OLAF is apparently running smoothly and there is a great deal of determination to clear up the matter and bring those responsible to justice .
Even now , OLAF is often at its weakest - and it is important to say this loud and clear - when investigating internal irregularities .
This is most apparent in the case of the alleged disappearance of files in the Fléchard affair .
This case was approached extremely tentatively .
I can understand that .
After all , a thorough investigation might reveal that senior and very senior officials have quite simply been telling lies .
This is one explanation , but it is no justification .
And when OLAF carries out its investigations quickly and efficiently , as in the case of the Stockholm representation , the Commission is remarkably slow to impose the necessary disciplinary measures .
This is why the call for a rapid entry into the first phase of a European public prosecution service is so important .
We need the " internal " public prosecutor so that the investigations within the institutions can be carried out as thoroughly as possible and the appropriate measures can be taken .
It is the Commission 's credibility , not least , which is at stake here .
For this reason , I would ask you , Ms Schreyer , to present an appropriate report to this House as soon as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I should like to congratulate Freddy Blak on an exceptionally good report and at the same time thank him for our fruitful cooperation during this process .
In the discharge , Denmark was subject to a critical comment which is a scathing criticism of the way in which the Danish Ministry of Food , Agriculture and Fisheries handles export aid payments .
It is quite extraordinary that , in Denmark , there are cases going right back to 1996 . This means that Danish export businesses are severely hampered in their operations at the moment and that there is a considerable distortion of competition vis-à-vis other EU countries .
This is far and away the harshest criticism ever levelled at Denmark , and in this case , mind you , it is the central authorities who have failed .
I must therefore urge the Commission to ensure that the Danish rules on export aid are normalised as soon as possible .
Mr President , this week , the Commission should be granted discharge for the 1999 financial year .
That is what the Committee on Budgetary Control recommended by a clear majority last week , in line with the proposal put forward by our rapporteur , Freddy Blak , to whom I should like to pay tribute for his excellent work .
However , last week 's recommendation was made in the expectation that the Commission would provide final clarification on a number of outstanding points .
I know that the decision of many of my colleagues - and indeed my own too - here in the House will depend on this taking place .
What are these issues ?
Let me sum them up in four key phrases .
The first is the Fléchard case .
Ms Schreyer , you have just stated clearly that the Commission would not proceed in this way today .
I am gratified to hear it .
But let me remind you that although you were all good enough to come to the Committee - and I thank you for that - it was rather irksome that you could not bring yourselves to respond in such unequivocal terms in the Committee .
It would have made things much easier for us - for both sides - if you had done so .
But I must say that we are looking to the future , and we will be able to boost confidence more effectively through openness than by wasting words and ultimately being none the wiser .
My second key phrase is the Statement of Assurance .
This is the sixth time in succession that a negative Statement of Assurance has been issued by the Court of Auditors , despite some improvements in a number of areas .
It is not enough for the Commission to respond to Parliament 's repeated calls for the error rates to be reduced by saying that it will do its best .
No , we want tangible results .
The DAS must be positive by 2002 .
This House is prepared to work with the Commission and the Court of Auditors to achieve this goal .
The third key phrase is access to information .
Many people 's hopes of the Framework Agreement between the Commission and Parliament have been disappointed .
I was sceptical from the outset , but as the Chairman of the Committee , I ensured that the provisions of the Agreement were strictly adhered to .
Yet the Commission still failed to provide all the information requested .
The long list of reports requested but not received , contained in the Annex to Mr Blak 's report , speaks for itself .
Ultimately , Ms Schreyer , the Commission is cutting off its nose to spite its face .
You cannot really expect that when in doubt , Parliament will intercede and defend you from unjustified attacks unless you provide us with the necessary information first .
And my last point : This House has called on the Commission repeatedly and with a broad majority to put forward proposals on the immediate introduction of a European Public Prosecutor 's office .
Its first task should be to deal with fraud within the European institutions .
The previous speakers have also raised this issue .
On this basis , a European Public Prosecutor 's office could be introduced immediately and without any amendment to the Treaties .
This was recommended by the five wise men in their report on reforming the Commission , as well as by OLAF 's Supervisory Committee .
Parliament gave the Commission until the end of March to state its position on this issue .
Ms Schreyer , I asked you about this issue during the last part-session .
Will I finally get a clear statement from you today ?
The Committee on Budgetary Control has submitted five other reports on discharge .
I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs on their excellent work .
Ms Stauner 's follow-up report on the 1998 discharge should be singled out in particular .
We must carefully verify whether our demands from last year have been fulfilled by the Commission , in order to strengthen mutual confidence , openness and responsibility .
Unfortunately , a number of points are still unresolved , especially the issue of a positive DAS , which I have already mentioned , as well as the issue of information for Parliament .
It is this weakness , not least , which led to the recommendation by the rapporteur , Ms Rühle , that the discharge in respect of implementation of the European Development Funds be postponed - and quite rightly , in my view .
Mr Folias ' report is considered and coherent . It contains no proposed amendments .
I should like to express my great appreciation of , and agreement with , the content of his report .
The reports by Ms van der Laan and Mr Seppänen were approved and adopted by the Committee .
Mr President , the Framework Agreement on the provision of information to this House has been mentioned by several speakers .
I should like to make it clear that the Social Democrats in the Committee on Budgetary Control have a good result to show for the recorded vote on Parliament 's freedom of information .
This may not apply to all the Groups here in this Chamber .
But I think it is appropriate to point this out .
A word to the Commission .
You should be aware that we are taking this seriously : we expect the Commission to do its utmost to ensure that a positive Statement of Assurance can be issued in 2003 .
In anticipation of what I have heard about the content of some of tomorrow 's proposed amendments - which had not been submitted in writing by the start of this afternoon 's sitting - I say this : we will not support any attempt to introduce an automatic process which effectively requires us , as Parliament , to cede our own right as the decision-making body on the issue of discharge and makes us a kind of secretariat for the Court of Auditors .
In my view , the PPE-DE must clarify its own position on this issue too .
You cannot table motions which aim to introduce this kind of automatic process and at the same time , in the committee meetings , emphasise the scope for political discretion in the granting of discharge , as Ms Theato tends to do .
There is a clear contradiction here , and the group really must clarify its position .
In any event , we will certainly not hand in Parliament 's right to make its own decision on discharge along with our hats and coats .
I have a number of responses to the points raised by Mr Heaton-Harris .
If the Court of Auditors does not provide any official error rates - as is the case - this is regrettable and is an issue which we can discuss with the Court of Auditors .
But the point of relevance to Parliament as an institution is that it has not done so .
As a Parliament , we are not the arbitrators for internal wrangling within the Court of Auditors , and it is not our task to judge what some members of the Court of Auditors may have told others in the corridor about the error rates .
If there are any error rates , we expect a clear statement from the Court of Auditors .
But Mr Heaton-Harris , you made one point on which I agree with you completely , and the Commission should take note .
The political nature of the discharge procedure , which I have just mentioned , does not mean that the Commission can simply collect broken promises and let them mount up endlessly .
Sooner or later , a stray spark will set the pile ablaze like a bonfire .
You are absolutely right on this point .
But I cannot agree with your little attempt to seduce Parliament : you say that we can simply refuse to grant discharge , as there are no legal consequences - there is nothing in the Treaties that says that must happen .
Here , too , I must remind you that there are different views on this issue within your group .
I was given a great deal of support from within your group when I said that since the events of 1998 / 1999 , this annual discharge procedure has acquired a political character .
It is , after all , an annual political vote of confidence in the Commission , so there is rather more at stake if we refuse to grant discharge than simply saying , go ahead , there are no legal consequences .
I think everyone in this Chamber is aware of the political consequences which would ensue if discharge were denied under the present circumstances .
And this is precisely the reason why , even after the explanations provided by the Commission , we will grant discharge tomorrow .
Mr President , I would first of all like to mention the Council ' s absence from this debate , which our committee chairperson , Mrs Theato , has pointed out very effectively .
It is unacceptable that in this debate , in which we are going to talk about the Council , that that very Council is not represented .
Here we have our Secretary-General of Parliament , and here we have the Commissioner , who represents the Commission , but where is the Council ?
I understand that this debate is taking place in parallel with a budgetary debate in Sweden and perhaps the Swedish Presidency has little to do with the exercise in question , but I believe that the Council also has a Secretary-General .
Mr Solana always tells us that he is not only Mr CFSP but also the Secretary-General of the Council .
Then he should come .
Or he should appoint a Mr CFSP so that he can be here and listen to what we have to say .
His absence is unacceptable and I would ask you , Mr President , to communicate to Mr Solana , Secretary-General of the Council , that somebody should be here representing the Council , whether or not that duty falls to the Swedish Presidency .
Secondly , I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs and also Mr Blak - our good friend Freddy Blak - because he , as a good cyclist and an admirer of the five-times champion Induráin - my compatriot - has been able to produce a successful report and employ great teamwork , given that his report has received a broad consensus in committee .
I agree with the report , which is serious , demanding and tough , and I also agree with the final section in which it discharges the budget , because , as has been said here from many different quarters , the Commission is making great efforts to improve things .
And also , in this 1999 financial year which , as Mr Heaton-Harris pointed out , has been rather unusual , an interregnum , the facts demonstrate that it is making improvements in the supervision of financial management and also in personnel policy .
However , I must say that , in my humble opinion , it is doing so very slowly and this creates insecurities and examples of improvisation and also creates a lack of motivation amongst staff .
I believe that you should move up a gear and carry out this very promising reform more quickly and more ambitiously because I very much fear that the reform is turning out , in almost all respects , to be unambitious and not the type of reform that was initially intended .
Mr President , fortunately , we are holding a debate this afternoon on the basis of a consensus , and Mr Blak ' s excellent report goes hand in hand with the resulting enthusiasm on the part of our committee , which we are all very pleased about .
Commissioner , I intended to begin my speech with a question : does the Commission not have any self-criticism to make ?
Having heard you say that the Commission ' s behaviour would not now be the same as on previous occasions and that we have to seek , for the sake of cooperation in relation to good financial management , an improvement of the regulatory and commitological legal basis , I agree with Mr Van Hulten , because I believe that we are seeing an inflexion in the behaviour and attitude of the Commission .
I interpret your words as self-criticism on the part of the Commission .
I have approached this report via the flax issue .
The countless filtrations which have taken place lead me to request that this report be declassified , and as an MEP who has read it , I can assure you that there would not be any negative effect if it were declassified and made public .
We want a serious , independent and effective investigation , whether or not members of the Commission are responsible , because in Mr Blak ' s report there is a very element , and that is that is asks for money which has been inappropriately and fraudulently received to be returned , as well as severe penalties in this regard .
We therefore have no problem whatsoever in arguing in favour of declassification .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate all the rapporteurs , especially Mr Blak for his hard work on this report .
I can recall a time when this Committee on Budgetary Control was just a subcommittee of the Committee on Budgets .
Mr Aigner , as chairman , fought to have it made a full committee and he also fought to get a Court of Auditors , which we succeeded in getting .
Over the years we achieved real control and achieved the possibility to affect the management of the resources of the European Union .
But we are in danger of overplaying our hand .
The more we shout about fraud and corruption , the less seriously we will be taken unless it is absolutely necessary and unless we know exactly what we are talking about .
I want to warn against that because we in the Committee on Budgetary Control used to see ourselves as working with the Commission for the improvement of the management of our resources . Too many people see us now as working against the Commission , and I want to warn that is not a healthy trend .
I also want to refer to the question of the Statement of Assurance and discharge .
The Court of Auditors was set up to apply accountancy procedures .
It looks at the way money is spent .
It looks at the figures and it comes to its conclusion that everything does not fit together and that it cannot give discharge .
We have an entirely different responsibility .
If you look through the lists which have been mentioned before - whether it be Italian milk quotas , whether it be olive oil in the Mediterranean , whether it be sheep in the United Kingdom and Ireland , whether it be the number of cattle in Corsica - you will find that in every single case it was the Member State that failed , not the European Commission .
I am not saying the Commission is perfect , but we cannot oblige the Commission to say " you must crack the whip and every Member State in the European Union will respond " , because it will not happen .
Anyone who knows the short history of the European Union and the long history of Europe will know that proud states are not going to dance at the crack of a whip by the European Commission .
But we can work towards it and we are getting there .
We will achieve a cohesive Union but we must be responsible in our attitude to the whole question of what is intentionally fraudulent and what are simply mistakes and errors that cannot , in the short term , be avoided .
Mr President , I would like to spend my last three minutes talking about this year ' s major issues .
I will start off with the Scandinavian countries .
The administration of the Stockholm office has proved to be scandalous .
We have to wait for the outcome of the disciplinary inquiry . However , I would like to ask the Commission when this will be concluded , and I should also like to know whether the Commission has taken measures to suspend staff after reading the OLAF report ?
As Niels Busk stated , there have also been considerable problems in Denmark .
The problem with the guarantee payments in Denmark , which has not yet been settled , is an absolute disgrace .
Being a Danish rapporteur , it is embarrassing to say so , but it is a fact .
With regard to the flax issue in Spain , I am very delighted that a compromise was successfully reached .
I have tried not to get involved in an internal Spanish quarrel .
I examined whether the Commission had failed to fulfil its monitoring role , and I do not think this is the case here .
However , I should like to thank my Spanish colleagues on both sides for their willingness to cooperate and for the fact that they appreciate the different views .
I should like to mention the ' Fléchard case ' which has been at the centre of discussion this year .
We shall never discover more than we know now .
We have set up a special committee , we have sent out additional questionnaires to the Commission and we have invited five new and former Commissioners to a consultation in the committee .
OLAF , the expert committee and the Court of Auditors have looked at the case .
And what did we learn ?
We learned that the Delors Commission made a decision for which there was no legal basis .
Under no circumstances was there a legal basis for reducing the penalty from six to three million . That was the conclusion of the Court of Auditors , the expert group and OLAF .
The Commission reacted , perhaps under pressure from the French government , and turned somersaults to save a company which had most likely even been involved in the fraudulent activities from the beginning .
This was just not discovered as there was no thorough investigation of the case .
The conclusions of the meeting at which the decisions were made were never put down in writing and cannot now be reconstructed .
OLAF has just completed a very thorough investigation , and its conclusions are clear : The files will never be found .
If OLAF cannot find them , then how should MEPs be able to ?
Now we must look ahead , and I am extremely pleased that Mrs Schreyer stated so clearly that there will be no repetition of the ' Fléchard case ' .
For the first time , the new Commission has admitted that the decision to reduce the penalty was perfectly open to criticism and that a more thorough investigation should have been carried out .
They have also promised to change the rules so that officials will not be able to make that type of decision in the future .
I therefore think we should consider closing the case and then devote our energy to holding the Commission to its promises .
Finally , I should like to thank everyone who has been involved in doing a really great job : the Commission , the staff of the Commission and our people in Parliament . Mr Asadbeg and Mrs Marina Buk Kristensen , in particular , have done an excellent job .
Thank you very much .
To my three colleagues , who do not wish to grant discharge , I would like to say that it would really have worried me if they had said that they wanted to grant discharge .
That would have meant that my report was not good enough .
For some people it is a way of life to be at cross purposes and oppose everything .
That is fine , and I accept that , as I also accept them as very good colleagues .
It is quite all right that three groups should be voting against this report , in which case the rest of us will take responsibility .
Mr President , with just one minute , I must be absolutely specific .
I shall use my one minute to congratulate Mrs van der Laan on her report and mention CEDEFOP , which is headquartered in Thessaloniki .
I want to get the message across that , in voting in favour of this report tomorrow , we acknowledge that CEDEFOP is now operating as we would like it to operate , we acknowledge the positive aspects of how it is operating and performing and we confirm the fast job done in completing the CEDEFOP building , which was finished ahead of schedule and with savings of EUR 2 million .
I also want to point out that we must make ensure that the people working so hard at CEDEFOP can rest assured that there is no risk of their being moved from Thessaloniki somewhere else , just as they were recently moved from Berlin to Thessaloniki .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we conclude this debate , I should like to come back once again to a point of detail arising from the 1999 budget , which is now extended to 2000 and 2001 as well .
I am referring to the SYNERGY Programme .
This energy programme was discontinued in December 1999 by the new Director-General of DG Energy and Transport .
There is a difference of opinion over the Programme 's minimum threshold .
The Director-General only wishes to approve programmes involving amounts of EUR 400 000 and above , whereas the Council 's Energy Working Group has set a figure of EUR 200 000 .
As a result of this dispute , the implementation of the SYNERGY Programme has now been blocked for a year and a half .
The whole situation is becoming farcical , for it even proved impossible to reach an agreement at Permanent Representative level and the issue actually ended up on the agenda for the Foreign Ministers ' meeting on 9 April .
Indeed , we risk losing the funds for 2001 , which would mean that we would not have implemented two-thirds of an energy budget-line .
This House should therefore call upon the Commission to take issue with the incredibly obdurate attitude of the new Director-General , Mr Lamoureux , and ensure that an amicable agreement is reached .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is getting late , so I would just like to make a few brief comments to wind up this debate .
Firstly , how will the Commission deal with uncovered or suspected fraud ?
Fortunately , we now have OLAF , which was set up in 1999 , so today 's approach is naturally very different from cases such as Fléchard in 1991 .
Let me re-emphasise this point : in a similar case , the approach adopted and the decisions taken in Fléchard would not arise today .
Of course , the individual factors are also important .
We have just been talking about the blacklist .
Here , the current situation is that only companies which have been prosecuted successfully can be blacklisted , and only by the Member States .
This is a shortcoming , of course , so we are working on a proposal to grant the Commission the right to blacklist companies as well .
But I should mention at the same time that this is a Council regulation .
It remains to be seen how the debate on this issue will continue .
As to the question : if fraud is discovered and a prosecution takes place , how will the courts in the Member States proceed ?
Yes , we know about this .
Various procedures are applied which vary in their speed and thoroughness .
I am not implying anything about any Member State , this is simply an observation .
So the issue of a European public prosecutor is still on the agenda , of course .
Let me say again : we consider that we have no legal basis on which to appoint a European public prosecutor without an amendment to the Treaty .
We will present the green paper , and we will also try to exert greater pressure through a directive based on the regulation on the protection of financial interests . So we will keep this issue alive .
I am still quite optimistic : perhaps by the time the next Inter-Governmental Conference comes round - although hopefully it will have a different name by then , so perhaps I should say " at the next Convention " - this issue can be dealt with and decided in a different way .
Another important point in this context is that we have presented a communication for an amendment to the disciplinary procedure . I should point out yet again that as part of the budget discharge procedure , the Commission provides Parliament with a list of disciplinary proceedings which commenced or were concluded in a given year , together with their outcomes .
As far as I am aware , no Parliament in any Member State is as well-informed about problems and proposed solutions , even in countries which pride themselves on their transparency .
A further point which was raised was the execution of the budget .
A number of speakers highlighted the continuing shortcomings in the execution of the budget - i.e. the translation of the budgetary authorities ' decisions into tangible policies - especially in the field of foreign policy .
Last year , for example , the budget for the Structural Funds was very poorly implemented .
I have to make this clear , because the new programme could not be approved and implemented in all areas .
In the area of foreign policy , a great deal has improved ; one reason is that for the Agency for the Reconstruction of Kosovo , a different administrative approach has been adopted in line with Parliament 's resolutions , which has really proved its worth .
And that is also something which we must take into account when considering reforms .
As regards the execution of the budget , I should like to reiterate that we will be presenting budget management data to Parliament on a weekly basis from now on . Here , too , I am not aware of any Member State which furnishes its Parliament with such up-to-date information as is the case here .
On the issue of a positive DAS : as the Budget Commissioner , I am responsible for the discharge procedure as well , so I would naturally be delighted to have a positive DAS sooner rather than later .
That goes without saying .
But I also realise that a Statement of Assurance from the Court of Auditors - and it is the Court 's decision , and the Court has not yet decided when it will produce the Statement - cannot be achieved through a single campaign or a few small-scale campaigns and improvements . Instead , we must plough a broad furrow , because each of the difficulties faced in combating fraud and mismanagement in the individual areas - the Structural Funds , agricultural policy , research policy , etc. demands highly diverse measures .
Mr Blak 's report makes this very clear .
It really is a very broad field , and - to continue with the metaphor - improving the execution of the budget , reducing errors , and avoiding fraud sometimes turn it into a minefield .
The Commission 's Action Plan and administrative reform are therefore also a mine-clearance programme , so that in future , the budget decisions fall on safe and fertile ground .
On behalf of the Commission , I can assure Parliament once again that we will not be downing tools once the discharge decision is taken . On the contrary , we intend to roll up our sleeves even further and continue our labours with renewed vigour .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Foot-and-mouth disease
The next item is the Commission statement on foot-and-mouth disease .
Mr President , Members of Parliament , I am pleased to update you further on the current outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease .
To date , the outbreak remains largely confined to the UK , where almost 99 % of cases recorded so far have occurred .
The outbreak started with two cases detected on 20 February .
Over the following weeks , however , the number of cases rose exponentially with daily totals sometimes 50 or more in number .
As we speak , the total number of cases in the UK stands at over 900 .
The situation in the other affected Member States is fortunately not as serious .
There have been two cases in France , twelve in the Netherlands and one case in Ireland ; however , we need to maintain a very high level of vigilance .
All Member States are putting huge resources into combating the current outbreak .
This is especially the case in the Member States which have recorded cases , and in the UK in particular .
There has been a very high level of solidarity and cooperation between Member States in the current difficult circumstances .
The Commission 's strategy towards the crisis has been to act decisively and quickly .
Our aim is to assist the Member States to eradicate foot-and-mouth disease .
There is a consensus on this objective .
Other considerations - very important considerations - arising from the crisis will have to wait until this objective has been achieved .
We are maintaining a very high level of coordination and cooperation with the Member States : for example , there have been eight meetings of the Standing Veterinary Committee since the crisis broke ; a ninth meeting is taking place in Brussels as we speak ; and two further specialist meetings of laboratory experts on foot-and-mouth disease and on zoo animals have also taken place .
There are also innumerable daily contacts and information exchanges with and between the Member States .
We are acting urgently on all new information .
For example , the Commission has acted to impose restrictions on exports and animal movements from affected Member States and regions within 24 hours of confirmed outbreaks .
There have been no fewer than 18 decisions adopted by the Commission since the outbreak of this crisis .
We are acting with as much transparency as possible .
In addition to the meetings of the SVC , the crisis has been discussed twice in the agriculture council and five times in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , in the European Council , in COPA or with professional organisations , and in countless press conferences and technical briefings .
This is my third appearance in Parliament to update you on developments .
I have also asked my officials to be available at all times to keep you informed on the progress of the outbreak .
Where possible , we are adopting a regionalised approach to any new outbreaks . This is designed to allow trade to continue , with however very severe safeguards to prevent further spread of the disease .
The Commission has worked hard to convince third countries that exports from the Community are safe and are not a risk .
I met the new US Secretary for Agriculture , Ann Veneman , last week in Washington , and she has undertaken to regularly review the situation .
Our efforts are continuing to secure recognition for this regionalised approach by major export markets like Japan .
I remain satisfied that the protective measures in place are sufficient to safeguard against the export of the virus to third countries . I repeat my call on them to lift unnecessary and unjustified restrictions .
I will now turn to the full range of Community measures in place .
As I noted earlier , there are no fewer than 18 decisions adopted by the Commission to date and there will , no doubt , be more .
They fall into two broad categories : first , measures with Community-wide effect ; and second , measures which are specific to individual Member States .
On to the first category , Community-wide measures excluding the UK , there are still very important restrictions on movements of live and susceptible animals .
Essentially , with a few exceptions , movements are only possible from a holding to an abattoir , or to another holding with permission .
In both cases , movements have to be authorised by the competent authorities of the place of departure and of destination .
This has proven essential to avoid the possible further spread of the disease on the continent .
Another essential measure was the obligation to slaughter all sheep imported from the UK between 1 February and 21 February .
This has been proven by the epidemiology of the French outbreak two weeks later , as of 13 March , as the most crucial decision to avoid further spread on the continent of Europe .
There are also important safeguards to ensure that any such transports do not allow animals to come into contact with animals from other holdings except for direct slaughter .
Vehicles are cleaned and disinfected , adequate notice of movements of animals is given ; movements of susceptible animals into the holding of dispatch within the previous 30 days have not taken place .
Finally , there is now a suspension in place on staging posts , while the maximum transport time is maintained .
These points are designed to provide facilities for the resting , watering and feeding of live animals in transport ; however , they are also an opportunity for animals to be cross-contaminated by other animals .
I will now turn to Community measures in relation to individual Member States .
In relation to the UK , there is a total ban on exports of susceptible live animals , untreated meat and meat products .
However , Northern Ireland will be excluded from this measure with effect from today with two important exceptions .
There will be no exports of live susceptible animals , and there will be no change in the current restrictions in the area of Newry and Mourne where Northern Ireland 's only case of foot-and-mouth disease was detected almost five weeks ago .
In relation to France , the Netherlands and Ireland , there is a ban on the export of live susceptible animals .
There is also a ban on the export of untreated meat and meat products , milk and milk products from the affected regions in Ireland ( one county ) , in the Netherlands ( four provinces ) , and in France ( three départements ) .
These restrictions are adapted as circumstances change .
Hence in France for example , the ban on exports of live susceptible animals will remain in force until 12 April . However , the restrictions on exports of untreated meat and meat products will only apply to the three départements where the second case was detected on 23 March , as of today and following detailed investigations of the epidemiological situation .
The existing restrictions in relation to Ireland remain in place until 19 April .
In the Netherlands , where there have been a total of 12 cases since the first case was detected on 21 March , the situation will be reviewed in the SVC today and tomorrow .
In both of these Member States , the restrictions on products are confined to the regions where the cases have been detected .
That summarises the situation insofar as restrictions on exports and movements of animals are concerned .
I would now like to turn to two other important measures adopted in recent days .
These concern the Commission decision to approve vaccination in clearly defined circumstances in the Netherlands and in the United Kingdom .
The decision in relation to the Netherlands provides for suppressive vaccination .
This involves the vaccination of animals pending their pre-emptive killing and destruction to prevent the further spread of the virus .
It has a role to play where there is insufficient capacity to carry out this killing and slaughter with the speed necessary to prevent the further spread of the disease .
The Netherlands is in this unfortunate position and the Commission and the Member States in the SVC are sympathetic to the situation .
Accordingly , it is entirely appropriate to allow vaccination to take place in these circumstances .
The decision in relation to the United Kingdom is more complex .
It is confined to cattle only in the counties of Cumbria and Devon .
Other species would not be vaccinated but pre-emptively killed in a certain radius around infected premises .
In contrast with the present policy in the Netherlands , the vaccinated bovines would not necessarily be killed and destroyed .
However , there would be very strict restrictions on the movements of these bovine animals , by and large dairy cows , which would effectively confine them to the regions concerned .
There would also be important restrictions on the movement of their milk and milk products and , when eventually slaughtered , of meat and meat products from these animals .
It is a measure of the consequences of vaccination that the UK has not yet decided if it will avail itself of the Commission decision in the circumstances in which it has been requested .
The Netherlands for its part is considering a request for a revised scheme similar to that approved in the UK .
As we speak , the Standing Veterinary Committee is discussing that particular request .
I fully appreciate that vaccination is a very emotive subject .
It certainly appears as an attractive alternative to killing and destroying animals .
But the reality is far different .
This reality is that there are important limitations to vaccination and there is still no widespread support for such a policy .
Generalised vaccination has not been asked for by the Member States , including the Netherlands and the UK .
It has not been asked for by the European Council which discussed the crisis in Stockholm recently .
And it has not been asked for by the farming community at large , nor have I heard any demands for its introduction in this , my third appearance , in this Parliament .
The reality is that it is a complex issue with formidable challenges .
I have spoken to you before of some of these challenges . Let me now repeat them .
There is no approved test to distinguish individually vaccinated animals from infected animals .
This allows the disease to continue to persist in the animal population .
There are seven serotypes of FMD , each with several sub-strains .
Vaccination is only effective against the targeted strain and for a limited period only .
As the disease is not endemic in the EU , the selection of the appropriate vaccine strain would be a pure lottery .
There are over 300 million susceptible livestock - cattle , sheep and pigs - in the EU which would need to be vaccinated to give full coverage and it would jeopardise our trade between the Member States and with certain countries which insist on imports only from FMD-free countries which do not vaccinate .
In the light of these circumstances , there is still a consensus that eradication of the present outbreak without the use of generalised vaccination is the best course of action .
Before concluding I intend that , when this outbreak has been eradicated , we will carry out a very thorough examination of all the contributory factors to the current outbreak and the consequences .
These will include issues such as the following which fall within my own area of responsibility : weaknesses in traceability of animals , especially of sheep and pigs ; animal transport and especially measures which allow live animals from different Member States to cross-contaminate one another ; vaccination and whether there needs to be a departure from the current policy of ' no ' to generalised vaccination and , if so , in what circumstances and in what conditions ; sanitary controls on imports , bearing in mind that the existing EU provisions are adequate if respected , not only to keep out the virus but also to ensure public health requirements are fully and properly respected .
But there are other wider issues which will also need to be considered .
Costs : the present outbreak already has a full potential cost to the Community budget of up to EUR 170 million on disease eradication measures alone .
Research into new marker vaccines and discriminatory tests which will allow vaccinated animals to be easily distinguished from infected animals thus giving much greater scope for protective vaccination .
There has already been good progress in this area and it needs to be intensified .
Further discussions in the relevant international bodies , especially in the OIE on the current approach towards the virus and perhaps , most importantly of all the issues raised , our current systems of animal production and their interaction with the non-farming rural community which has suffered hugely in recent weeks .
However , these issues can only be addressed when the current crisis has been brought under control .
I hope that this will take place sooner rather than later .
Thank you for your attention and I now look forward to hearing your views .
Commissioner , I notice that you have in any event made some moves towards a policy whereby infection and vaccination do not immediately lead to the removal from farms .
This might be a first step , but in my own opinion , and that of my group , it is probably not sufficient .
After all , we cannot deny that the current line of attack with regard to foot-and-mouth disease is unacceptable in real terms , and also from an economic , social and ethical point of view .
The disease is continuing to rage out of control in Great Britain , which is leading to huge mass graves and enormous losses .
In the Netherlands , twelve cases in a limited area have now led to the slaughter of almost 100 000 animals .
In addition , social life has been disrupted to some extent over a large area , and other sectors , such as the medium-sized and small businesses , are suffering huge losses too .
In my own country , we are now talking in terms of more than EUR 100 million .
This also applies to the rural areas which are far removed from the affected area .
For that reason , one could claim that the remedy , namely control by means of destruction , is worse than the disease itself .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission the following questions .
Why are the Commission and Council not drawing from experience in South Africa and Argentina , among other countries , where outbreaks were successfully brought under control by means of comprehensive vaccination schemes ?
Why is the Commission not putting the report published in 1999 on the testing of vaccinated animals to good use ?
Now that the enormity of the economic impact outside agriculture has become apparent , and there is - with good reason - widespread dissatisfaction among the public , who refuse to accept animal suffering , what is the Commission intending to do about this in the light of a thorough overhaul of the present non-vaccination policy ?
Does the Commission really condone the fact that for each animal infected with foot-and-mouth , tens of thousands of other , often still healthy , animals are being killed and destroyed ?
My question also falls within the scope of fighting BSE , for it is a well-known fact that we have a surplus of beef and veal .
I would like the Commission to confirm , in plain language , that this approach of the foot-and-mouth outbreak is not related in any way to the BSE policy , where it is taken for granted that animals have to be removed from the farms and destroyed .
Mr President , on this basis , I believe I have to conclude that the current policy of controlling foot-and-mouth can , both ethically and economically , no longer be justified , and I eagerly await your answers .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his very detailed statement which , without wishing in any way to put aside the devastation of the impact of this outbreak , will have counteracted some of the hysteria that we have encountered .
There was complete agreement that slaughter and containment was the most effective policy when this disease broke out .
But for the rapid action of the United Kingdom Government to ban exports and impose movement restrictions and alert other Member States , the impact on the Continent and in Britain would have been far greater .
Sound-bite television has not been helpful to public understanding of this complicated disease - as you may have experienced a few moments ago , Commissioner .
Vaccination is not as simple as some suggest .
I congratulate the Commissioner for making that clear and destroying some of the myths that have been bandied about .
The Standing Committee has only agreed to vaccination with the proviso that quarantine , slaughter and disposal remain the most effective means of eradicating the disease .
That clear message should go out from this Parliament .
There is no threat to human health .
The vast majority of Britain 's countryside is disease-free and open for business , subject to sensible precautions about staying away from farm land and farm animals .
This outbreak will continue for some time and must , as the Commissioner said , be followed by a full inquiry .
There is little doubt that the virulence of the virus and the extensive sheep movements just before the outbreak have been important factors in the spread of the disease .
But we need to know more about the incubation period , the epidemiology of the virus and how farming practices have been contributing factors .
I welcome the commitment of the Commissioner to look at all these and other factors .
Pontificating on instant solutions in advance of an inquiry will not be helpful .
Mr President , in some EU Member States , and particularly in my own country , the Netherlands , this is the most serious agricultural crisis we have known in years .
I would like to express my sympathy to the farming families affected by this , and also to other people who are suffering the effects .
The liberal group is backing the policy of emergency vaccinations to restrict the outbreak and spread of the virus .
We are of the opinion that , ultimately , this will need to lead to complete eradication of the foot-and-mouth virus throughout Europe .
We cannot turn a blind eye to the major doubts which pervade Europe with regard to the non-vaccination policy .
What the Commissioner stated this afternoon can be applauded , but the message must be made clearer to the public .
What would the implications be if we were to abandon the current policy ?
What are the effects on markets in Europe ?
What would be the implications on the income of the farming families if we were to abandon this policy ?
This message must be driven home .
I would now like to draw your attention to another aspect . At the moment , we are exercising extremely strict control at airports and other entry points .
This should not be a temporary but permanent measure .
We must follow the lead of the United States and Australia , where such controls have been in place for years .
The Commissioner talked about the transport policy in Europe .
We must consider whether we cannot set up certain quarantine zones throughout Europe , so that animals can no longer contaminate each other at the so-called resting points which are being used at the moment .
I would like to finish off on a minor point .
Farmers have been unable to deliver milk for some days in various countries .
Is it possible that the Commission could revise its decision to adjust their quota downwards ?
They must be given an extra milk quota , so that they are not suffering more damage than they already are .
The days on which they were unable to deliver should be added to their quota .
Mr President , Commissioner , you have given us a most impressive overview of the measures adopted by the Commission .
We have the impression that it comes rather too late .
Perhaps these measures should have been adopted in " peace-time " , if I can call it that .
But the Commission - and some Member States as well - showed a striking lack of concern about the danger posed by the disease , and it would also seem that no one took the precaution of developing a common strategy to combat it .
We had the impression that the politicians were falling over themselves with radical demands and instructions , but none of them offered a particularly effective response to the outbreaks .
But , of course , the key question now is : culling or vaccination ?
Let me make it clear to the House that it is not a matter of resuming a regular programme of preventive vaccinations . No , the question is whether the outbreak can now be contained through emergency " ring " and suppressive vaccinations .
And what happens to the animals after they have been vaccinated ?
That is another question . You have authorised the vaccinations , but only on condition that the animals are slaughtered afterwards .
You were rather circumspect in your speech today , so let 's be frank about it : this is an absolute scandal .
Healthy vaccinated animals do not need to be slaughtered to curb the epidemic , they can be returned to the economy .
There are a number of countries which have proved that it is possible to pursue an export policy even though they have cases of foot-and-mouth disease at home . Argentina is a case in point , with its trade with the EU and other countries .
But they do not export the disease .
What we expect from you - and I hope that tomorrow 's resolution will bear this out - is that you will not present us with endless arguments about why the cull is necessary : I have heard quite enough of them from your subordinates .
Endless imagination is used to justify the culling - yet in reality , very little imagination is needed to break away from this fixation with slaughter .
I expect you to explain to us how you intend to negotiate at international level in order to enable us to achieve a sensible policy on how to combat the epidemic while continuing to trade with third countries .
We must finally overcome this contradiction : the two things must be possible , trade and a sensible policy on the disease .
Vaccination is not just an emotive issue ....
( The President cut the speaker off ) ( Applause )
Mr President , the foot-and-mouth epidemic in Great Britain and its spread to mainland Europe clearly demonstrate that the disease apparently cannot be halted with the current strategy .
I do not believe that we are out of the woods yet .
Ever since the first case of foot-and-mouth disease , the Commission has supported the slaughter of lambs and the blazing pyres , and has been reluctant to approve other methods of tackling the disease which might have been agreed at national level .
In my view , this is a major political risk , as the costs and benefits are very difficult to quantify .
Putting our money on the economy from the outset would have been the right approach .
A vaccination programme at the very start of the foot-and-mouth outbreak would have saved a great deal of money , but above all , it would have saved a great deal of personal suffering .
It is estimated that around 200 million livestock are moved around the EU every year .
Traceability in this commercial chain , especially in the necessary chronological order , is always problematical and uncertain .
Even in normal years - without BSE and foot-and-mouth crises - the error rates are high .
The common agricultural policy has its own powerful momentum , and it is difficult to halt it once it is under way .
That is why it would have been necessary to identify a number of viable and practical alternatives to the current strategy to combat FMD .
The present approach is mediocre and irrational - so I am delighted that it is to be changed .
Beef consumption has decreased by 50 per cent .
Prices have hit rock-bottom , and the monthly wages bill can no longer be covered from beef production .
Commissioner Fischler 's compensation programme is to be enhanced with an eighth point , namely the removal of the penalty bonus for the milk quota .
This makes sense , as cattle sales have been stopped .
Jobs and livelihoods in agriculture , food production and processing are at stake . There is no longer any rural tourism , even in areas which are free of FMD .
Even relatives are staying at home .
Patching this up through a " rural renewal " programme could take years .
After all , cattle cannot be produced overnight .
Vaccination must be utilised more effectively throughout Europe as a normal instrument to combat the disease .
It must be ensured , in this context , that vaccinated animals and their products are commercially viable , in other words , that they can be marketed without any trade barriers .
Discriminatory tests must be developed as a matter of urgency in order to allow vaccinated animals to be easily distinguished from infected stock .
This should also make it easier for the Commission to give the Member States more scope than before to have their say in decisions on measures to prevent and eradicate the disease .
Mr President , we have heard what the Commissioner has to say regarding the situation which has come to pass in the United Kingdom : 900 cases and the situation still does not appear to be under control .
This is the situation that has been described to us .
I therefore feel that the initiatives implemented to date are not sufficient .
Moreover , we have heard , in the Committee on Agriculture and elsewhere , that , also in the United Kingdom - as some farmers have said - interventions are not always timely enough considering the fact that as long as three weeks have been known to pass between the occurrence of a case of foot-and-mouth disease on a farm and slaughter of the animal .
We must therefore create the right conditions for the Commission to intervene through all the channels open to it and ensure that timely measures are taken , apart from anything else in order to make the need for vaccination clear at last . Although vaccination will not provide a definitive solution to the problem , it will certainly be an indication of the will to stop regarding slaughter as the only possible reaction .
There is therefore a clear need to create the right conditions for tighter controls and thus to prevent foot-and-mouth disease from spreading to other countries as well .
Mr President , it is high time that the political world sent a clear message of support to the agricultural community , which has been severely affected by one crisis after another .
They often have the finger pointed at them , but farmers are , in fact , victims of the system .
Mass slaughter , carried out in the name of the much-vaunted precautionary principle , is becoming much less acceptable , especially because consumer confidence has not returned as a result of this sacrifice .
Confidence cannot be bought by decree - it has to be earned .
An appropriate media campaign should be launched to restore this confidence .
Our exports are paralysed by poorly targeted embargoes .
The Commission failed in its negotiations with the United States .
Only a few regions are affected by foot-and-mouth disease , but the whole of Europe is being punished - this is an unacceptable situation that must be redressed .
The Russian and Japanese markets are also out of bounds .
What did the negotiations achieve ?
The European Union must adopt a strong position on regional policy .
With this background of economic and social disaster , why is preventative vaccination not being carried out , instead of resorting to a pre-emptive cull ?
Systematic culling causes both the ruin of the farmers involved and the destruction of genetic heritage .
Europe has a wealth of local breeds authorising their vaccination will enable us to protect them .
With regard to compensation , this must be paid to enable farmers to buy new livestock , and payments must be made quickly , since administrative red tape would be unacceptable in this crisis .
Compensation must also be paid out to those working in farming-related activities and other rural businesses , such as poultry and game farming and the many tourist activities .
Although the tourist industry is not affected by the disease , it has lost revenue due to the prevailing hysteria .
Furthermore , psychological counselling facilities should be set up as soon as possible .
Apart from the financial aspects , who at the present time is concerned about the distress experienced by farmers who have had part of their heritage destroyed ?
We must show unwavering solidarity in the light of this human tragedy .
Mr President , Commissioner for Consumer Affairs , yes , I said ' for Consumer Affairs ' and not ' for Agriculture ' , our current concern , the foot-and-mouth crisis , has arrived just in time .
Foot-and-mouth disease has arrived just in time for eastward enlargement and for the WTO negotiations .
First of all , it is in time for eastward enlargement , since we must , of course , cut our agricultural expenditure because the annual budgetary pie for agriculture will have to be cut into 21 slices instead of 15 and everyone ' s piece will , therefore , be smaller unless the number of farmers is reduced .
And it has arrived just in time for the WTO negotiations , since we must make room in our marketplace for goods from the southern hemisphere , for goods from the Cairns Group as we already have for wine , fruit and vegetables - but there is also New Zealand and Australia , which , as if by chance , produce lamb .
So , how can we now cut agricultural expenditure for Western Europe and make room in our marketplace for goods from the South ?
Quite simply by cutting our numbers of farmers and livestock .
And how can we cut our numbers of farmers and livestock ?
Quite simply by making a drama of an everyday occurrence of foot-and-mouth disease , blowing it out of all proportion subjecting it to Apocalypse Now-type media treatment , turning it into a spectacle , with butchers , mass graves , diggers , bulldozers , cordons sanitaire , the armed forces and mountains of burning sheep , cattle and pigs .
For months now , the Food and Agriculture Organisation has been warning of foot-and-mouth disease prevalent in Anatolia , Korea , Japan , in South Africa itself and in Greece last year .
The world is on red alert and yet the European Union does not flinch .
Foot-and-mouth disease breaks out , and it breaks out , as luck would have it , in Great Britain , which has the most livestock in Europe .
What we should do is vaccinate .
So , what do we do ?
We do not vaccinate .
And we do not vaccinate firstly because we have to come through this unscathed and vaccination would involve three million pigs , sheep and cows , secondly because this would cost EUR 100 million , and finally because we could no longer export anything even though we are not exporting anything at all . And so the disease spreads further .
And what is the outcome of all this ? Farmers aged 55 and over , whose herds have been slaughtered , are forced into retirement .
Farmers who suffer unavoidable financial problems due to a fall in sales go out of business .
But then , although farmers leave farming , the budget savings that we need can be achieved .
Although British herds are haemorrhaging , there is room in the marketplace for lamb from the southern hemisphere and then New Zealand and Australia will , as a result , agree to sign up at the WTO .
Eastward enlargement can go ahead , since , in terms of the budget , agricultural expenditure has been slashed .
In the wake of the BSE crisis , foot-and-mouth disease has given rise to a total of three miracles .
The first miracle is that there are fewer budgetary obstacles standing in the path of eastward enlargement .
The second miracle is that the Cairns Group is satisfied with the sacrifice of European livestock and is happy to sign up to the WTO .
The third miracle is that we can also reform the CAP at the expense of our farmers , who are made out by the media to be poisoning cows and infecting sheep .
All of this happened by chance , of course .
It was also by chance that Stephen Dorrell admitted in 1996 that BSE could be passed on to humans , at the exact time when there was the scandal of US hormone-treated beef .
It is by chance that we have allowed the disease to spread .
It is by chance that , for ten years , we have done nothing to combat BSE .
It is by chance that the United States has a stranglehold over the world ' s media .
So , Mr President , you must appoint Mr Chance European Commissioner alongside Mr Pascal Lamy .
Having given up on soya at the Blair House negotiations , he will be successful at the WTO negotiations and next on the list will be the farmers .
Mr President , Commissioner , on the occasion of this debate on the foot-and-mouth epidemic , I would firstly like to express my unwavering solidarity with all those working in the farming industry , who have already been dealt a cruel blow by the BSE crisis which threw the markets into disarray , and especially with all cattle farmers , most of whom work to rigorously high standards , using methods which respect both the environment and the animals on their farms and who have now been severely affected by this latest crisis which has left them feeling totally helpless .
I would like to make a clear distinction between , on the one hand , the urgent steps that must be taken in order to combat this disease , in this situation which is extremely difficult to control , since vaccination was stopped in the European Union in 1991 , and , on the other hand , the subsequent measures to be taken once the disease is under control , so that a disaster of this kind can never happen again .
What will need to be done ?
First of all , we need to initiate an in-depth discussion of the developments in farming which have allowed such diseases to occur .
Were we right to allow such intensive farming to take place and become increasingly widespread and specialised , employing processes that were increasingly artificial ?
Were we right to have so few abattoirs , which caused local abattoirs to close down , and which encouraged intensive farming and made it necessary to systematically transport animals over long distances ?
We will then have to thoroughly re-examine the international rules laid down by the World Organisation for Animal Health which , in their current state , seem absurd and obsolete .
Currently , if a living animal is vaccinated against foot-and-mouth disease within a particular country , that country will lose its status as a foot-and-mouth-free country , and is therefore banned from exporting .
Who cannot see that this arbitrary rule blatantly favours the United States ?
We must also deal with bilateral trade exchanges , as each country can freely negotiate the conditions governing exports with Russia , Japan or other countries .
We must also take a regionalist approach .
There is no reason why any Member State , even the whole of the European Union , should be considered as a homogenous entity in this area .
There is no reason why a case of foot-and-mouth in Brittany should affect Alsace , nor why a country that has 1 000 cases of infection such as Great Britain and a country that has two cases such as France should be treated in the same way .

Furthermore , we will have to give serious thought to whether it was the right decision to ban a preventative vaccination that has been used in the Community since 1991 .
Should we not at least authorise the vaccination of rare animals , reproductive animals , and even milk herds ?
To enable this to be done , it is imperative that we encourage research and development into marker vaccines which enable a vaccinated animal to be distinguished from an infected animal .
Finally , we will have to find the resources required to encourage holdings , especially small and medium-sized holdings where rearing and fattening are carried out in the same place , which reduces the risks of spreading diseases since integrating birth , rearing and slaughter at the same holding is a vital factor in preventing the spread of disease .
This role must be fully acknowledged under the common policy .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , Commissioner , it is quite clear that no one can give serious consideration to a generalised vaccination programme at present , for one very good reason : the vaccine is not available in sufficient quantities .
I would also like to add that vaccination must not be used to cover up poor hygiene and disease prevention .
But it is also quite clear now that the first real test of the strength of the new FMD policy since the introduction of the internal market is about to end in disaster .
However , let me add a further point in all seriousness , Commissioner : international agreements - restrictions , even self-imposed restrictions through the IOE criteria - mean that no one in Europe , neither the Commission nor the other European institutions , can bear to continue the current policy .
The endless culling of herds is neither intelligent nor appropriate in the long term .
Indeed , it raises a number of issues concerning animal welfare , guaranteed property rights , and even the principle of proportionality , which is part of the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice .
So I welcome the fact that those affected are starting to clarify these issues at the highest judicial level .
So how do we proceed with a new strategy which will not find it easy to dispense with tried and tested methods of disease prevention ? This automatically raises a further question : what has the Commission done to implement the report by the Scientific Committee in March 1999 as regards the regionalisation negotiations at international level , the validation of testing , and the evaluation of the criteria determining when emergency vaccinations are necessary in " at risk " regions too ?
A last word : the general abhorrence of vaccinations , both on a Europe- and worldwide level , must end .
And we will push for this with all our energy and determination .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , during Parliament ' s last part-session , I expressed the concerns of my region , which is fighting an outbreak of the foot-and-mouth virus .
I would today like to express our general feeling of relief that we have on a local level managed to contain the infection and that we are able to announce that the situation is under control with regard to the second holding in France where foot-and-mouth was discovered and treated , approximately 300 kilometres from the first site .
Although there have only been these two outbreaks in France , we can , of course , deduce from this that the Community strategy to combat the foot-and-mouth virus is effective and very suitable since it is implemented in a most vigilant and strict manner .
Despite our pleasure in having won the first battle , I do not think , however , that we can draw any firm conclusions .
I would also like to stress that we will have to wait for the disease to be completely eradicated before we can accurately weigh up its impact in terms of health , the economy , as well as its psychological and budgetary impact .
However , before we reach that stage , I would like to mention the problems that we need to deal with now .
Farmers have fulfilled their role as a shield , with their herds being sacrificed in order to protect the community at large .
The European and national community must now treat the farmers ' psychological suffering and ensure that their economic losses are totally compensated .
The industry is destabilised and under threat .
Member States and the European Union must deal with this situation as a matter of urgency and in a way that matches people ' s needs .
On several occasions , the general public has said that it does not understand the mass slaughter of animals when the virus poses no danger to humans .
A specific statement should , therefore , be issued in order to clarify the health and economic issues of this disease for the benefit of citizens and on the possible direction of our health strategy , moving towards the use of technology to carry out vaccinations , for example .
Commissioner , this is an exceptional situation . We must deal with it in an exceptional manner .
Mr President , the previous speaker , Mr Garot , said that the disease is gradually starting to be brought under control .
I hope it is .
We therefore have to look to the future .
Animal diseases spread with animal transportation , and so for this reason animal transport across borders should generally be avoided .
At least there should not be any kind of financial incentive for it .
Moreover , animal transportation must be properly monitored in each EU Member State and candidate country .
One problem concerns animal auctions , especially those involving bull calves .
I think these should be abolished altogether .
Animal sales should be carried out , in this age of modern technology , directly between one farm and another , or between farm and abattoir .
I would also like to stress the importance of a policy of prevention .
Strict adherence to legal provisions on hygiene and transport is the undisputed basis for all agricultural trade and , consequently , for the production chain .
The EU should embark on an eventual vaccination programme so that countries free of infection and disease do not have to unduly suffer .
Mr President , in the wake of the implications of FMD for communities directly and indirectly affected by the outbreak , it is vital that we learn the lessons of the mishandling of the outbreak which has caused such devastating knock-on effects for many sectors of society .
The consequential loss to those directly and indirectly affected by the disease has so far been enormous : hauliers , abattoirs , tourism , cultural events , schools and the small business sector are all bearing the brunt .
Farmers whose stock is not affected directly by FMD , but who are unable to move their stock to markets , are also facing massive losses , further exacerbated by the ban on the sale of cattle over 30 months following the BSE crisis .
Commissioner , I learnt from one of my colleagues last week that if the UK were to offer state aid to those affected by the crisis , this would not contravene European Union competition policy .
I would appreciate clarification by the Commission on this point .
We must also call again for the re-establishment of local abattoirs and a reduction in animal transport over long distances , which undoubtedly acted as a catalyst for the rapid spread .
Mr President , recent developments in connection with foot-and-mouth disease in a series of countries in the European Union prove that the systems for guaranteeing that animal diseases are efficiently controlled are in a parlous state .
This is because of the EU multinational companies ' demand for complete freedom to move goods within the Community , a demand which has been met by establishing the single internal market .
The border veterinary and sanitary controls required in order to move animals and animal products between the countries of the European Union have been abolished within this market .
As a result , diseases are easily transmitted and it is difficult , if not impossible , to stop diseases moving from one country to another .
At the same time , the certificates testifying to the state of health of the animals and animal products being transported are a symbolic rather than a substantive measure - witness the unacceptable impression created by veterinary services nowadays which do not have even the most rudimentary structure needed in order to cope with the increasing demands , both quantitative and qualitative , of the internal market .
This is the natural consequence of the multinationals ' demand that all obstacles be removed and that controls , which are basically left to the companies themselves , be minimised , as we have seen from other recent problems such as dioxin , BSE etc .
The present situation is therefore the price we have to pay for creating a internal market and bowing to the demand for fewer and fewer controls .
It merely proves that we need to reinstate border controls at internal frontiers in order to prevent the emergence and spread of epizootic diseases and to compensate livestock farmers for their losses .
Any such compensation should not be linked to cuts in Community funding for other agricultural products , especially from countries which have no part in the causes or dimensions of the current problem .
Mr President , Commissioner , last month in the emergency debate on foot-and-mouth I indicated that it was not a time for apportioning blame and indeed I sympathised with the plight of British farmers .
In the meantime , I have not altered my view other than to say , regretfully , that the dreaded virus has since spread to my country with devastating consequences for farmers within the control zone of Cooley Peninsula , and with worrying implications for Ireland 's farming and rural communities .
With such a dreaded virus one is somewhat reluctant to talk about success , other than to say thankfully Ireland 's quick response , sometimes regarded as extreme , has so far been successful in containing the disease to one outbreak .
But Ireland is paying an enormous price for this single incident .
It affects not just the farmers but the broader economy such as tourism and employment .
However , I am left with some questions about the effectiveness of the controls up to the point of the outbreak of the first disease .
It is obvious that Britain 's first outbreak originated outside the Community , and I now question whether third countries which export to us are complying with the conditions we have imposed .
This is something on which the EU Food and Veterinary Office must focus in the immediate future .
Secondly , we must question whether the meat being imported into the European Union is being fraudulently misrepresented on importation .
Are the inspection procedures and sampling arrangements at import points into the Union adequate ?
I ask the Commissioner today , who has been doing an extremely good job , to consider increasing the level of sampling as an initial step .
In my contribution last month I called for an EU taskforce to police the implementation of the control measures in Member States .
I ask today are we satisfied that enough is being done ?
What about the method of disposal - have we reached any scientific conclusions about the necessity for incineration as against the safe burial of dead animals ?
Do we have a view on the psychological impact , not just on farmers , but on the entire EU population , young and old , of the non-stop display on our television screens of truckloads of dead and decomposing animals ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioner , foot-and-mouth disease was found on a farm in my municipality last week .
Emergency vaccination is now taking place in a radius around that farm , and 90 000 animals will be slaughtered in the next few weeks .
This is a disaster of unknown proportions which is affecting 200 farming families , as well as many others , in this village .
Given the permission for emergency vaccination , I had hoped that the Commission would have begun to appreciate the ethical side of agriculture .
But emergency vaccination is only putting off the evil hour for healthy animals .
This level of destruction is not acceptable , and there are alternatives available , such as those included in our resolution .
Cows , sheep and pigs are more than production units .
They are God ' s creatures in relation to which we need to act as responsible stewards .
The measures which the Commission is taking are based only on dubious economic motives , that is to say retaining remote export markets .
The non-vaccination policy was based on a restricted outbreak every 5 to 10 years .
The present epidemic is anything but restricted .
The non-vaccination policy is therefore based on false scenarios and must be reviewed .
I call on the Commission to consider the ethical dimension of its policy .
Healthy , vaccinated animals could be kept for the internal market .
Mr President , Mr Byrne has given us a very clear statement this afternoon in an area that was requiring more clarity .
In Cumbria , where the outbreak was spreading out of control , we told the farmers that they would have to slaughter even healthy animals in a preventative cull .
They reluctantly agreed to comply with that request and the slaughter of healthy animals has begun .
Now we appear to be changing direction and saying at a time when we have not enough veterinary resources to deal with the backlog of animals requiring slaughter , with the huge backlog of animals requiring disposal burial , we are saying now that we wish to diversify and use these vets for a mass vaccination policy .
This sort of dithering has been an element which has been obvious throughout this whole disease .
To say that the UK government has been decisive is a nonsense : it dithered over whether to bring in the army .
It dithered whether to use incineration instead of burial .
Now it is dithering over vaccination .
Let me say this afternoon that vaccination is not the right way forward .
After what Mr Byrne has told us , if we use the vaccination policy we effectively bring down the curtain on our agricultural economy .
We would close off the export trade for all these products from animals in the areas where vaccination had been used .
Vaccination is not a sensible way forward just now during the epidemic .
We know that in Saudi Arabia they have used the vaccination policy for the last two years . They have nevertheless had six outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease .
We know that when you vaccinate cattle it can take up to 14 days before they develop immunity .
In the case of pigs it can take 7 days .
During that time they can spread the virus .
I would pose one question to Mr Byrne before I finish .
He was talking about whole areas of Holland , France and Ireland where restrictions will be lifted .
Will similar restrictions be lifted in areas of the United Kingdom not affected by the disease ?
Mr President , Mr Byrne , I disagree with you on one key point , namely that we cannot yet discuss the measures to be adopted once the current crisis has been brought under control .
I take an entirely different view .
I am convinced that if you do not start talking about tomorrow and the future now , while all the Member States are trembling at the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease , you will find that once everything has settled down , the Member States will all sit back and relax .
So now is the time for you to adopt a different course of action .
Now is the time , for example , to work actively with your colleague Mr Fischler to ensure that a follow-up system for sheep and pigs is introduced immediately , so that the premium payments are no longer coupled to specific transfer date provisions .
It would no longer be necessary to move the sheep and pigs all round the European Union to ensure they can be counted at the right place at the right time when the money is available .
But I also believe that you must finally take courage and throw a stone into the water .
Why do you not say : live transports are banned ?
Every live transport must be granted an exemption .
Why can animals not be transported after slaughter ?
Try it and see .
Why do you not announce here and now that we need a different policy on disease ?
Sit down with the IOE in Paris and say : the international policy on animal diseases needs to be changed right away , together with all the other relevant partners in the IOE .
And finally : tell us , what have you got against giraffes ?
Many people have asked me that question : what has the Commissioner got against giraffes ?
Why is he stopping the safari parks from vaccinating to prevent disease ?
Why is he making all the safari parks close down , or putting the fear of whatever disease into the zoos throughout the European Union , because we failed to pursue a decent disease prevention policy and all the animals suddenly have to be culled ?
So tell us , Mr Byrne : please tell us , what have you got against giraffes ?
Please be so kind , take the measures today .
Be more courageous today , do not wait until tomorrow .
Commissioner , thank you for your contribution .
I would urge you not to falter with regard to the non-vaccination policy pursued by the Commission since the beginning of the 1990s .
I should like to ask you , Commissioner , if it is not correct that , when we implemented the single market in 1992 , there was an agreement that the national veterinary borders should apply in the event of a disease breaking out in any of the Member States .
If this is the case , I would urge the Commission , including you and the Commissioner for Trade , to make a far greater effort to ensure that some of the countries which really depend on exports to non-EU countries - and here I am thinking primarily of Denmark - will again be able to export to the United States , Japan , Russia and the many other countries which have stopped their imports from the EU , an action which is basically a technical trade barrier .
Mr President , hundreds of thousands of healthy animals are being killed in the name of export .
People in my country no longer accept this .
Other sectors of the economy too have ground to a halt .
The damage caused in those sectors is many times more serious .
Commissioner Byrne ' s attitude is brutally inadequate .
Mr Byrne should have taken the initiative to vaccinate animals in zoos . Instead , he did nothing .
Mr Byrne could have taken the initiative to vaccinate rare animals roaming freely .
Ministers Künast and Brinkhorst took the initiative instead .
Mr Byrne should have taken the initiative in respect of generous buffer vaccination .
Export interests are not sacrosanct .
Let the affected countries vaccinate their animals to their heart ' s content and not sacrifice animals unnecessarily .
Finally , I should like to urge the Commission to reduce the time limit for the transport of live cattle from 30 hours to a maximum of 4 hours .
In that way , a future outbreak of foot-and-mouth would be restricted to one area , rather than affect half of Europe , as is currently the case .
Commissioner , Mr Böge has helped me prepare this speech , for he has already indicated the best way to deal with the issue .
I would like to make three brief points .
Firstly , the animal health policy adopted by the European Union during the 1990s appears to have been a good one .
What we are witnessing during these initial months of 2001 is a quite extraordinary phenomenon , but one which requires careful analysis .
We thought that foot-and-mouth disease was a minor problem , but the response from all over the world is forcing us to think again : there is a complex situation in Mongolia , specific situations in Africa and Argentina .
This will probably mean the need for a rethink and the introduction of a World Trade Organisation regulation .
The second point relates to the agricultural sector .
The agricultural sector is , in any case , constantly the focus of traumatic events which are causing - I would say - a sharp , frightening drop in farmers ' incomes .
Thirdly , we need flexible policies .
There should be separate measures for foot-and-mouth issues relating to zoos and rare animals .
Mr President , foot-and-mouth is leaving tremendous grief and helplessness in its wake .
In the battle against the virus , all means must be deployed .
The European non-vaccination policy is now turning out to be a self-imposed handicap .
I set great store by the fact that we should join forces in this time of crisis , and that we should adhere to a Europe-wide approach .
However , the downside of the non-vaccination policy is also making itself felt now . I am quoting animal welfare in this connection .
The destruction or evacuation of healthy animals is meeting with enormous resistance .
I am also quoting animals in zoos .
It is quite inexplicable that animals in zoos and at pasture in nature reserves are not allowed to be vaccinated .
Furthermore , you are calling the effectiveness into question .
The massive slaughter could not prevent foot-and-mouth from spreading across England .
The draconian measures in the Netherlands could not prevent further outbreaks of the disease , or the spread of the virus into Germany .
Commissioner , the situation is very serious indeed .
We call for a joint approach . Hence , I would like to put two pressing questions to you .
First of all , at what stage will you recognise that the European strategy has failed ?
I assume that you will not wait until all livestock has disappeared , but where will you draw the line ?
Secondly , is it conceivable that vaccinations can take place in a short space of time and on a limited scale in the dairy farms , where the identification and registration system can guarantee that meat and dairy products remain in the region and certainly outside the export loop ?
In the long term , we do not simply call for a return to a policy of preventive vaccination .
Experts , however , do call for strategic vaccination in the event of an outbreak , obviously accompanied by failsafe registration .
Finally , Commissioner , today , I received 350 signatures from children who live in Amsterdam .
They want the animals in their zoo , Artis , to be vaccinated .
I should like to offer you these signatures , and I hope for a positive response to their request .
I gave you the note that they enclosed a moment ago , and I hope that you will be able to spend a few minutes of your time on this .
Mr President , the Commissioner has told us that vaccination has not been asked for .
It is being asked for today in this House .
A decision on vaccination is not easy .
I understand that many farmers are reluctant to go down the route of vaccination but the effect of this outbreak is being felt not only by the farming community , but by hauliers , hoteliers and a whole host of tourist businesses who are suffering without compensation .
The Commissioner told us the disease has cost EUR 170 million in eradication measures .
It is costing far more in lost business .
If science allows us to distinguish between animals which have been vaccinated and those carrying the disease , then vaccination should be allowed whenever requested .
The lessons from the UK are of inadequate contingency planning , an inadequate number of vets due to cuts in government services and inadequate supplies of labour and materials . I would ask the Commissioner three questions .
Are you satisfied with the UK 's response to this disease ?
Are you satisfied that other countries have adequate contingency plans ?
Would you confirm that the first you heard of this disease in the UK was indeed on 20 February or were your services in fact tipped off about a possible outbreak some weeks earlier ?
Mr President , today at 12 noon in London there was a strong protest outside the Ministry of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food against the senseless culling of millions of healthy animals .
The message to the UK Government was clear : to help prevent the slaughter of millions of healthy animals and to save farmers and the tourist industry from economic ruin , the government must urgently start a vaccinate-now firebreak campaign .
In the longer term , Europe 's farming must become less dependent on international trade and more self-reliant .
It is a nonsense that we simultaneously export and import precisely the same product to and from the same country and it is clear that it is not small farmers ' livelihoods , animal welfare or the tourist industry that the UK Government has as its priority for protection , but simply our meat exports .
Commissioner Byrne , you also talked of not vaccinating in order to safeguard trade ; yet even this dismal economic justification for culling on such a scale does not stand up .
According to the National Farmers ' Union , the UK earns just GBP 633 million per year from meat and dairy exports .
Compare this with the estimated GBP 9 billion cost of the foot-and-mouth epidemic .
We therefore urge the Commissioner to revise the EU strategy of defending , by all means , its FMD-free status , and to recognise that the culling and destruction of healthy animals is both inhumane and ineffective .
Mr President , so that I do not repeat the words of the previous speakers , I shall state that I agree with almost everything that has been said , and with Mr Böge in particular .

I would , however , like to ask Mr Byrne , firstly , to clarify the regional approach that he has taken , because I believe that we must protect this and immediately put it into place .
Secondly , with regard to the outcome of the inquiries , I would like to say to the Commissioner and the Council that foot-and-mouth disease is one of the contagious diseases that is rife in the world ; the entire population , one which is increasingly mobile which is natural since travel is becoming cheaper and cheaper will , increasingly , spread diseases that can be caught by both animals and humans .
That is what this crisis of foot-and-mouth disease signifies .
Are you prepared , Commissioner to give some thought , in conjunction with the World Health Organisation , to all these illnesses that we are going to suffer in the future as a result of this increasingly accessible Europe , in the light of the decisions taken regarding LDCs for 2006 and 2009 , which will allow the free movement of all products , apart from weapons , throughout Europe .
Are you prepared , Commissioner , to take steps , as the United States has done and I shall for once not make any openly anti-American remarks to establish much tighter controls in our airports , on all products that arrive from anywhere and everywhere in the world .
Have you considered , in conjunction with the Council and Commission , any further steps to benefit the people who travel and who pass through our airports too ?
This really is a genuine appeal that I am making to the Commission , to Parliament and to the national governments .
I shall sum up , Commissioner , by also saying that the European spirit which brings us here , to Parliament , forces us to ask the Council and Parliament to take exceptional measures for farmers and all sectors of the economy and the affected regions in Europe , otherwise , I believe that European integration is meaningless .
Commissioner , the speech that you have just made has left me somewhat confused , and I shall tell you why : you began by saying that a review of livestock farming is needed .
You then present yourself to this Parliament as the master of an agriculture that is focused on intensive production and exports .
In other words , you are saying ' I cannot vaccinate livestock because if I did , I would harm exports ' .
This illogical approach is intolerable .
You have to make a choice , Commissioner : either you are genuinely interested in protecting producers , in which case you have to opt for vaccination in areas with the highest numbers of affected animals , or you want to protect the export industry , in which case you would be sacrificing producers to exports . What you cannot do is address both issues in the same way .
I would ask you , whose side are you actually on ? Are you on the side of the export industry or of saving livestock farmers ?
My second question to you concerns another incongruity : the Netherlands has discovered a dozen cases , and the United Kingdom 900 .
The United Kingdom has slaughtered hundreds of thousands , perhaps millions , of animals and the Netherlands has slaughtered a few thousand .
The latter is using vaccination but with regard to the UK , on which everyone is focussing , and which has major problems , you come here , Commissioner , and sit on the fence .
This is unacceptable .
You must tell us what you think about vaccination .
I should also like to ask you why animals are being slaughtered once they have been vaccinated .
You must explain to us what the technical or scientific basis is for having animals slaughtered when they have already been vaccinated .
I have one final question : your Veterinary Committee knows the type of vaccination needed and can guarantee its safety .
Why then are you always confusing the situation and leading people to believe that from a technical and scientific point of view , we cannot control this disaster through vaccination ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe we should revisit vaccination policy .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt is right .
We should do this today , and not tomorrow .
I have read reports from virologists and vets who claim that , in this day and age , adopting a non-vaccination policy is much like sitting on a time bomb .
Apparently , there are a number of diseases which we still do not have under control , such as swine fever , and now also foot-and-mouth disease , by all accounts .
This is why we need to reconsider all the factors involved , including the human dimension .
Surely you cannot tell farmers every couple of years : look , you have worked really hard , but there is now a threat of a disease and we will have to eradicate your businesses .
Then there is the aspect of animal welfare .
It appears that the scientific arguments are still not fully concluded .
All economic arguments have to be looked at , for internal consumption takes a real nosedive each time we hit a crisis .
Just add up all the costs of these crises combined .
We only need to look at the internal market : pigs are now being sold in the Netherlands at BEF 50 / kg , and at BEF 80 / kg in Belgium .
It is only a matter of time before the first reports on smuggling will start to roll in .
All these aspects should therefore be considered .
After all , people , especially in my country , are increasingly mystified by your policy .
You will therefore need to carefully explain what it is all about .
You claim that no single country is asking for vaccination , but no single minister dares ask at this moment when a true European discussion will be held on this subject .
The positions are shifting .
When will we be able to hold a debate on this subject at the highest level ?
Mr President , we must see the current crisis resulting from foot-and-mouth disease as an opportunity to consider the European Union ' s vetinary policy .
First of all , it is hard to understand why the Union is finding it so difficult to react to this disease and to adopt a strategy to combat it .
Starting with the Veterinary Committee , which only belatedly authorised vaccination , then the Council of Agriculture Ministers , which seemed more concerned with external trade issues than with controlling the situation , and finally , the Stockholm European Council , which danced around the crisis , like a ' cat on a hot tin roof ' , insisting on referring all the costs to the financial framework defined in Berlin .
Secondly , the problems faced by some countries today in mobilising resources to deal with sick animals are clear for all to see .
The European Union itself has never advocated a genuine common veterinary policy and in my own county we have seen a degree of laxness creeping into health policy , with unbelievable delays in payments to health protection agencies cofinanced by the European Union .
Lastly , I wish to emphasise the urgency of adopting a decision on the strategy that we should follow .
We know that it is not easy and that both vaccination and non-vaccination have their pros and cons .
What is happening , though , is that the assessment carried out ten years ago which led to opting for non-vaccination must now be reconsidered in the light of the many aspects of European farming that have changed since then , starting with its integration into the global economy , which has increased the risks of contamination exponentially .
Selective preventive vaccination or vaccination within a cordon sanitaire , on a regional basis , should be seen as alternatives that the Member States can authorise , according to the number of cases they discover .
Otherwise , we shall run the risk of losing control of a potential future outbreak of an even greater crisis , or of irreversibly damaging irreplaceable genetic heritage , as has happened , in some countries , with certain native breeds .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , some of us appreciate your dilemma and your unwillingness to rush to judgement .
If there were simple solutions to this tragedy , we would have found them by now .
In the UK we gave our neighbours in France , Ireland and in the Netherlands an early warning and they acted promptly .
We applaud them for what they did .
But in a minefield the early warning is given by the first person to step on the mine and that was the UK .
We have suffered greatly from that .
Would the Commissioner confirm that this is essentially a crisis of movement ?
Would he accept , as the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development does not , that vaccinated animals can carry the virus ?
Otherwise the belated decision which the Commission took on 14 March to exclude Argentine produce would make no sense .
Will he undertake with the SVC to examine the problem of long-range , unrecorded animal movements in which animals are largely treated as commodities , which has been the major factor in the spread of FMD ?
Would a carcass trade not be better for Europe to be considering ?
Finally , what is the SVC 's opinion of the various methods of disposal used in the UK where a million animals have now been culled ?
Can he reject the false stories which have been put around by some in the UK that these methods were originally vetoed by the Commission , if that was not the case ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will be quite frank : I am not happy about the fact that we are adopting yet another resolution .
I think that the situation for everyone concerned is far too serious for us simply to be carrying on with politics as usual .
Please do not misunderstand me : I certainly would not wish to prevent the dreadful situation of farmers and rural communities from being given the attention it deserves at European level , quite the contrary .
But I am afraid that if this discussion is not addressed seriously , it will simply create even more uncertainty among our citizens .
The tragedy faced by the farmers needs more than headlines .
The survival of a profession is at stake .
Although the farmers currently receive up to 30 % less for their cattle , a kilo of beef costs just as much , if not more , than before .
And this is the case even in my own Member State , which fortunately still has no cases of foot-and-mouth disease or BSE .
The situation in the regions where there have been outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease is critical .
It is not only the farmers who are affected ; it has an impact on everyone in these rural areas , including tourism and thousands of jobs .
I should like to take this opportunity to express my sympathy to the farmers and the rural communities who are suffering as a result of this disease .
I hope that everyone understands what damage this is doing to farmers , and that years of work will be required to rebuild these herds .
Let me say a few words about vaccination policy : I support the emergency vaccination measures in order to prevent the virus from spreading .
But we must not give people the impression that the animals are healthy as a result of vaccination , and that we do not need to cull them .
I believe that we must continue to cull if we wish to regain our disease-free status .
I also hope that the Commission , but above all the Member States , fulfil their responsibilities .
I notice time and again that throughout the European Union , there are still no disinfectant mats at the airports .
This hygiene problem is a matter of acceptance in the Member States .
Mr President , it is now clear that everyone 's hope that the foot-and-mouth disease crisis will be temporary and short-lived has not been realised .
In the Republic of Ireland we have been fortunate so far in that the outbreak has been confined to one area close to the border with Northern Ireland .
And while the disease has appeared in only four Member States , we cannot yet be sure that it will not spread further .
In the light of this , we must make certain that the restrictions domestically imposed do not impact disproportionately to the detriment of other key industries and public life generally .
The option , therefore , of vaccination has to be kept open in the interests of the wider community .
I said this last month . I hope that this month , given the weight of opinion expressed here today , this will now be listened to .
The current Draconian restrictions on people 's movements cannot continue .
We cannot reasonably expect the farming community to have the balanced view of this issue that the wider community needs .
It is for politicians to make these balanced choices .
I am thinking , in particular , of the tourist industry in Ireland , which is worth EUR 4 billion .
The Irish Hotels Federation is already reporting actual losses of EUR 55 million in the last month , with obvious knock-on consequences for employment .
It must also be made clear that the illegal movement of sheep by unscrupulous operators will not be tolerated .
Such movements in border areas between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland must be stamped out and licenses withdrawn from those found to be involved in such practices .
To conclude , I want to support the call by my colleagues for a European taskforce , not only to monitor the existing situation , but whose remit would also be to monitor and approve a European-wide eradication programme .
Mr President , Commissioner , many questions have been asked today and time does not permit me to repeat them , particularly those questions asked by my colleague , Liam Hyland , and indeed colleague De Rossa in relation to the proportionality of the response .
Could this outbreak have been prevented ?
Will consumers lose confidence in our food ?
Are our rules and regulations concerning animal movement and animal traceability all that they should be ?
Are farmers ' incomes such that they can afford to call out a vet when in doubt and have the European Commission and the national responses been adequate to the challenge ?
There will be more time for those later .
Then there is the complex question of vaccination , even if it is not on the Irish agenda .
In the last 18 months , 34 countries have reported outbreaks .
To maintain a disease-free status a country has to be free of FMD for at least 12 months , an effective system of surveillance must be in place and all regulatory measures for the prevention and control of FMD must have been implemented .
A policy of strategic ring-vaccination around outbreaks may be appropriate in certain circumstances even though we still cannot distinguish commercially between infected and vaccinated animals .
I appreciate that the Dutch , for example , have a particular problem about disposing of carcasses so vaccination is for them perhaps an option to ring-fence the disease .
I am referring specifically to firebreak vaccination .
With the tragedy of FMD following on from BSE and swine fever we must review in a rational way the common agricultural policy .
We know that FMD has been around for 400 years so modern farm practices cannot be blamed for this virulent disease , but the mobility of animals today gives rise to greater risk and faster contamination .
The general principle should be to ensure that animals are slaughtered as close as possible to the point of production .
There are huge economic implications for Ireland from this disease and while farmers are suffering badly , because of restriction of movements and slaughtering , so are other businesses and industries , particularly our tourism and transport sectors .
Already we have lost IRL 200 million in tourism receipts since the outbreak of FMD in the UK some weeks ago .
Our overseas markets are seriously threatened and we have only one case of it .
In conclusion , we are only spending 1 % of the 1.2 % of GDP currently available .
There are other measures that can help compensate sectors generally in terms of our budget .
Mr President , Commissioner , in 1991 , I joined with other colleagues in this House to vote against the abolition of vaccination at that time .
I believe that against the background of enlargement , we will be forced to rethink the situation .
Last week , 4000 animals were culled as a preventive measure in my region , after piglets had arrived there from quarantine areas in Holland .
Since 2 p.m. today , foot-and-mouth disease may also have reached Germany and my home region of Münsterland near the Dutch border .
If the cases are confirmed , Commissioner , the disease will have broken out in a region which is widely regarded as the " meat belt " of North Rhine-Westphalia .
The EU 's " no vaccination " policy has always been justified in terms of exports to third countries .
So my question is this , Mr Byrne : is it not clear that this policy really has failed ?
What does Europe gain , in financial terms , from these exports , and what is the epidemic costing Europe ?
The Commission should put these figures on the table for the Council .
I called for this two weeks ago in the Committee on Agriculture .
Put the figures on the table , and do it quickly .
Then the Council can decide , and the Council can take responsibility for its policies .
The European Parliament will undoubtedly set out its views on this issue in its resolution tomorrow .
I am in favour of emergency ' ring ' and suppressive vaccinations , and I say : let us do it right away .
I believe that the current situation is putting untold emotional and psychological strain on farmers .
What about Europe 's moral responsibility for its policies ?
Please , Commissioner , answer the questions we have asked . Please do not just read your prepared text because otherwise this whole discussion will be a waste of time .
Thank you .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I have received eight motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Mr Böge has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , without wishing to impede the progress of the debate , but in view of the last comments , I would ask the Commission very sincerely to provide an overview at the next Committee meeting of the internal and external activities which it has undertaken in order to embed the recommendation of the Scientific Committee on Animal Health and Animal Welfare of 10 March 1999 both in the Commission 's policies and at international level .
I would be grateful if we could receive a comprehensive report at the next Committee meeting .
Thank you very much , Mr Böge .
The Commission takes good note of this and it will appear at the appropriate time before the Committee on Agriculture .
President .
Mr Posselt has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I would simply like to ask when Question Time proper , with the preparatory questions , is likely to begin .
After all , it was scheduled for 6 p.m.
Mr Posselt , I am really concerned today because we are going to have a delay of three quarters of an hour .
I understand what you have said and I will communicate the repeated problems which arise with Question Time to the Bureau of Parliament and the Conference of Presidents .
Report on the preparations for the introduction of euro notes and coins
The next item is the Commission communication on the report on preparations for the introduction of euro notes and coins .
Commissioner Solbes has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the euro has been a reality since 1 January 1999 and the coins and notes will be introduced in 272 days .
We will thereby complete the historic process of passing from our countries each having their own currencies to sharing the same currency within the Economic and Monetary Union .
The first two years of the euro have led to the consolidation of good economic results and substantial advances .
I am not going to repeat the figures for growth or inflation or the extent to which monetary policy has contributed to growth or to the convergence of our economies , nor the role played by the euro as a protective factor in the face of external crises .
In any event , it is clear that the euro has had a definite impact on financial integration and has created the conditions for a broad and very fluid European market .
This new situation enables us to confront the challenges facing us , such as those in the field of budgetary policy . It enables us to prevent this being procyclical and to prepare ourselves for the risks posed by the ageing of the population , to speed up our structural reforms in order to improve our growth potential , to make progress in the field of financial legislation in order to further integrate the markets , and to complete the process through the introduction of notes and coins , which we hope will take place successfully on 1 January .
There is absolutely no doubt that the introduction of the euro is going to be an historic event .
Every company , consumer and authority must adapt to this new situation , and the communication being presented today consists of a report on the situation with regard to the preparations for the introduction of coins and notes , but also , as well as assessing the general situation , additional work is being carried out : on the one hand , to establish to what extent the content of the Commission recommendation of last 11 October has been complied with by the Member States and , secondly , to establish a series of good practices , the application of which may contribute to aiding the correct development of operations relating to the introduction of notes and coins .
It is possible that this new communication will mark the end of Commission communications to the Council .
And I say it is possible because we do not rule out the idea that , if new factors arise which suggest the need for a new communication , then this would be done next October .
In any event , I would like to respond to the two questions which are the subject of today ' s document : what is the current situation and what new practices are proposed .
The framework of preparations presents a situation which I would call unequal .
It is not a black or white situation ; it is a grey situation and , in some cases , it is too dark a grey , but only in some very specific cases , it is true .
With regard to companies , it is true that , generally , the preparation of large companies has made very satisfactory progress , but small and medium-sized businesses are still somewhat behind .
Approximately half of them have improved the situation , but still half of them have no action plan to transfer to the euro on 1 January .
What is more significant is that one in three of them is still not aware that 1 January 2002 is the time limit for carrying our all their operations in euros .
Therefore , increasing the awareness of small and medium-sized businesses is still one of the fundamental concerns of our communication .
With regard to consumers , the eurobarometer for January demonstrates the consumers ' vision of the euro , and we must acknowledge that in some cases it is relatively confused .
For example , one in every four people ( 25 per cent ) believes that euro notes and coins issued in one country will only be legal currency in that country , which indicates that a factor as fundamental as the existence of the single currency is still not fully understood .
One in every five , however , is not aware , for example , that the introduction of the euro will be accompanied by the withdrawal of the old currencies and , although progress has been made on the issue of the timetable , 40 % of citizens do not yet know the exact date of the introduction of euro notes and coins .
The numerous information campaigns have had limited effects , but it is true that it is difficult to persuade consumers to take an interest in an event which they see as far off .
There is plenty of documentation , but that documentation is not always read .
We are convinced that this situation will improve at the beginning of the second six-month period , with large companies that issue invoices changing their bank accounts and other means of collecting payment early .
This will contribute to consumers being progressively more involved in the new situation we are creating .
Public administrations are generally prepared and offer the public the opportunity to use the euro in a very broad range of operations , although it is true that they could play a more significant role , acting as a catalyst for the whole of the economy , for example , by paying , public contracts or officials ' salaries in euros , something which has taken place in some Member States , but not in all of them .
The banks are cooperating well ; they are carrying out changes in advance in their relations with their clients ; the adaptation of automatic cash dispensers in 2002 will probably be very rapid , and even immediate in the majority of Member States ; in general , they will issue notes of low value and will thereby contribute to alleviating the problems of returning change which may arise in commercial operations .
The exchange of national notes for euros will be free and unlimited in the majority of participating States during the period of dual circulation .
The banks have in fact become one of the driving forces in the transfer to the euro and their policy of early exchange is a very important contribution to increasing awareness of the euro amongst economic operators .
We have also developed a series of good practices , which are nothing more than a series of simple , practical ideas which are being applied in some Member States and which are being made known to the others so that they can also apply them .
In today ' s communication , the Commission offers 20 new practices , 10 to be applied before the introduction of notes and coins on 1 January , and another 10 which could be implemented at a later date .
Those measures are not applicable in all the Member States of the Economic and Monetary Union , but they are a set of ideas which each Member State may have recourse to and use if the State considers it appropriate .
I will mention some , which are , as I said before , relatively simple ideas such as distributing to small businesses instruments for calculating the exchange of currency while the national currency and the euro are being used at the same time .
Or creating and distributing instruments for calculating the cash requirements of small businesses , a fundamental issue when it comes to calling for the front loading of notes and coins .
Another measure , in agreement with consumers and businesspeople , is to start to pay a part of salaries , at the end of the year , with ' kits ' of euro coins , which is a possibility .
After the introduction of the notes and coins on 1 January 2002 , other issues of interest may be raised .
For example , we recommend that sales do not take place , as is usually the case in some Member States , on 2 January , as that would give rise to an unmanageable situation from the point of view of the operation of those businesses .
We also recommend , for example , that the ' neutralisation ' of national notes be authorised for some economic operators , so that we can reduce the risks of transport .
We also propose , for example , as has happened in France , that specific precalibrated instruments for the old currency be created , so that the exchange of national coins may take place more easily .
Finally , there is a series of ideas which we believe to be useful , which have been applied already in some Member States and which are no doubt going to be have a positive effect in terms of ensuring that this introduction of notes and coins for 300 million Europeans takes place more easily .
The logistical operation is of great importance , and we should try to resolve the majority of the problems before that date arrives so that these possible second level and less important practical problems do not cloud the fundamental issue , that is the introduction of euro notes and coins .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Commissioner , it is always useful to hear your recommendations on the practical aspects of the euro . I do get the idea , however , that you are not overly concerned .
I , personally , am concerned and I think that there are still some fundamental sticking points : people do not really know what is going to happen in practice , businesses do not really know and Europe ' s citizens are not familiar with the new currency .
Do you not think that specific measures need to be adopted ?
The second question I would like to ask you is this : what is really happening with transfers between euro-zone countries ?
When will stop paying transfer costs within the euro zone , between euro-zone countries ?
Mr President , Commissioner , you know that as the rapporteur on this issue , this is of great interest to me .
As regards your current statement , which is hopefully more comprehensive and detailed on paper than what we have just heard , I have two main problems : firstly , how do you verify that the funds provided by the European Union for the information campaign are actually being used efficiently and constructively , and in accordance with the guidelines and recommendations and the basic political message , in the Member States ?
I ask this question because I have the feeling that we have become more of a channel for EU funding and are relinquishing our leading role in the information campaign under the guise of subsidiarity .
And secondly : what do you intend to do to persuade the Ministers responsible , especially the ECOFIN Council , and include them in this much-needed action programme in the information campaign on a mandatory basis , not just in an advisory capacity ?
Mr President , I would say to Mrs Torres Marques that my obligation is not to be anxious .
My obligation is to resolve the problems and view the difficulties rather coolly and with a certain distance .
I believe that we may have a distorted view of reality .
When you see the communication you will see the level of decision which each of the Member States has reached and the amount of information available at a national level .
I believe that the citizens who have wished to be informed have been so , the companies are reasonably well informed and the public administrations are also acting .
However , it is the case that the coins and notes campaign has still not begun , since most of it will begin in June , and be reinforced in September .
There will be national campaigns , as well as a European Central Bank campaign which will undoubtedly have a specific effect on coins and notes and their technical characteristics , including security characteristics , which will take place as we come closer to the final stage and will give everybody a clearer knowledge of the situation .
Another problem which you have raised is a rather complex issue , which you know well , and which appears on page 46 of our communication .
I am not yet able to offer you a definitive solution .
You will be able to see there the progress we are making on the different problems raised and that , since November 2000 , the banking association has launched the STEP I project , which is the first project to offer us a system of compensation at a cross-border level , which should be a key element in helping us to reduce the cost of these operations which , for you and for us , are an issue of special concern .
It is going to be very difficult for the citizen to understand that , from 1 January , and working with euros in different countries , that a cheque in Portuguese euros paid in Portugal is not going to cost the same as a cheque in Portuguese euros paid in Belgium or vice versa .
Therefore , this is a point which has to be resolved , but resolving it necessitates the existence of a cross-border compensation system equivalent to the national compensation systems .
You will see in the difficulties posed by this issue in the communication , and we are prepared to do everything necessary to launch this project because we agree that it is a fundamental problem .
With regard to guidelines , I would say to Mr Karas that these have been established , with the Commission , through the different agreements which have been reached with the different Member States and , therefore , we are convinced that , if the agreements which have been reached for transfers of resources are applied correctly , there should be no problems in this regard .
And I would say the same to the respective ministers in relation to their national programmes .
The national programmes are all being discussed in the Commission .
There are references to each of the national programmes , including the communication issues , even the web pages relating to each Member State and the present communication informs us of exactly the action which each of the Member States has planned .
In any event , if Parliament or yourself have any doubt about any particular programme , we are prepared to give you the relevant information .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have two brief questions .
Firstly , 9 May is also supposed to convince young people in the European Union that their future lies in Euroland .
What are you doing , what is the Commission doing , and what are you arranging with the Member States so that a Euro project day takes place in every school before the end of this year ?
Do you plan to launch a specific initiative here ?
Secondly , what measures can be taken to help boost consumer confidence and ensure that in terms of consumer protection , there are no grounds to fear price distortions during conversion and a lack of transparency in price calculation ?
Thirdly , do you intend to continue the Euro information campaign with the Member States at least during the first half of next year , and if so , in what form ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I do not have as many misgivings as some of my fellow MEPs .
I believe that , on the whole , things are going well .
We still have a few months left .
Ordinary consumers and small businesses are not great planners , and the information will only strike home once they realise that things are getting serious and that it is high time they did something about it .
Of course , we could lend them a helping hand , and I have two suggestions in that respect .
As far as the SMEs are concerned , they should be given incentives in order to be ready on time .
So far , there are a great many small and medium-sized businesses , especially those working for the local market , who can only see the drawbacks .
They need to invest in order to be able to work with the euro , but they are not gaining any direct benefits .
My question is whether it would not be possible for the Commission to encourage the Member States by , for example , offering SMEs small fiscal incentives to be prepared in good time .
It is also important to make the consumer fully conversant with the fact that coins are not exchangeable in every Member State .
Foreign coins must be spent , and it is vital for people to know this before the summer .
So I would advise you to give them plenty of warning about this .
Secondly , could I suggest that you take the initiative of collecting all coins locally and maybe using them for a good cause ?
That is better than simply binning them .
Mr President , I would like to say the following to Mrs Randzio-Plath :
Firstly , with regard to the activities for 9 May , as you know , in cooperation with the chairman of the eurogroup , it has been agreed to communicate the 9 May initiative relating to schools to the Ecofin Council , in Malmö , and the Commission will print 400 000 little passports which our delegations will make available to the schools so that the children can begin to familiarise themselves with this situation .
Secondly , in relation to the consumers ' difficulties with prices , we make certain references in this communication to factors which may be useful in guaranteeing that the rounding up or down of product prices does not benefit the retailer .
We also insist that national administrations , in relation to the payment of taxes , for example - and the Belgian administration has done this - round prices down rather than up , so that the public administrations may be the first to demonstrate that the euro does not have to have inflationary effects , but precisely the opposite .
Thirdly , the fundamental problem with the information campaigns - as you know - is that they are national .
This means that some of the funds for 2002 can be used to finance some of the existing commitments .
Campaigns have not only been carried out in accordance with calendar years .
However , there is no doubt that if there are remains of these resources , we should seriously consider using them to send a political message about the significance of the euro , as a change in our customs , and about the fundamental nature of the process of European integration .
I would say firstly to Mrs Thyssen that I agree with her that the small- and medium-sized businesses and consumers will not adapt until the last moment .
Whether or not there are fiscal advantages is to be decided by the Member States .
The principle of subsidiarity applies here and it is not for us to intervene on this matter .
Something we have insisted on though , amongst the good practices , is that the debiting which the Central Banks make to the commercial banking sector , the financial advantage which results from the currency charge , be also partially transferred to the companies , so that this type of operation does not imply an additional cost for them .
With regard to currencies , what you say is clear .
We have not given any consideration to the recovery of currencies , but this is the element which initially is going to come into play most quickly .
I take note of your proposal that an initiative of this type be created at a local level , which , as you say , may help to bring about a good result .
Mr President , Commissioner , my question is this : the need for this information campaign is certainly not limited to the twelve future euro countries .
In Central and Eastern Europe , in particular , there are billions in circulation , especially in Deutschmarks , and in parts of the Balkans , the Deutschmark is the local currency , either officially or de facto .
The people there will then suddenly be confronted with the euro from one day to the next as well .
So my question is : How do you intend to provide information in these countries ?
Are you working with their national banks ?
Should they perhaps operate as issuing offices as well ?
How do you propose to prevent racketeers from cheating people with their own particular forms of currency exchange ?
I think there is a significant need for action in this area .
In the event that we have additional resources , we will organise a conference in Budapest in order to provide information on the introduction of the euro in the candidate countries .
However , in relation to the specific problem which you have raised , the European Central Bank has accepted the possibility of front loading even for branches of European banks in countries outside the eurozone , bearing in mind that a very substantial proportion of German currency notes are located outside German territory .
Work is being done on this issue and the European Central Bank has seen this as the best way to solve this problem .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
This item is closed .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0163 / 2001 ) . We will examine questions to the Commission .
Part one
Question No 29 by ( H-0263 / 01 ) :
Subject : Violence against women in Sierra Leone Given the widespread reports over the past month of the ongoing acts of sexual violence and rape being perpetrated against women and girls by the forces of the Revolutionary United Front in Sierra Leone , could the Commission outline what measures it has adopted to monitor the situation in Sierra Leone and what action it has taken ?
Could it also reassure me that everything is being done to help the Government of Sierra Leone address the human rights violations there ?
The European Commission is aware of the reports relating to the Revolutionary United Front 's violence against women and girls and shares the concerns of the honourable Member .
The United Nations , through its office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights , has this year established an information system in Sierra Leone , aimed at gathering information from women and girls in camps for internally displaced persons across the country , to determine the scope of sexual violence against women and girls .
The data gathered will be used to advocate better protection and programming on the ground .
Where appropriate the information may also be shared with the Truth and Reconciliation Committee being set up by the government and the proposed UN special court .
The Commission , through ECHO , has been assisting the office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights since September 2000 , with a grant of EUR 30 000 .
This is intended to increase general awareness not only within government but throughout society as a whole , of the question of human rights in Sierra Leone and , in particular , the problem of violence against women and children .
Funding to the tune of EUR 50 000 is being provided for training courses for humanitarian workers on human rights and international humanitarian law , including acts of violence against women .
The human rights section of the UN peacekeeping force is implementing this programme .
Question No 30 by ( H-0300 / 01 ) :
Subject : Humanitarian aid for the Chechen people Leaving to one side the rights and wrongs of the Commission 's humanitarian policy in Chechnya , can the Commission state whether , given that it has on several occasions drawn attention to the difficulties involved in operating inside Chechnya itself , it would be willing to support the implementation of humanitarian projects inside Georgia and Azerbaijan , aimed at the Chechen people and involving first and foremost the provision of medical assistance ?
Since the outbreak of the current crisis in October 1999 the Commission , via ECHO , has allocated more than EUR 25 million in humanitarian aid to the victims of this conflict .
The emphasis of ECHO intervention in the northern Caucasus region , where the large majority of Chechen IDPs are located , is because this is where the biggest problem is .
Up to 360 000 internally displaced persons in Ossetia , Daghestan and Chechnya itself , compared with a figure reportedly around 5 000 to 7 000 refugees in the Pankisi Valley in Georgia .
Operating conditions in the northern Caucasus remain difficult , especially in terms of security .
However , the same holds true for Georgia , where aids to the Chechen refugees in the Pankisi Valley had to be suspended for some time last year in reaction to the abduction of expatriate aid workers .
To date , allocations made in the context of the Chechnya crisis and benefiting Chechen refugees in Georgia total some EUR 820 000 .
The operations funded focus mostly on basic health care .
They have , for instance , consisted of the distribution of essential medicines to health providers , training of doctors on rational drug use , rehabilitation of basic health care facilities and the distribution of hygiene parcels .
Given the scope of the case-load of internally displaced persons in the northern Caucasus and the limited resources available , ECHO 's main focus for humanitarian intervention in favour of the victims of the conflict will remain there .
However , depending on how the situation develops , some limited funding might be made available to continue a medical programme in Georgia .
No specific humanitarian assistance is envisaged for Azerbaijan as at present no substantial numbers of refugees from Chechnya are reported in Azerbaijan .
Commissioner , thank you for your answer , although I think it is slightly elusive .
I am acquainted with the competent people , the Minister for Health in the Maskhadov government , Mr Oumar Khembiev , in particular , who believes that there are needs to be met in Georgia and Azerbaijan , which in no way detracts from what you have seen within Chechnya and the part of Russia where other Chechen people have sought refuge .
Having said that , I would like to know if you would be prepared to meet Mr Oumar Khembiev , the Health Minister , to discuss matters with him and to see if there are any firm possibilities of establishing two field hospitals in Georgia and Azerbaijan .
. We have been quite careful in calibrating and prioritising what we are doing with the aim of getting as close as possible to the biggest groups in need affected by the conflict in Chechnya .
We are also funding the logistic operation of food and medicine into Chechnya .
The priorities on which we are working are the right ones .
What you mention in your supplementary question sounds more like health support , not directed specifically to the victims of the conflict .
In any case , the priorities which I indicated in my first response are the best available answer we can give now .
Commissioner , I should like to ask whether you are now able to address the Chechen people directly via the Russian media , as I have read reports from ECHO which indicate that this access - especially via radio broadcasts - has not been granted by the Russian Government .
Are you able to do this , and is it helpful , for humanitarian aid purposes , to be able to contact the civilian population directly ?
My second question follows on from this : do you not think it is necessary for the Commission to visit the refugee camps in Georgia and the other neighbour states officially in order to make contacts there ?
I am not going to repeat the numbers of refugees in the different regions .
They are not our own figures .
They are from the various international forganisations working on this .
The reality is that in Chechnya itself we are working with 170 000 internally displaced people , the same number in Ossetia and the small number of 20 000 in Daghestan .
We are directing our assistance to areas with the largest concentration of people in need .
Finding the right channels to do that is not very easy .
It should be noted that the Commission , through ECHO , is by far the largest provider of humanitarian aid in this conflict .
Question No 31 by ( H-0260 / 01 ) :
Subject : Non-polluting vehicles The third oil crisis which recently hit the European Union raises a number of issues regarding the transport and energy policy pursued by the EU , the implications of that policy and the fact that it is having little effect in combating greenhouse-gas emissions .
What is the Commission doing to support and encourage the use of vehicles which run on non-oil-based fuels ?
How many studies have been conducted in this area ?
Does the Commission give due consideration to all projects involving the patenting of zero-emission techniques , and , if so , how have these been followed up ?
. ( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , a White Paper on common transport policy will very soon enable us to renew the debate on sustainable development .
As part of this debate , we will look into alternative fuels .
A communication is currently being drafted on biofuels to see how they can help to solve key political questions such as the dependence of transport on oil-based fuels , the security of power supply , greenhouse gas emissions and pollution .
Furthermore , the Commission will present a proposal for a directive before the summer of 2001 to introduce a rate of utilisation for biofuels in transport .
For approximately 20 years , the Commission has supported a great number of projects on alternative fuels and vehicles through its technological research and development programmes .
Almost all alternative fuels have been covered in these projects .
In spite of this huge support , these fuels and vehicles have not really been available on the market until now , the main barrier most often being the extra costs that are involved .
With regard to patents , many have been created as part of these projects , but they are the intellectual property of the industries and universities that took part in these projects which we cofinanced .
Commissioner , I mainly wanted to talk about the last point on patents .
Many citizens are concerned about reducing greenhouse gases and they even send us projects that are extremely interesting but which we are not in a position even to understand and analyse from a technical point of view .
I wanted to find out if the Commission had opened any sort of ' one stop shop ' that these people could contact , because if they are not scientists or do not belong to a university , there is no one to act as a sounding board for their ideas .
With regard to the specific question on transport , I shall pass this on to Mrs de Palacio , to see if this sort of ' one stop shop ' does indeed exist , but I can inform you that , as for all these research proposals , obviously we receive letters on a regular basis from inventors and people who believe they may have found a solution and these are of course sent to the administration department .
We should remember , however , that the principle of subsidiarity also applies and that in relation to the proposals that are dealt with in European projects , we must ensure that there is , of course , a body made up of several European partners .
We therefore believe that these projects must be looked into by the different innovation and research bodies that exist in the regions and also on a national level .
I shall pass on your proposal to Mrs de Palacio to see exactly to what extent a direct answer can be made to the proposals submitted .
Mr President , my question relates to the Green Paper " Towards fair and efficient pricing in transport " .
As harmful emissions are a key measure of how transport and mobility should be regulated in future , are there any plans to consider , in the research field , carrying out cost-benefit analyses in order to determine the areas of transport in which low-emission or zero-emission options would be of greatest benefit ?
Several studies have already been carried out on this issue and the Green Paper that Mrs de Palacio presented on behalf of the Commission sets a debate in motion on a whole raft of issues .
Some studies have already been funded on transport systems to find out what are the best systems in the current circumstances .
For example , we supported the solution to transport problems in towns , through the Joule-Thermie programme and the Energy programme and an experiment is being carried out at the moment using fuel cell-powered buses in various European cities .
This is a proposal that we have supported and which is currently being put into practice .
Question No 32 by ( H-0281 / 01 ) :
Subject : International trade and the fight against AIDS In the absence of concerted international action and coordination to facilitate access to treatment for the countries of the southern hemisphere , use of the safeguard clauses included in the international commercial agreements ( TRIPS ) is an essential way of reducing significantly the number of deaths from AIDS .
However , a restrictive interpretation of the international agreements is posing a threat to some countries ' national programmes against AIDS , as demonstrated by the complaints recently filed by South Africa and Brazil .
What is the Commission ' s position on this matter ?
What measures does the Commission intend to take to support the countries concerned ?
Second part
Questions to Commissioner Busquin
Over recent weeks , there has indeed been a great deal of public attention surrounding a trial taking place in South Africa against the pharmaceutical industry and the South African Government and also a complaint lodged against Brazil by the United States .
I shall not comment on these cases which are sub judice , but I believe that it is worthwhile to explain the Commission ' s policy on this issue which includes the problem of action to take against communicable diseases affecting developing countries .
The issue was referred to us last summer and we have worked on this , whilst trying to be both ambitious and fair .
In September , we organised an international round table in Brussels , out of which came a number of recommendations , ranging from a diagnosis according to which the issue of access to key drugs involves both local systems for care provision , policies for prevention and , of course , questions of the pricing and thus the funding of medicines .
We came up with a global approach based on three pillars .
The first is to step up our measures in this area , on the basis of development policy ; the second is to lower the price of key drugs and the final pillar is to continue with high level research so that public research can be carried out alongside private research in this area .
We very recently began a specific action programme based on this approach which forms part of a whole raft of actions adopted by the WHO , the UN and UNICEF , the ONPI and the WTO .
I believe that we are now already seeing some of the first real effects with a number of pharmaceutical companies announcing that they are committed to lowering prices .
What part does intellectual property play in this matter ?
In our view , it has a major part to play , as intellectual property is required in order to stimulate both innovation and research .
This is the role of TRIPS , which is the WTO agreement on intellectual property and today we clearly stated that we are defending this concept .
However , we also stated and we are stating this just as clearly , that there are cases where exemptions from patent law - which is called compulsory licensing - are permitted for public health or urgent health reasons .
We would like to reiterate that the WTO agreement on intellectual property stipulates this flexibility .
The same , of course , applies to parallel imports , since the agreement leaves this open to WTO members to decide what can or cannot be done .
As far as we are concerned , we are also willing , at European Union level , to move ahead with this issue if it allows us to make progress on the issue of tiered pricing .
The legal provisions , which Mrs Carlotti mentioned , do not therefore present an obstacle .
It is the ways in which they may be interpreted that could pose a problem .
We have clearly stated our own interpretation .
This , perhaps , goes further than some other WTO members would wish , but that is the situation , and we committed ourselves during the preparatory phase for the Doha meeting and in the ONPI and the WTO to push the consensus towards our own flexible interpretation of the WTO provisions .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his very thorough answer and for his interpretation .
I think that we are on the same wavelength on this issue .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions No 33 and 34 will be taken together .
Question No 33 by ( H-0279 / 01 ) :
Subject : European Research Area and the aeronautics sector Aeronautics , the European Union 's leading export industry ( EUR 22 billion ) is also a key sector in employment ( 400 000 direct and 1.5 million indirect jobs ) and turnover ( EUR 65 billion in 1999 ) .
While the aeronautics sector provides a good example of integration at industrial level , aeronautical research is fragmented among the various Member States .
The industry does however depend on research to remain competitive .
Europe can no longer afford to waste resources by duplicating and failing to coordinate its activities .
The Commission , therefore , wished to take all appropriate action to make aeronautics an example for the implementation of the European research area .
The new Framework programme for research and innovation includes ' aeronautics and space ' as one of its seven priority thematic areas .
Can the Commission give more specific details of the resources mobilised and the strategy adopted to make aeronautics exemplary in respect of research for the European Union ?
Question No 34 by ( H-0287 / 01 ) :
Subject : European aeronautics The European Commission recently published a report entitled ' European Aeronautics : A vision for 2020 ' , which details a research and development strategy in civil aerospace .
Would the Commission indicate what specific steps it intends to take with a view to implementing this strategy , what response there has been from Member State governments , and whether such a strategy is compatible with the WTO ?
Questions to Commissioner Vitorino
The questions submitted by Mrs de Veyrac and Mr Titley deal with the Commission ' s strategy on research and development in the aeronautical sector and the measures and resources that are planned in order to implement this strategy .
I would , therefore , like to explain the action that we have taken .
In our view , the aeronautical sector is one of the best examples of the implementation of the European Research Area at a sector of industry .
In the light of global competition and given the impact of air transport on the life of European citizens , the Commission believes that it is necessary to improve the efficiency of aeronautical research through greater coordination and integration of the activities undertaken at all levels , i.e. national , European and private , into a single vision .
During the last six months of 2000 , I formed the Group of Personalities , representing all parts of the air transport system including industrialists and manufacturers , airport management , airlines , regulatory authorities , air traffic controllers and researchers , whose aim was to shape this vision .
The fruit of the group ' s labour is the report entitled ' A Vision for 2020 ' , which defines the main technological objectives that the sector has set itself over a 20 year period and the resources that need to be put into practice in order to achieve these .
The report focuses in particular on the need to improve the integration of research that is today being undertaken at various levels .
The report recommends setting up an Advisory Council for Aeronautical Research in Europe or ACAR .
ACAR will , in the main , be made up of representatives from national programmes , the industrial sector , the scientific community and the Commission .
Its aim will be to draw up a strategic research agenda that all the players of the sector agree to , which will influence the research priorities of national and Community programmes .
The Commission will make the utmost effort so that this council is up and running by the middle of this year .
The ACAR members are due to be named by the end of May and the first meeting is scheduled for June .
A first draft strategic agenda is expected at the beginning of next year .
Consultation between the various players in this sector and the Member States with regard to ACAR ' s competences and mandate has made a good start .
This has already stirred up interest within the Member States , which all wish to take part in this initiative .
A budget of EUR 1 billion for aeronautics and space will be provided for the new framework programme .
There are four priorities - competitiveness , the environment , safety and the capacity of the air transport system . These four priorities already correspond to the main objectives of the Vision for 2020 .
In order to meet these objectives , the Commission is proposing to use three major instruments .
The first is the networks of excellence , and the coordination that already exists between centres of research in the aeronautical sector should facilitate the implementation of these networks .
The second is integrated projects , which essentially involves undertaking and further developing the unifying measures of the previous model of technology platforms .
The final instrument is the European Union ' s involvement in programmes run jointly by several Member States and which are of benefit to the Community , for example under Article 169 of the Treaty , such as those we shall have the opportunity to discuss at the debate on the new framework programme .
The Commission ' s action aims , over the long term , to stimulate the coordination of research undertaken at different levels by using the unifying effect of the instruments provided for in the framework programme and is perfectly in line with the agreements of the World Trade Organisation , the research actions sought being very competitive in nature .
The Commissioner did not actually respond to my question as to what exactly the response has been from Member State governments .
Also , in relation to the WTO , I notice the report lays great stress on the fact that the United States makes a major contribution to domestic aeronautical research .
That point is precisely at the centre of the dispute over the 1992 agreement on large aircraft construction .
Does not the Commissioner see this programme as being yet another opportunity for us to have a dispute with the United States of America ?
Finally , given that much of defence expenditure is now in the aeronautical area , is there a likelihood of a spill-over of this research programme into the field of defence ?
The proposal for this programme is based on Vision 2020 , which has three main objectives - to reduce noise , to ensure greater safety and to reduce pollution .
This research is therefore of general interest , and as I already mentioned in my first speech , it is pre-competitive research , which should therefore not be compared to specific development programmes on types of aircraft .
That is why I do not believe that there will be any difficulties in this area , since we are working within the rules agreed with the World Trade Organisation , and that the objectives are important and , moreover , concern the quality of life of all European citizens , and to the safety of Europe ' s skies .
It is therefore quite acceptable that these research projects form part of this objective .
Thank you very much , Mr Busquin .
Question No 35 by ( H-0266 / 01 ) :
Subject : Denmark 's JHA opt-out Title IV of the EC Treaty does not apply to Denmark .
Nonetheless , a number of the texts adopted under Title IV do apply to Denmark by virtue of international agreements .
The Danish Government has , for example , indicated its willingness to be associated with the EURODAC regulation , the bankruptcy regulation , the Brussels I and II regulations and the regulation on the notification of documentation in civil and commercial cases .
The Danish position is based on the assumption that it enjoys freedom of choice with decisions on whether to be involved or not being taken on a case ­ by ­ case basis .
Can the Commission confirm that Denmark enjoys freedom of choice about whether to be a party to decisions taken under Title IV of the EC Treaty with the result , for example , that certain parts of decisions taken in the area of asylum and immigration can - also in the future - be acceded to by Denmark , while Denmark at the same time retains special national arrangements in other areas of asylum and immigration policy ?
Mr President , as stated in the protocol annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam , the areas covered by Title IV of the Treaty do not apply to Denmark .
Article 3 of this protocol , which incorporates the Schengen acquis into the European Union , lays down that , with regard to decisions on implementing the Schengen acquis , Denmark can decide to guarantee the transposal of these decisions into its national law , thereby binding itself under an obligation under international law to the other Member States .
With regard to issues of Community law , Denmark has reserved itself the opportunity to renounce the use of this exemption system , under the terms of its constitutional requirements and in the wake of an internal democratic debate .
Nevertheless , the Danish Government recently asked the Commission about the possibility of applying certain rules adopted in the field of cooperation in judicial and civil matters to Denmark by means of parallel agreements with a basis in international law .
A technical debate is now underway on this issue between Denmark and the Commission ' s Directorate-General for Justice and Home Affairs .
Once we have moved beyond this stage - and above all , once we have identified any difficulties in these parallel agreements - I intend to present the whole process to the Commission , that is to the whole College of Commissioners , following the exploratory technical discussions that are currently taking place . On the basis of this political debate , I also intend to lay down the future guidelines for the Commission as Guardian of the Treaties .
A very restrained thank you as I am none the wiser .
There is an ongoing debate in Denmark about Denmark ' s position .
It will be recalled that , as the Commissioner also explained , we have this exemption in Article 5 and Article 7 of the Protocol on the position of Denmark .
Article 5 is a very simple rule specifying that , if the other Member States subject to Title IV of the Treaty should decide to develop the Schengen acquis , then the Danish government and the Danish parliament may , in accordance with the constitution , decide , within a period of six months , whether Denmark should or should not take part .
The question is what a development of the Schengen acquis means .
Currently , there is the issue of the EURODAC Regulation which I believe is very closely linked to Schengen cooperation and the Schengen system . Accordingly , it might be said that asylum and immigration issues are closely linked to the Schengen problems and the Schengen system .
The question is how far we are prepared to go in applying Article 5 in developing the Schengen acquis .
Mr Krarup , the Commission is of the opinion that the Schengen rules are not the basis for either the Eurodac regulation or the future Community regulation that will replace the Dublin Convention . These are based not on the Schengen rules but directly on Article 63 ( 4 ) of the EC Treaty .
We are therefore undertaking a technical study into the possibility of implementing the Eurodac regulation and the future Dublin regulation , on the basis of a parallel agreement with Denmark , which will be in accordance with international public law . This agreement will not be based on the Schengen Agreement , but based directly on Title IV and on the possibility of implementing a parallel agreement under international public law .
Question No 36 by ( H-0276 / 01 ) :
Subject : Passport requirement for Swedish nationals travelling within the Nordic region From 25 March 2001 , Sweden and the other Nordic countries will take part in Schengen cooperation .
Current Swedish ID cards do not meet identification requirements under the Schengen provisions .
A new national ID card in Sweden may replace the Swedish passport next year .
There is contradictory information about what will happen in the meantime .
According to the Council 's answer to my question H-0145 / 01 , application of the Schengen agreement is neither contrary nor an obstacle to the Nordic passport union .
However , Article 45 of the Schengen agreement states that anyone staying in a hotel in another Schengen country must be able to produce identification and prove citizenship .
The only document Swedish citizens have which indicates their citizenship is their passport .
In the Commission 's view , are Swedish citizens required to carry their passports after 25 March 2001 when travelling in the Nordic countries until they obtain the new Swedish ID card ?
Mr President , I must emphasise , first of all , that under Community law , any citizen of the Union may enter or leave the territory of a Member State on presenting a valid identity card or passport .
If the passport is the only valid document for leaving the territory , which is the case in various Member States that do not issue identity cards , it must be valid for a period of not less than five years .
Member States themselves are responsible for setting the conditions for issuing and validating the identity papers of their nationals .
Incorporating the Schengen acquis into the European Union has not had any affect on these provisions .
According to the Commission ' s information , Sweden intends to introduce a national identity card with the status of travel document in accordance with Community directives .
Secondly , it should be pointed out that Article 45 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement stipulates that persons wishing to stay overnight in a hotel must prove their identity by presenting a valid identity document .
It should be noted that the Schengen acquis does not stipulate the type of identity document required .
Consequently and in summary , the concept of a valid identity document can be interpreted to mean that all identity documents that have been accepted to date by the Nordic States as proof of identity can , in future , be presented when booking into a hotel .
I would thank the Commissioner for his answer .
If I have understood all this correctly , a Swede does not need to carry any ID document showing that he is a Swedish citizen , in spite of Article 45 ' s stating that it must be checked whether the traveller is a citizen of a Schengen country .
Consequently , Swedish citizens are at present exempt from that rule when they travel in other Nordic countries .
Is that correct ?
I am afraid that , probably due to the translation , the situation is not clear at all .
There is no change about the status of the Swedes ' valid identity document as far as registering in hotels is concerned .
So if the document was valid to be registered in a hotel , in a Nordic state , it will go on being valid for the same purpose .
What I said was that as far as I know , up until now , the Swedish authorities have not notified any specific identity document to be recognised by all Member States as a travel document according to Directive 68 / 360 .
I hope is now clear that there is no change about the possibility of using the current Swedish identity card to register in a hotel .
We no doubt all remember that , during the Schengen negotiations , it was emphasised how important it was for the Nordic countries that the Nordic Passport Union which is nearly 50 years old and which ensures that Nordic citizens can travel freely in the Nordic countries without their passports - or other identification documents , for that matter - should not be affected by the Schengen Agreement .
Now , if I understand the Commissioner ' s answer correctly , it is nevertheless necessary to introduce passport requirements for journeys from one Nordic country to another , which means , in other words , that the Nordic Passport Union no longer exists .
The exemption from the requirement to carry passports , which we have enjoyed for nearly 50 years , no longer applies .
I am sorry I do not share your point of view .
Your freedom has been enlarged in that now you have a free area of movement throughout the Schengen area which is why , for instance , Norway and Iceland - which formed part of the Nordic free area of movement - have signed a parallel agreement with the Union to guarantee that they will also benefit from that area of free movement that is the Schengen area .
I know your political view on this issue and you know mine .
I hope that Commissioner Vitorino does not feel weighed down with too many questions about the Schengen Agreement and the Nordic exemption from having to carry a passport , but I should like to follow up what has been said by my fellow MEPs , Mr Sjöstedt and Mr Krarup .
Swedish ID documents make no mention of citizenship , but it has been possible , in spite of that , to use them within Scandinavia .
Does the Schengen Agreement mean that Swedish ID documents will not be of use and relevance within the Schengen area in future ?
If so , this would be a change for the worse for Swedish citizens .
Have I understood correctly ?
I cannot interpret Mr Vitorino ' s answer in any other way .
The only thing I would like to say is that some decisions come under the competence of the Commission , some other decisions come under the competence of the Swedish Government .
What I said and would like to reiterate is that , up to now , the Swedish authorities have not notified any specific identity document to be recognised by all Member States as a travel document according to Directive 68 / 360 , which does not mean that the Swedish Government has the intention to introduce changes in their identity cards due to the reason that you have mentioned .
There is not a specific indication of nationality in that document .
My evaluation is that the Schengen acquis does not introduce any change in national travel documents because , as far as I know , that remains strictly the responsibility of Member States .
Therefore I hope within the next few months we will be able to clarify the intentions of the Swedish Government concerning identity cards and the best interpretation of the Schengen acquis .
I can assure you that the political objective of this exercise is to make free movement of people easier , not more difficult .
Question No 37 by ( H-0311 / 01 ) :
Subject : Authorisation to carry medicines when travelling between countries in the Schengen area The Danish Government recently submitted a draft law requiring authorisation to carry medicines for private use when travelling within the Schengen area .
There is great doubt in this regard as to what is required by EU legislation and what simply derives from requirements under Danish national law .
Will the Commission , therefore , say how it interprets the rules on carrying medicines for private use within the Schengen area ?
Does EU legislation require such authorisation , and what are the rules in this respect in the other Member States of the Union ?
Article 75 is one of the provisions of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement and this seeks to allow travellers to carry narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances in connection with medical treatment .
These individuals must be in possession of a certificate issued by a competent national authority .
Pursuant to the above-mentioned article , the Schengen Executive Committee adopted , in its decision of 22 December 1994 , the form and content of this certificate and the principles governing its issue .
The Commission takes the view that a draft law in Denmark covering the subject you have raised , now matches the above-mentioned provisions .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Would you please answer the two other questions I asked on how the rules have been interpreted in other countries ?
I would very much like to hear your answer , as the debate in Denmark and the proposals put forward there seem like an April fool ' s joke .
However , 1 April was last Sunday , and now we have to look ahead , so I would therefore like to hear how other countries have tackled the issue of Article 75 .
Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , I must inform you that the interpretation of Article 75 of the Schengen Agreement was drawn up by a decision of the Schengen Executive Committee adopted on 22 December 1994 .
This decision , which was the subject of the document entitled SCH / Com-ex ( 94 ) 28rev and which was published in the Official Journal of 22 September 2000 , is applicable uniformly throughout the Schengen countries .
This means that , with the rules being identical in every country , the common form must be respected to certify the need for medical treatment allowing a citizen to carry the substances mentioned in your question .
This is the uniform implementation of a decision of the Schengen Executive Committee .
I am surprised to hear the Commissioner ' s answer .
I should like to have it confirmed that this point , referring to Article 75 , is about a development of the Schengen acquis .
We are dealing with the Protocol on Denmark , Article 5 , paragraph 2 , and I gather from the Commissioner ' s answer that any rules regarding the carrying of certificates must be adopted unanimously and that if no agreement is reached , that is if Denmark takes up another position , then the parties must enter into negotiations .
In principle , this is about a development of the Schengen acquis , a fact which I should like to hear confirmed , and when it is claimed to be about extension of freedom , that is quite ironic for me personally , as I believe it would become quite a burden for those of us who travel around with many types of euphoriants in our bags due to our delicate health .
I have the greatest respect for your opinion , but my point of view is as follows : a Danish law , as stated in your question does not contravene the Schengen acquis .
Incidentally , I do not understand how Protocol 5 can be invoked - there is no contradiction between the decision of the Schengen Executive Committee and the free and sovereign decision of the Kingdom of Denmark .
This does not constitute an exception , but rather a guarantee for the uniform implementation of the rule .
Question No 38 by ( H-0320 / 01 ) :
Subject : Protection of the EU 's borders Is the Commission prepared to carry out a feasibility study of the creation of EU protective units at the external borders , and what is the current status of the administrative work on setting up the European Police Academy ?
Questions to Commissioner Patten
Mr President , as Parliament , and Mr Posselt especially , knows , for the Member States party to Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community , the principles relating to controls and surveillance of external borders of the European Union are governed by Community law , in accordance with the Protocol implementing the Schengen acquis in the European Union , as drawn up by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
In my view and in the Commission ' s view , there are now several reasons for considering the creation of a European corps of external border guards .
Several Member States also seem to want to explore this option further in order to strengthen resources for combating illegal immigration .
The countries who are candidates to join the European Union will be required , in the long term - I stress the long term - to play a full role in implementing the Schengen acquis and the acquis communautaire , in the area , amongst others , of controlling the European Union ' s external borders and of the unchecked free movement of individuals within internal borders .
Even from the point of view of developing Community law , the only aim of external border controls is to check individuals purely in terms of migration .
The controls also seek to ensure monitoring of external borders in terms of combating crime , or applying customs regulations and to ensure that various technical regulations that apply to vehicles or to dangerous or illicit merchandise are being respected .
That is why - and I am able to confirm this - the Italian Government has requested the Commission ' s support to undertake a feasibility study on the possibility of setting up a corps of European border guards .
This is an initiative that was also supported by several other Member States and which the Commission favours .
As you know , any decision regarding this sort of programme supported by the Odysseus programme depends on the Management Committee .
What I can say to you is that the Commission supports the Italian initiative .
To turn to the subject of the European Police College , which was created as a result of the Council decision of 22 December 2000 , to which the European Parliament also contributed in the form of Mr Posselt ' s report - I would like to say that in terms of its organisation , the College ' s rules of procedure will be submitted for the Council ' s information .
The headquarters of the European Police College ' s secretariat will be established on the basis of a forthcoming decision by the Council .
Its operating budget will also be set .
I can inform you that the College ' s governing board approved its draft financial regulation on 23 March and this will now be submitted for approval to the Council .
With regard to the College ' s working programme , we are working on the basis that the Police College must not be used to finance existing national actions and that it must concentrate on a few priority areas which are currently being defined .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your very precise and competent answer .
I have just one further question : when do you think the feasibility study on the creation of EU protective units will be submitted ?
As you know , it was due to my report three years ago that this House has proposed the creation of these units .
Yes , I wholeheartedly agree with you .
I certainly recall the European Parliament ' s proposal .
I hope that we will be able to approve the Italian proposal as soon as possible .
As you know , the proposals had to be tabled by 31 March .
The Management Committee will now meet and make a decision .
I hope that the proposal will be approved , so that it can be implemented during 2001 .
I hope that by the end of the year , the Italian Government will present the feasibility study , which was , moreover , undertaken in close consultation with several other governments , which have already given their support and backing to the possibility of creating a common guard force for Europe ' s borders .
Question No 39 by ( H-0249 / 01 ) :
Subject : Crisis in the Balkans As developments in the Balkans crisis have revealed , recognition of the borders of many countries in the region is a matter of direct or indirect contention .
A case in point is the border between the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) and Serbia , on which the two countries themselves have agreed but which Albanian groups in FYROM itself and in Kosovo refuse to accept .
What is the Commission 's view of these current developments and , in particular , what is its position on the acceptance of borders as a stabilising force in the Balkans crisis ?
Mr President , I very much welcome the opportunity of answering this question and I am grateful for what you said a moment or two ago .
My time of departure is largely determined by the fact that I took until 5.00 a.m. this morning to get back from Macedonia , which is the subject of this question .
As the honourable Member knows , the governments in Skopje and Belgrade recently reached agreement on border demarcation between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The European Union very much welcomes that agreement .
Since the appearance of the armed Albanian extremists , the European Union has made clear its very strong support for the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and we have made clear as well our support for the inviolability of borders .
We have condemned the violence and we have argued passionately , as was the case for example at the European Council last weekend , that grievances must be addressed through democratic institutions .
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is moving towards Europe .
As the honourable Member will know , we are looking forward to signing a stabilisation and association agreement with the Macedonian leadership at the beginning of next week .
The European Union has been intensively involved in trying to manage and prevent this crisis .
We have all worked very closely together - the Presidency , the High Representative , the Member States and the Commission - and we have also worked closely with the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation .
My latest trip to Skopje was yesterday .
I went for the second time in about ten days with the High Representative .
It was his third trip in that period .
We have made clear once again that the Albanian population need to see the real opportunity for promoting their interests through political means .
We are very pleased at the attempt made by President Trajkovski to launch a process of dialogue in Skopje .
The first meeting of the political leaders that he brought together took place yesterday .
We are ready to help in that process of dialogue but I have to make it clear that we do not think it is our role to mediate .
It is our role to assist people in taking things forward but it is not our job to take the responsibility off their shoulders .
We appealed yesterday to the PDP Party to attend meetings of the dialogue in future .
We had individual meetings with all the party leaders .
All of them expressed their commitment to democracy .
All of them expressed their commitment to dialogue .
All of them expressed their commitment to joining the European family .
So we now look to them to make good the undertakings that they gave us yesterday .
We hope that they will talk to one another through the fora created by President Trajkovski .
We hope that all of them , including the opposition , will participate in the signing ceremony of the stabilisation and association agreement next week .
We have said that we stand ready in the Commission to support the process of building a successful , multi-ethnic Community through our CARDS Programme and so on .
We have made it clear to the Albanian leaders in Kosovo that the donor community 's patience is not unlimited and that they have to make clear their own absolute abhorrence of violence in the attempt to move away from extremism .
I think we have been doing all we can , but the political leaders in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia now have to show the leadership which is going to be required in order to get their country through this difficult period .
Commissioner , thank you very much for your detailed reply .
I must say that I agree with the way in which you have set things out , but there is one problem . You said , ' ... for promoting their interests through political means . '
As you know , there is a scenario , which is the subject of a great deal of discussion , whereby with institutional and constitutional change in the FYROM , i.e. by converting it into a kind of federation or confederation , political pressure could arise - especially at difficult times , such as now - for subsequent secession .
It is a model which , unfortunately , we have seen and several countries backed it in the former Yugoslavia .
I would like it to be made clear from your side - I think you expressed it well , but you could perhaps stress a little more - that no such way out will be given to extremists inside this country or , as you well know , outside it , to political forces in Kosovo .
I would like to go further than that , if I may .
First of all , it has to be the way forward for southeast Europe to turn its back once and for all on violence and the attempt to effect political change through bloodshed , mayhem , bombs and bullets .
That is the path to Europe .
That is what I will be discussing again tomorrow when I am in Croatia where they have , in my judgment , turned their faces to democracy and their backs to violence .
It is the point I will be making in Albania on Thursday when we have the high level steering group which will be discussing the stabilisation and association process for Albania .
I pay tribute now to the unequivocal statements made by the political leaders of the Albanian state in the last few days .
But I want to go further .
Those who believe that we can secure peace and prosperity in southeast Europe by fiddling with borders here and there are deluding themselves , and deluding themselves seriously .
There is not just one Presevo Valley in the southeast of Europe .
There are , in political terms , figuratively several .
So if you start fiddling with the borders here you end up fiddling with the borders everywhere .
Every time you do that you encourage those who think they can get their own political way by blowing up houses , buses with innocent women and children in them , or shooting police officers going about their lawful duties .
I endorse what the honourable Member says , but I would go a stage further .
There have been excellent signs in southeast Europe over the last 18 months of people coming back towards the democratic family .
I took particular satisfaction myself in looking at the B92 radio station website at the weekend , which had the headline " Slobo in the slammer " .
I thought we had come a very long way in the last few years .
I know that occasionally there are problems and not everything progresses smoothly , but I very much hope that we will not lose what has been achieved in the last 18 months .
To what extent would the Commissioner agree with me that the origins of the current crisis in Macedonia actually lie purely and simply with the activities of criminal gangs looking to protect their smuggling rackets and taking advantage of the weak security of the border with FYROM , and that what we need to do is to tighten up on those criminals who have used the issue of minority rights as fuel to keep the fires of discontent going in order to cover up their activities ?
What is at stake here is that gangsters are seeking to undermine democracy and peace and stability to line their own pockets .
Primarily we have to take tough action to prevent that illegal activity so that the political situation can be stabilised .
I once heard somebody in another part of Europe , where I was chairing a commission on policing and security , make what seemed to me to be a curious distinction between what they described as ' good honest old-fashioned crime ' and political extremism using bombs and bullets .
The fact of the matter is there is no good honest old-fashioned crime , but there are plenty of examples where organised criminality , organised criminal behaviour becomes interwoven with political extremism and its manifestation in organised violence .
We have seen that in so many parts of Europe and we are seeing it once again in parts of south-east Europe , including no doubt the Kosovo-Macedonian and Kosovo-Serbia borders .
While there are doubtless some who espouse political extremism for political reasons , there are others who see the advantage of cloaking criminal action - trafficking in drugs , trafficking in smuggled cigarettes , trafficking in human beings ; they see political causes as a way of providing an umbrella for that criminality .
Whatever it is , it is wrong , it must stop , it is what the past was like in south-east Europe .
We must do all we can in the European Union to make sure that the future is very different indeed .
Is the Commissioner satisfied that KFOR is adequately controlling and successfully preventing movements of fighters and arms across the border between Kosovo and FYROM ?
I had an opportunity to discuss that issue with the Swedish Foreign Minister , Anna Lindh , in the presidency of the Council , and the High Representative with KFOR , in Pristina about ten days ago , with the Special Representative , Mr Hakerup who is doing such an excellent job and also with KFOR and the KFOR commander .
They assured us that they were stepping up security on the border .
It is , like a lot of borders , difficult to give cast iron guarantees of security about the ability to pass from one side to the other .
It is very mountainous terrain as the honourable Member probably knows but nevertheless I am sure that KFOR need to continue to do more .
They are committing more troops .
They are making a greater effort .
It is essential that they do because there is no doubt at all that there have been people moving backwards and forwards across the border and the political consequences in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia of movement of extremists from Kosovo into Macedonia make what has been a difficult crisis for them to face even more political and therefore even more awkward .
So yes , I hope KFOR will be able to do more .
We have certainly had a dialogue with them about that and I very much hope that the assurances they have been given will be manifested on the ground .
It is a difficult job but one which I hope they will be able to do even better .
As the author is not present , Question No 40 lapses .
Question No 41 by ( H-0274 / 01 ) :
Subject : Fundamentalist hostility to women in Saudi Arabia The laws currently in force in Saudi Arabia discriminate against women .
For instance , women are stoned for committing adultery and condemned to death for apostasy .
More than 28 women having been executed since 1990 . In its contempt for women , the State discriminates against them .
They are subjected to gender apartheid , arbitrarily detained and imprisoned , and watched by the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice , also known as the al-Mutawa ' een .
In view of this situation , what measures does the Commission intend to propose with a view to improving the human rights situation for Saudi women ?
The situation of women in Saudi Arabia is a matter of very considerable concern .
The European Union has raised this issue on a number of occasions in the context of the overall human rights situation in Saudi Arabia .
We have done this through démarches , we have done this in political dialogue and we have done this in statements on human rights policy .
For some years an exchange of views on human rights has taken place between the European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council countries , including Saudi Arabia .
The situation of women has been raised by the European Union in the context of the European Union-Gulf Cooperation Council political dialogue .
The issue has also been raised by the Commission in the negotiations on a free trade agreement with the Gulf Cooperation Council countries in which an article on human rights and democratic principles will be included .
Moreover , the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia has been raised by the European Union in the UN Commission on Human Rights .
Last year this led to some modest but positive steps by Saudi Arabia , to which I can return if the honourable Member would like .
I hope that these relatively positive signals in the area of human rights which we have seen from Saudi Arabia in the last year will be followed by positive actions in Saudi legislation , but I have to say that having read , for example , the report by Amnesty International and other reports on the situation I can well understand why the honourable Member has tabled this question .
Commissioner , could you expand a little on your answer and tell me whether the Commission has made any specific proposal in this respect ?
I would also like to know whether , within the existing political dialogue , the Commission is prepared to raise this issue of respect for the human rights of Saudi women .
In case I did not make myself clear , let me underline the fact that the Commission is exceptionally concerned by particular cases of the abuse of human rights , including the situation affecting women .
I referred to , for example , the special report by Amnesty International .
I could have referred to the EU statement in the UN Commission on Human Rights as well .
We do not , however , have any representation in Saudi Arabia , nor do we have any representation in the Gulf .
Nor do we have any competence to take any particular steps or to make a stand on an individual level in these particular cases .
However , we participate in the European Union démarches which are agreed upon regarding human rights issues in the framework of the CFSP .
So the honourable Member is right to raise the issue .
It is an issue - I repeat again - in the framework of the political dialogue that we have with Saudi Arabia and the Gulf Cooperation Council countries and we will continue to do so .
Question No 42 by ( H-0277 / 01 ) :
Subject : Deployment of Russian nuclear weapons at Kaliningrad According to several reports in reputable Nordic media , such as Swedish Radio 's news programme Ekot and the Oslo newspaper Aftenposten , the Russian military is planning , or has already carried out , a major deployment of nuclear weapons in the Kaliningrad region .
Such action by the Russians would seriously affect military détente in the entire Baltic region since it would mean a considerable change in the military threat both to several EU Member States and to a number of applicant countries .
Russian Foreign Minister Ivanov has given Commissioner Patten his complete assurance that no deployment of Russian nuclear weapons has taken place or is planned .
In what way is the Commission monitoring developments in this matter , which is of such importance for the whole of the Baltic region , and what information has the European Union been given recently from the responsible political representatives in Russia such as the President , the Foreign Minister and the Defence Minister ?
The Commission shares the view that if nuclear weapons were deployed in the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad this would have very serious repercussions for cooperation in the Baltic Sea area , particularly for our northern dimension policies .
It would also run against Russia 's stated policy in the region .
During the visit which we made in February to Moscow and Kaliningrad - I went there with the Presidency , with Foreign Minister Anna Lindh - the issue was raised .
The Russian side firmly denied the allegations which had been published in the media .
The Russian side gave assurances that there were no plans regarding the deployment of nuclear weapons in Kaliningrad .
I have seen the press and broadcast reports to which the honourable Member draws attention .
That is why we raised the issue with the Russian side , but I repeat the assurances which they have given us .
I should like to thank Commissioner Patten for that clear answer .
I have had the privilege - in another , more informal Nordic context - of addressing this serious problem with the Commissioner .
It is my understanding that the Commission has had assurances at the highest Russian level that no deployment has taken place .
In spite of that , I should like to ask two follow-up questions : how has this information come to be accorded so much credibility by the media ; and was this a subject that was discussed at all with President Putin at the European Council in Stockholm ?
Mr Putin said quite a lot at the European Summit in Stockholm , including giving the Macedonian leadership the advice to follow what he had done in Chechnya , which , I am bound to say , I did not think was a very wise piece of advice to give them .
It seems to me that the last thing anyone should do is to try to reduce Tetovo to the state of Grozny .
I did not agree with those remarks of President Putin .
The Commission does not , of course , have the means to monitor Russia 's compliance with the assurances that we have had , but we would expect Member States to raise any information indicating the contrary in the appropriate European Union fora .
We will be having , in the margins of the General Affairs Council at the beginning of next week , a discussion on the northern dimension on the basis of the proposals which have been put forward by the Commission .
That discussion will involve not only the Member States of the European Union , but also countries affected by our northern dimension policies and aspirations including , of course , the Russian Federation .
And I hope that the Russian Federation will make it clear once again that these press reports and media reports are untrue .
One central part of our northern dimension policies is our attempt to suggest ways in which we can both help Kaliningrad to deal with the consequences of enlargement - that is , of being surrounded by Poland and Lithuania as Members of the European Union ; and we have suggested as well , which is slightly different , ways in which Kaliningrad can be helped to deal with problems which have nothing to do with enlargement , but which have an impact on the whole area .
We are keen to play our part in helping Kaliningrad , and it would not be remotely helpful if these media reports turned out even to be a percentage true .
We thank Mr Patten for his cooperation and we wish him success in the Balkans .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 43 to 74 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

People with disabilities
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0084 / 2001 ) by Mrs Hermange , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - Towards a barrier-free Europe for people with disabilities [ COM ( 2000 ) 284 - C5 ­ 0632 / 2000 - 2000 / 2296 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , our guests from the organisations who are taking their seats in the public gallery , forgive me if I am speaking somewhat slowly , but today is the first time that our debate will be interpreted using sign language , and I would like to inform the Commission that I have also had this report translated into Braille , and this is the first time that a parliamentary assembly has done this .
The report will be sent by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to all the organisations in all our countries .
It is a joy and a source of satisfaction to me to present this evening to the European Parliament the report written in response to the Commission ' s communication . It also gives me grounds for hope .
It is a joy because I am aware that this report has perhaps more influence than others , or at least in a more direct manner , in bringing about the Europe that I have been hoping and praying for , a humane Europe in which we are all involved and which we all hope to achieve , since we are well aware that , having achieved the single market and monetary union , the 21st century will have to try to bring about a humane European Union .
Drafting this report has only served to strengthen my belief that we can only make the future of Europe attractive if we start working on a basis of solidarity , justice and respect for others .
This occasion also provides me with a source of satisfaction because , although my name is on the report , it is above all the product of a new working method in which many useful contacts were fostered with the organisations for people with disabilities , which helped me to write it , particularly the European Forum for Disabled People , and I would like to acknowledge here their extremely valuable contribution to this matter .
I also derive satisfaction from the high level of interest shown by my fellow Members , since they tabled over 100 amendments to the original draft .
In this respect , I would like to say that out of the amendments that were recently tabled , I shall accept two amendments from the Socialist group .
I would also like to thank the Commission ' s Directorate-General for Education and Culture for taking part and the European Agency for Special Needs Education , which is based in Copenhagen .
Lastly , the report fills me with hope because , if it is adopted by the European Parliament , it will enable many doors to be opened to the 37 million citizens who live with a disability .
This report will be considered from four perspectives : firstly , ' mainstreaming ' and the right to be different , secondly , ' family and disability ' , because it is true that a disabled person , whether an infant or an old person , is nonetheless someone ' s child or parent and it is within this family environment that the most support can be found .
The third perspective is to overcome obstacles and access problems .
The fourth perspective is that of consultation and information .
On the basis of these perspectives , we put together a number of proposals .
The first is , of course , to start working on the year 2003 , which is to be named the European Year of the Disabled Citizens , as announced at Nice .
Secondly , we believe that it is important that a number of measures be taken in terms of access to benefits .
If Italian , French , Belgian or Greek workers leave their own country to work elsewhere , they should continue to receive the benefits to which they are entitled as a disabled person .
This also involves mutual recognition of cards carried by people with disabilities throughout the Union .
The issue of access should also be extended to education .
We all know that disabled people are not fully or properly integrated into school life .
That is why I can announce now that on 26 November 2001 , the first European meeting dedicated to teaching and disabilities will be held at the Senate in Paris , in conjunction with the European Academy of Medicine .
The issue of access also includes transport and public buildings .
We heard a speech made by Brian Crowley at the inauguration of this building .
In this respect , we can announce a forthcoming directive , for example with regard to lifts .
I hope that , in this directive , mandatory standards can be specified for disabled people .
That is what I wanted to tell you very briefly , by pointing out that the report that is presented to you today is both a culmination and a point of departure .
At a time when we often speak about ' lobbying ' , I hope that , in view of the year 2003 , along with all the organisations , we can use our influence on all the Commission and Council bodies to translate these recommendations - or at least some of them - into directives , so that a European disability policy can be developed in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Hermange on her work on achieving a barrier-free Europe for people with disabilities .
I believe it is necessary to complete the strategy for integrating the rights of people with disabilities into Community policies , particularly the transport sector , access to buildings , the information society and consumer policy .
However , I am convinced that the issue of practically integrating people with disabilities will depend not only on traditional obstacles , such as the physical barriers enclosing public areas and transport , being overcome , but , above all , on the general public taking a new approach to the everyday situation of people with disabilities .
It is clear that , in these cases , psychological factors and people 's prejudices may be much greater obstacles than those created by physical barriers .
Another important point to stress , which also featured in the Stockholm Presidency Conclusions , is that of the integration of people with disabilities into the world of work .
We must work towards a situation where companies employ more than the obligatory number of people with disabilities , making things easier for companies by consistently reducing or abolishing both the contribution and tax burdens .
This would have the positive effect of using this social potential , which is currently only partially exploited , and would benefit the entire economy .
Currently , 37 million European citizens suffer from some form of disability and the unemployment rate for this category is over three times higher than average .
Moreover , let us not forget that the quest to achieve full employment in the Union does not mean concentrating solely on job creation but involves providing better jobs for all people , including those with disabilities .
Lastly , I consider it essential for research in Europe to play a fundamental role , through its centres , in the development of technologies intended to improve the quality of life of people with disabilities .
In this way , we would be able to close the gap between Europe and the United States of America .
Finally , may I emphasise the role that the Member States must play in improving the skills and promoting the specific professional training of people who cooperate within voluntary associations and the social cooperatives , in order to provide adequate professional training which is suited to the different forms of disabilities .
Mr President , last Saturday I took part in a rally called " Rights Now " by disabled people in Trafalgar Square in London , where disabled speakers told us how hospital consultants denied them medical treatment because their quality of life was not equal to that of able-bodied patients .
The new charging policies for social care services effectively stop them from benefiting from those essential services .
Whereas sexism and racism are well-known terms , disability discrimination is barely referred to in public discourse .
I start my speech with this bleak assessment because in our proper desire to support the Commission in their barrier-free Europe communication , and Mrs Hermange , in her excellent response , we risk forgetting the very real exclusion from every aspect of public life which is the daily reality for disabled people in our societies .
In the strong consensus we have achieved in supporting the bulk of the proposals let us remember we will encounter real conflict in delivering on the aims agreed .
We welcome the European Commission 's proposal to make 2003 the year of disabled citizens but its impact will be diminished if the Commission does not , during that same year , publish a general disability discrimination directive which offers comprehensive civil rights to disabled people in Europe , similar to the American Disabilities Act , on the other side of the Atlantic .
We are pleased that the Socrates Programme offers additional support for disabled participants , but point out that there is a long way to go before the extra costs of disability , the provision of specialist transport , personal assistance and sign language interpreters are provided for in all mainstream European programmes to make equal participation a reality .
I welcome the sign language interpretation taking place in both the Chamber and the public gallery .
I only wish we could see it regularly in the European Parliament .
We emphasise that the specialist and mainstream provision can go hand-in-hand and can complement each other , that the loss of the tied aspects of the research and development programme were not fully replaced with mainstreaming and that a specialist disability section should be allocated in the sixth framework programme now being discussed .
We point out that fine words about free movement can never be fully realised until difficult issues for Member States , including the protection for social security benefits for disabled workers crossing our borders , can be tackled .
We watch carefully when talk about interdepartmental cooperation in the Commission , on public procurement for example , shows steadfast opposition by DG internal market against awarding public contracts with full reference to companies ' equal employment record .
We ask the Commissioner for Employment to identify a clear timetable for binding disability access standards to the built environment to be established , and , equally , to ensure seamless access by disabled persons to all modes of public transport .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Hermange on an excellent report .
I would also like to congratulate her for making it available in braille and through sign language interpreters .
This is such a good report because of the cross-party cooperation , similar to the cross-party cooperation there was on the article concerning anti-discrimination , and because of the input from the disabled people 's organisations themselves .
We had 97 amendments in committee , and we have only five for this plenary session .
That demonstrates how we have all worked together and particularly that Mrs Hermange has listened to the points that have been put to her and incorporated them into this report .
I hope also that this report will act as a springboard for the year 2003 , the Year of Disabled Citizens , but hopefully we can bring forward the disability directive that Mr Howitt has just referred to within that year , so as to actually make a commitment to a positive disability directive .
This report is about breaking down barriers for disabled people , to get rid of the prejudices that disabled people face in their daily lives across the European Union .
That is what we are aiming to achieve .
It is disgraceful that we need this report , that disabled people are not treated like other people .
We must make sure that disabled people are mainstreamed , that they are not sidelined , that they are taken into account in all sectors - in the information society , in public procurement , in employment .
As Mr Mantovani said , the level of unemployment is three times higher for disabled people .
Let us hope that this report , together with the employment directive , will address that issue .
We must look at all the issues .
I would like to conclude by saying again to Mrs Hermange that she has produced an excellent report but one that we must make sure that we put into practice .
Fine words are one thing , making sure that in practice disabled people are treated exactly the same as everyone else is another .
Mr President , if I had an hour instead of a minute I could maybe touch on some of the key points , however , in the European Parliament we have to work within these limits .
At the outset I want to congratulate and thank Madam Hermange for her advocacy on behalf of people with disabilities and in particular for her willingness to take on board new ideas with regard to creating a barrier-free Europe .
Any charter of rights , any constitution will tell you , that all people are borne equal , yet every single day disabled people in the European Union are treated as unequal .
In fact , in many scenarios they are treated as inferior beings to the rest of society .
I can bring hundreds of examples of discrimination , of ignorance , thousands of examples of prejudice .
When we speak about a barrier-free Europe for people with disabilities , our main focus is always on legislation , on new innovation with regard to buildings or access to transport .
These are all key and important elements , but the first thing that we have to overcome , the first barrier that has to be jumped is a psychological barrier and the prejudices within each and every one of us .
When we see someone with a disability , instead of focusing on the disability , let us treat everyone as equal , focus on their ability and give them the tools of information , of training , of education and of opportunity to really show how much ability they actually have .
I commend this report to the House and would ask that it should not just be an expression of good intentions or the conscience of the Members of this House or of the Commission , but lead to real action before 2003 , so that then when we celebrate the European Year for the Disabled Citizen , we can actually say that we have made progress and moved beyond some of the barriers .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Hermange on the quality of her report and also on her generosity in accepting the amendments presented in committee , which will have contributed to enriching the report but , above all , in taking on board the differing sensitivities in dealing with measures for combating a possible situation of inequality : the inequality resulting from disability .
Although we might not realise it , we are not nevertheless mistaken in stating that the number of people suffering some form of disability in the European Union stands at around 10 % of the population , which currently means some 37 million people , and that disability is not a homogenous category .
We could say that there is no such thing as disability , but rather there are disabled people and therefore , whether the disabilities are visible or invisible , slight or serious , single or multiple , chronic or intermittent , whether they affect mobility , hearing , sight or speech , all of these people - and I repeat , people - have to face difficult barriers when it comes to accessing the various aspects or areas of their social lives despite these limitations .
I would like specifically to refer to the area of employment in relation to this policy which is intended to create a barrier-free Europe and furthermore a Europe with a high level of employment .
And therefore , to name but a few factors , we should refer to the adaptation of the procedures for examinations and tests of the abilities of disabled candidates ; access to specific training activities for general employees and , perhaps , for public officials in particular , with reduced abilities ; to measures for the retention of staff who have suffered some incapacity during , or in the execution of , their work ; to the reorganisation of work and flexible hours , part-time work , etc .
It seems to me to be extremely important that 2003 be declared European Year of Disabled Citizens .
It seems equally important - maybe more - that each day we reinforce the idea that each and every disabled person is one more citizen , one more European of the almost 400 million Europeans who are protected by Article 13 of the EC Treaty and who expect specific actions , the coordination of policies within the European Union and who expect to see an increase in people ' s awareness and sensitivity , since it may be that the main barrier they face is a lack of awareness .
Mr President , I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur for a good report and for the sensitivity she has shown in accepting arguments from the various political groups and in listening to the organisations and the movement representing people with disabilities .
She has been exemplary in the way she has attended to her task as rapporteur .
People with disabilities are discriminated against today .
Freedom of movement , which is basic to EU cooperation , is significantly more difficult for people with disabilities to make use of when it comes to seeking work or , in the case of young people , studying in other countries .
There is clear discrimination in this area .
The same applies to the labour market .
Unemployment among people with disabilities is very high .
They also find it more difficult to achieve the kind of access to information we often discuss nowadays .
We must adopt a pro-active attitude , for all this can be prevented .
Disability is not a static phenomenon .
It is the environment which is at fault , and this can be changed .
Nowadays , we have interpretation using sign language , for example .
We can design buildings and workplaces differently , making them more accessible to people with disabilities .
This is something which is possible to implement , because it is about changes to the environment .
We can implement changes .
The change must affect all areas of policy , moreover .
Not only can social , transport or labour market policies be changed , but all policy areas .
In the labour market , where unemployment is approximately three times higher for people with disabilities , it is important that , in addition to devising indicators for improving older people ' s , women ' s and other groups ' chances of obtaining work , we should also include people with disabilities .
Many people have pointed out how important a change in social attitudes is to integration .
I myself come from the world of education .
It is important for people with disabilities not to be hidden away but to be included in the world of education so that everyone can obtain education and training on the same terms and so that we see how people with different qualities are able to work together .
That is incredibly important if attitudes are to be changed .
Finally , it is important for voluntary organisations and organisations representing people with disabilities to be integrated into this work .
Let the Year of Disabled Citizens be a point of departure for an offensive in which we devise new directives and a new action programme , so that we can obtain a Europe without obstacles and with equal opportunities for all .
Mr President , the report by our fellow Member , Marie-Thérèse Hermange , gives some very positive support to the awareness campaign proposed by the Commission for the year 2003 , which has been declared the European Year of Disabled Citizens .
We need to change our way of thinking , but I believe that it is crucial to propose a series of measures , as Mrs Hermange has , in favour of a genuine policy of non-discrimination .
To be recognised as being different , but having the right to be fairly treated is the philosophy that runs through all the proposals , particularly those relating to easy access to the work place and to public spaces , the exportability of disability benefits for workers and dependent persons within the EU or the mutual recognition of national cards carried by people with disabilities .
The report also stresses the need for a sense of responsibility with regard to equal treatment in the labour market , vocational training and education .
Professional integration is therefore associated with social integration .
In this respect , the report shows that the value of the work performed by a person with a disability cannot be measured solely in terms of competitiveness .
I believe that these are ambitious guidelines that give a true reflection of the overall thinking of the parliamentary committee concerned and the determination of the organisations representing people with disabilities .
I would add that the proposal to monitor and evaluate the measures adopted seems to be a very positive step , as does the transition from a simple intergovernmental policy to a Community policy in this area .
I can only see two shortcomings .
On the one hand , the report adopts , in my view , an extremely hesitant attitude towards businesses with regard to the employment of people with disabilities , and the proposal regarding the income of people with disabilities who are in employment is much too weak - and I quote ' an income at least equal to the level of benefits received by people who are not in employment ' .
On the other hand , the ambiguous nature of the part of paragraph 20 which relates to research into therapies at the beginning of life must , in my opinion , be withdrawn , which justifies the amendment tabled by my group .
Incidentally , this report was much needed and I believe , as do my colleagues , that it is also extremely good .
Mr President , after listening to the Members who have spoken before me and with whom I totally agree , I have had to change my views and alter the content of the speech I had prepared to give during this debate .
Mr President , have you seen how we all agree on this issue ?
There is no dissent : we all want society to recognise that people with disabilities should receive what it is right for them to have .
However , people have been saying these sorts of things for 35 years , and still nothing tangible has been done .
In your opinion , who is responsible for this , Commissioner Diamantopoulou ?
The answer is clear , for the bench normally occupied by the culprits is empty : it is the Council 's bench .
It is the governments which do not want to give people with disabilities what it is right to give them .
And it is the Council of Ministers of the European Union that has the power to do something : its absence tonight is proof of that .
And that means the Swedish Presidency , which we all consider to be one of the most enlightened .
Well then , Commissioner Diamantopoulou , I am sending you a message saying that I am sure you are the best ambassador and determined supporter of the rights of people with disabilities : it is the governments and the Council of Ministers of the European Union who have to do what we all agree has to be done .
If nothing has been done thus far , it is because the governments of our 15 States are blind , deaf and dumb .
They are the true disabled in this European society .
Mr President , this communication reflects the European Commission ' s intention to maintain and further promote the policy for a European Union without barriers .
All that remains to be seen , between now and 2003 , is just how serious the intentions behind this policy are .
This sort of policy can only be implemented through a specific programme of actions , target evaluations , statistics and specific , self-imposed deadlines .
Mrs Hermange ' s report is , without exaggeration , a particularly important paper because it captures all aspects of the problem with perfect clarity and proposes a universal policy at all levels and in the broadest possible sense , by setting specific targets .
We need to recognise the importance of this basic position on people with disabilities , irrespective of their individual disability , and of their needs as a whole as citizens , producers and consumers .
We agree that the initiatives taken under this new approach are not tantamount to concessions or generosity or evaluated merely as costs , but form part of our productive system , which they further , and of our social model , which they strengthen .
This new concept should also inform corresponding policies in the Member States .
The point is whether or not the Member States are mature enough to look at it from this angle .
It is no easy task .
If it is to succeed , we must alter entrenched , opposing perceptions and mobilise the public sectors responsible , in order to prove that policies in education , culture , sport , employment and other sectors cannot succeed unless they incorporate the problems of persons with disabilities .
So the message is that we are moving from an awareness to practicalities and that the aim is to ensure that these people play a full part in economic and social life .
In the final analysis , with increasing numbers of disabilities as the result of road traffic accidents and accidents at work , we are all potentially members of this group of people and this issue does not only concern a number of unlucky , preordained people ; it concerns all of us .
Mr President , the report quite rightly speaks out against discrimination , of which 37 million disabled people in the European Union are victims .
However , to create a barrier-free Europe for disabled people , to enable them to lead a life and have a career as everyone else does not just require good intentions ; it also requires resources .
Yet , if we take just these examples , although the efforts made to provide education are scandalously inadequate , although the most basic facilities are lacking in public places and transport , it really is because Member States , instead of providing the money needed to this basic form of solidarity , spend it on financial support and subsidies to employers .
And how can we not condemn the derisory amount that those who are unable to work receive in benefits ? How can we tolerate a situation in which insurance companies refuse to insure disabled people or overcharge them , which is a form of discrimination .
It is a pious hope to merely ask the Commission to propose that Member States urge companies to employ disabled workers .
Even in the Member States which have financial penalties for employers who disregard the quotas for employing disabled people , the employers prefer to pay the fine and not employ them .
When it comes to commercial contracts , however , legislators know how to impose tough rules .
Well , equally harsh mandatory measures must be taken against employers who refuse to employ disabled people or who do not adapt the workplace as necessary .
Mr President , I should like to offer my special congratulations to Mrs Hermange on her very comprehensive report . I note that , like many of her fellow members , she has identified two basic aspects to the problem .
The first is preconception and relates to cultural and political change and the second is the need for equal opportunities and equal access to all types of activity .
This second objective of equal access means specific policies for 12 % of Europe ' s citizens .
To give you a clear idea of the numbers involved , 37 million people with disabilities equate to about 9 countries the size of Denmark .
And the Commission communication , like Mrs Hermange ' s report , emphasizes the need for a horizontal approach to the issue of disability , i.e. the need to approach all policies and to take account of this aspect in all types of decision , which is why the communication also specifically refers to the need for access to buildings , the architectural dimension , employment , transport , research , technology , education and health .
I should like to point out that we have had three interesting examples of this in the short interval between the Commission communication and the report .
First , the endeavour concerning the rights of airline passengers .
This consultation at European level , which is now ready for signing , involved the airlines and the Commission , as well as groups of people with disabilities , the aim being to agree on specific , binding undertakings to safeguard the rights of all passengers and people with disabilities .
The second interesting example is the e-EUROPE initiative , which incorporates five different specific lines of approach defining the needs of people with disabilities as regards access to all the new technologies and IT systems .
Finally , the third example is the programme for research and technology announced recently , which again includes both specific commitments to special technologies for aids and appliances to assist people with disabilities and social research and studies .
Honourable members , as you have rightly pointed out , we need specific action and , of course , we need to take account of the fact that , at European level , there is the potential to add value to the policies of the Member States , given that this sector still comes almost entirely within the jurisdiction of the Member States .
Nonetheless , I think that there are several specific issues worth mentioning here , such as legislation .
Thanks to the catalytic role of the European Parliament , we recently managed to adopt the directive banning discrimination against people with disabilities in the workplace in record time .
This directive represents a truly historic decision by the institutions of the European Union and the challenge now is to ensure that it is applied correctly .
In addition , all the action programmes currently being developed and announced by the Commission contain specific reference to and a commitment towards people with disabilities ; this applies to the EQUAL initiative , the programmes against discrimination and exclusion and the fifth women ' s programme .
I also think employment policy and strategy are worth mentioning .
Last year , at Parliament ' s suggestion , the Commission agreed that our objective should be to include persons with disabilities in training and the employment strategy , an objective which was not , however , accepted by the Council of Ministers .
We shall come back to this again this year , in a bid to set specific quantitative targets at European and national level for the participation of people with disabilities in the employment strategy programme , be it in the form of training , lifelong learning , access to new technologies or subsidised jobs .
This will be one of our priorities over coming years .
I should also mention that the Commission is preparing a communication on companies ' social responsibilities .
This communication will take particular account - and we are already working on this with special networks of companies - of the fact that each company is personally and specifically responsible for applying social policies and policies to integrate people with disabilities .
I recently visited the companies which received Commission awards last year for incorporating people with disabilities in their workforce and it was a most pleasant surprise to see practical examples of small and medium-sized companies increasing their profits by making use of the exceptionally well-honed talents of people with disabilities .
I should also like to mention the specific problem of transferring benefits to other countries ; this problem will be very hard to resolve due to the huge differences in both how the systems are organised and the level of benefits .
Regulation 1408 / 71 does not in fact make provision for transfers or for discussing the question of disability benefits .
And , of course , there is currently considerable reaction on the part of numerous countries to benefit transfers , due to the huge financial costs involved .
Finally , I must say that 2003 will really be a big challenge .
At present we are discussing the political framework for 2003 .
Of course , we shall be discussing the matter with Parliament before we draft our overall proposal , but 2003 will be a huge challenge for all of us , because we shall need to show that we are capable of action , not just words .
Public health action programme ( 2001-2006 )
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0104 / 2001 ) by Mr Trakatellis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council adopting a programme of Community action in the field of public health ( 2001 ­ 2006 ) [ COM ( 2000 ) 285 - C5 ­ 0299 / 2000 - 2000 / 0119 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , the health programme on which we are about to vote is the first integrated EU venture in this sector .
This is a favourable time to promote such an initiative , in view of both the considerable advances in information collection and dissemination technology and the increased awareness Europeans have of the quality of life , on which health protection can have a catalysing influence .
In this new programme , an overall approach is adopted , both for health and the methods , mechanisms and practices used to tackle health issues .
Thus , the programme sets three objectives , to be achieved through close overall and two-way cooperation between Member States .
The first objective is to collect , process and disseminate medical data , information , practices and knowledge from all sources .
The second objective is to create a mechanism for a direct , rapid and coordinated Community response to health threats .
The third objective is to tackle factors which are lifestyle-related health determinants , socio-economic health determinants and environment-related health determinants .
These factors will be studied , so that a strategy and policies can be drawn up designed to ensure that individual measures are of a high quality and to make health protection more effective .
However , the programme ' s major weakness is the fact that it lacks the coordinating centre which is absolutely vital in such an extended , complicated endeavour in which the national services of the Member States , non-governmental organisations , international bodies , Commission departments , existing and developing programme networks are involved , as the programme proposes , together with numerous other factors .
I focused my attention on this deficiency in particular and , after some consideration and several consultations , I finally decided on a proposal for creating a Health Coordination and Monitoring Centre , my proposal being that this centre would operate within the framework of the Community , i.e. the European Commission , and the programme , with the assistance of a committee made up of representatives of the Member States .
This will ensure that all the objectives are achieved in the best way possible .
As well as the coordination objective , several other objectives have been included which are connected with the introduction of an integrated health strategy through the development of an inter-sectoral policy in the definition and implementation of all Community policies and activities .
The programme to tackle health determinants proposes adding the development of strategies and measures on genetic , antenatal and biological determinants which obviously affect health .
Similarly , supporting action to identify and determine best practices and guidelines for health is a basic factor in safeguarding a high level of health protection and preventing illness .
Obviously , without comparability of information , compatibility of data and interoperability of systems and networks which are being developed or which will be developed within the programme , the measure will have a limited impact and the Community action will not be successful .
For this reason , binding provisions are being introduced for the development of comparable health data and compatible information systems as well as express provision for the protection of personal data .
Another factor which I consider extremely important is the budget .
There must always be a correspondence between the objectives set and the means available to achieve them .
In my opinion , this correspondence is not ensured in the proposed programme for two reasons : first , the programme ' s measures , as described , are particularly extensive and ambitious and , secondly , the extension of the existing programmes in the health sector adopted last December has already reduced the original budget of EUR 300 million by approximately EUR 80 million .
In view of the above , amendments have been proposed so that the objectives of the programme can be achieved .
Furthermore , we should not forget for an instant the fact that , after successive crises - bovine spongiform encephalopathy , dioxin , foot-and-mouth - public health is a major EU priority , even taking precedence over its other policies .
This programme has come along at the right time , a time of considerable advances in information technology and surprising achievements in atomic biology , genetic engineering and biotechnology , all of which will radically change preventive medicine and therefore be instrumental in preventing disease .
Finally , I should like to say that , if we are to strengthen the foundations of the European structure , we need convergence not just at strategy and policy level in the economic sector or in the foreign policy and security sector ; we also need convergence in individual sectors such as health , education , etc .
These are new forms of integration which I refer to as new convergences and which add breadth and depth to the unification process .
I therefore consider that the new programme represents the start of just such a convergence process in the vitally important public health sector .
, draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank Mr Trakatellis very warmly for his excellent report .
But thanks are also due to the committee responsible , which accepted all 16 amendments proposed by the Committee on Women 's Rights .
This shows that once again , this House is much further ahead than some Member States with their national health policies .
Although we women constitute the majority of the population , and although the double and triple burden of work , family and caring for relatives are shown to take a greater toll on our health , women-specific aspects do not always receive the attention they deserve in health policy .
Our health systems are usually gender-blind .
National reports rarely include a breakdown by gender .
Yet it is telling that in Europe and beyond , the majority of people who are dependent on medication are women . In Germany , the figure is 70 % .
So we urgently need more solid data , and above all , a holistic approach to health throughout Europe .
Gender policies must also be granted a central role in health policy in future : in research , prevention and treatment .
The new Public Health Action Programme can pave the way in this regard .
Every 20 minutes , a woman dies of breast cancer in Europe .
It affects one woman in nine .
The probability of contracting this disease increases from year to year .
Yet if it is detected in time and properly treated , breast cancer is curable .
So here too , best practice is imperative .
We must ensure that it is not only in early detection that breakthroughs are widely promoted throughout the EU .
After the adoption of the European Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Mammography Screening , the task now is to research and promote best practice for treatment as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal for a Public Health Action Programme for 2001-2006 is a well-meaning attempt to overcome the current fragmentation of European health policy into numerous individual programmes .
Our colleagues on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy have made every effort to incorporate many additional issues into the Commission 's text and improve upon it , while our rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , has made genuine efforts and worked extremely hard to take all these different wishes into account .
This has not only resulted in a great many proposed amendments ; in my view , it also presents us with a text which - as an opinion of the European Parliament - is useless in its current form .
It is full of repetition , tautology , rambling paragraphs , contradictory statements , and demands which violate the principle of subsidiary , even though the opposite is claimed in the text .
In terms of content , I have concerns about the Commission 's priorities as reflected , inter alia , in the allocation of resources .
Here , I support the rapporteur 's proposed amendment .
But in particular , I have grave reservations about the undoubtedly well-meaning proposal calling on the Commission to set up a Health Coordination and Monitoring Centre ( HCMC ) to ensure the efficient operation and coordination of the programme .
I will vote against all these proposed amendments , and also protest vigorously about the fact that we are discussing this report in plenary this week even though the translation was only available on Monday .
A framework programme could create the necessary transparency for the Community 's activities in the field of health and offer the flexibility to set priorities in response to current events .
In this way , the limited available resources could be used sensibly and in a targeted way .
But this requires a clear and lucid mandate for the Commission , which - in my view - the current text fails to provide .
Mr President , today is our first reading of one of the most important matters of concern to the citizens of Europe , the action programme for public health .
This is the first time advances in European policy in the health sector have been set out , achievements and weaknesses have been identified and the difficulties in applying a consistent Community policy have been made clear .
The European Parliament must use its vote on the report in question to signal its support for health promotion , the principle of prevention and improved medical services at all levels .
Obviously , sectors such as research and the environment impact directly on public health and proper account must be taken of them in action programmes .
We also feel that the European Union should work with international organisations and non-governmental health organisations so that there is a constant flow of information and exchange of experiences and we can respond immediately to serious threats .
We also need to stress how important it is to increase public awareness and for the public to be actively involved in health issues .
If we are to win the confidence of European citizens in Community policies on issues which affect them , specific problems relating directly or indirectly to health need to be examined promptly and transparently .
Under the new programme , three global objectives replace the eight programmes currently in operation .
We are hopeful that the new , special objectives will be selected not in a fragmentary manner and under pressure , but on the basis of the priorities set by the World Health Organisation and other organisations working in this sector .
As far as creating a European Coordination and Monitoring Centre is concerned , I think that it should work under the aegis of the Commission and should draw up programmes of priorities in the health sector , taking account of international data .
Similarly , it should collect , monitor and evaluate the relevant information so that it can propose and then coordinate strategies and measures .
I must , of course , stress that the confidentiality of personal data on individuals or groups of people must be respected when collecting information .
I think it is very important that mental health has been included for the first time as an area for action under a public health programme .
My congratulations for that to the Commissioner , who demonstrated a personal awareness and responded to our proposition by including this issue in his proposal .
Scientific data clearly show the extent and seriousness of neuro-psychiatric illnesses and our response , albeit belated , must be direct and effective .
Finally , as regards the budget , even though I believe that funding should not be sparing in this sector and am aware of the objective difficulties of the budget , I believe that an increase of EUR 80 million , i.e. the amount spent on extending the operation of existing programmes , is perfectly realistic .
I am confident that , despite all the difficulties , the European Commission and the Council will agree to this increase and finally , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his efforts to find compromise solutions which substantially improve the initial proposal .
Mr President , I would like to express my warmest thanks to our rapporteur , Professor Trakatellis , for having once again very skilfully steered a report through the channels of the committee , a report that has aroused much interest , and one that is very important and , for that reason , has left itself open to the hundreds and hundreds of amendments that we have all tabled .
I would like to draw particular attention to the fact that rarely during a committee ' s work has there been so much cooperation among political groups , and for that an unqualified thank you goes to the rapporteur .
As my fellow Member , Mrs Schleicher , criticised this report for perhaps not focussing adequately on the essentials and featuring too many good intentions , I might first of all say that the final result could have been a lot more cluttered .
It could have expressed a lot more in the way of hopes for the future .
I think the rapporteur has seen to it that it covers the whole issue , however .
As for Mrs Schleicher ' s own group , it added a totally new area of focus .
Her group asked for the fifth special objective to be adopted , the one connected with gene therapy , diagnosis of genetic diseases , cloning , and so on .
My group certainly was not of the opinion that this should be added here .
Mr President , public health is a major area of activity for the European Union as the Treaty of Amsterdam does indeed oblige the Union to take account of the health issue in all areas of its work .
In this respect we face some very demanding challenges .
My group would particularly like to underline the importance of this sort of integration and the Commission is going to have the enormous task of adapting agricultural policy to the demands of health .
Let us just think about the food we eat , for example .
It must mean that in the future we will be eating more vegetarian food and rather less meat , and so on .
In industrial policy it will mean that when we adopt a strategy on chemicals the basic issues of public health must be made very clear .
It will also mean that the food industry will have to accept that tighter regulations will have to be adopted , for example , with regard to the salt content of food .
There are many conflicts to come , and we can only hope that the Commission will work on these proposals and then the Council of Ministers and Parliament will clarify this situation further in the second reading .
Mr President , it may seem surprising that we on the left congratulate the rapporteur and welcome his report , but we are convinced by its content .
Mr Trakatellis talks of a principle which we share : health is not a commodity which can be traded .
And he speaks of two objectives : health promotion and disease prevention , and the whole of his proposal refers to these two objectives , and it is essential that a health programme achieves them .
Initially he talks about the necessary coordination , not only in the networks which deal with health , but with the Member States and also with the non-governmental organisations .
And , as an epilogue , he also talks about a proposal which we agree with : to create a centre for the coordination and monitoring of the health situation .
We also agree that we must have the capacity for rapid reaction in the face of the kind of threats to health which we have seen recently and continue to see .
We must also overcome inequalities ; there are still inequalities between the Member States and within the Member States themselves , and the rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment remind us that these inequalities must be overcome , and place great emphasis on the ongoing training of doctors and health staff , but also on the health education and training of schoolchildren .
We think this is essential .
The rapporteur also speaks of the risks which today are of great concern to the population and which relate to the health effects of mobile telephones and mobile communications in general , with the tall masts that are now all over our towns producing electromagnetic waves .
He also discusses the risks of radioactivity and , specifically , of something which was also talked about - and this is a debate which should continue - of the health risks of depleted uranium and other risks .
I believe that this is a fine report and that its deserves Parliament ' s support tomorrow .
Mr President , I welcome this report and the three main elements to it , of which we are already aware .
I fully support the position taken by the Commissioner for Public Health and Consumer Protection , Mr Byrne , when he states that it is dangerous to assume that a Member State can protect its citizens ' health by its own efforts alone .
He is fully correct in his approach .
We know that a single market exists where there is a free movement of goods , persons , services and capital within the territories of the European Union .
Communicable diseases which affect the health of our citizens do not stop at borders .
Citizens of each Member State must have access to the wide range of information concerning the factors affecting their health and on the way in which public health systems within that country meet their needs .
This proposal also covers the important legislative initiatives in areas such as safety of blood and blood derivatives , and the implementation of wider anti-smoking campaigns .
The Commission must be given a central coordinating role in public health to deal with illnesses , from detecting their origin to their actual treatment .
It is very important that homeopathy should also be included as a medical treatment within this European Community action plan on public health .
Finally , the European Commission should allocate greater financial resources to investigating the causes of , and possible cures for , Alzheimer 's disease .
Mr President , at the end of last year I concluded my contribution to the debate on the extension of the European public health programme with the observation that , in my opinion , the developments in public health in the EU are going too far .
Public health is national policy , and it should remain that way .
I am therefore against public health programmes which can be used as leverage to influence national policy , whilst the programmes currently before us hardly represent any added value compared to Member State efforts .
The current debate on a new public health programme is only feeding my concern .
Although there is a formal acknowledgement that the principle of subsidiarity needs to be observed , it is a hollow phrase .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , the programme has been padded out and trimmed with all kinds of topics which could possibly be related to public health .
In addition , the budget has been increased from EUR 300 to 500 million , and should partly be utilised to set up a European coordination centre .
Not only do I find such a coordination centre surplus to requirements , it is also unwanted , since I expect it will be used to develop European rather than a national public health policy .
If the EU institutions want to make a distinct gesture in terms of public health , they need to phase out subsidies for tobacco growing completely .
That will generate funds for the European Union , instead of the European Union spending money on projects which Member States could implement and finance .
In the field of alcohol and drugs , it is the Member States which need to pursue a restrictive policy .
Furthermore , the European Union could do more for the candidate countries in terms of promoting public health , where even basic health care is found wanting .
Various diseases can be controlled effectively by means of relatively few resources .
Mr President , it is appropriate , I suppose , that this measure has reached this plenary in World Health Week , with its particular emphasis on mental health .
The week before last , in Parliament , we were launching the epilepsy White Paper .
Some 15 million of our fellow Europeans will be afflicted by that illness during their lifetime at a cost of some EUR 20 billion per year , plus the cost to the individual and families of lost income and the cost to Member States of lost tax revenues .
Multiply that by all the diseases and disorders , physical and mental , add the impact of ending the communist system in Eastern Europe and the two-way cross-border movement of health problems , from environmental pollution to sexual and drug-related diseases , and the economic impact of health problems is colossal .
The European Union has no competence for health services , but it has always had competence for health and safety at work , and then for public health and infectious diseases which have no respect for national borders .
More recently it has been given competence for health promotion and illness prevention and health impact assessments .
Now we have to take this forward with the reforms of our health action programme that this report suggests .
I commend this report , the work of the rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy 's additions to his work .
We shall raise standards of health in the European Union , not by directives , but by research , education and the identification and dissemination of good practice .
It will not cost the tax-payers an arm and a leg : just EUR 83 million per year , if our committee position is accepted - a tiny sum for a massive challenge .
We are told that the Council will not accept EUR 83 million per year for six years , but EUR 63 million per year is what was being spent under the old programme .
If you just add some 5 % per year for six years , that would mean EUR 83 million .
If you take the Commission proposal of EUR 50 million and reduce it by the same amount then you would be cutting health budgets to EUR 37 million in real terms when we are taking on these new responsibilities .
If they do , let it be on their consciences that they voted against EUR 20 million per year for health , while endorsing an annual budget of over EUR 1 000 million for subsidising the growing of tobacco .
Mr President , this proposal for an action programme in public health is greatly welcomed by this Parliament .
Health is an issue which opinion poll after opinion poll shows is the number one priority for our citizens across the European Union .
This issue matters to ordinary people : people understand when you talk about health .
As we discuss this report this evening we should never forget this .
We often talk about getting closer to citizens and , with an appalling turnout across the Union at the last European elections , we should never forget what is important to our citizens .
As we all know , Article 152 gives public health greater importance than ever before , so that health has to be taken into consideration in all European Union policy areas .
With this programme we can directly add value to the lives of European Union citizens .
By taking a horizontal approach to public health , we can make the best use of limited resources .
With a rapid reaction unit to tackle communicable disease we can act much more effectively .
With health impact assessments we can detect what works and what does not .
With more health information for our citizens , quality of life will surely improve .
Although I support much of what the rapporteur proposes , I still have concern over the issue of the centre .
I fear that this issue could delay the whole programme because of the legal questions surrounding the proposal .
In addition , I also fear that such a centre would take away much of the budget , leaving very little for the work which actually connects effectively with our citizens .
In conclusion , health connects with the citizen .
We must guarantee that this proposal , which will last for the next five years , is effective .
We must deliver on health and well-being .
After all , colleagues , the European elections are not far away .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Byrne .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Golden shares
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B5-0166 / 2001 by Mr Galeote Quecedo and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , to the Commission on the ' Golden Share ' ;
B5-0167 / 2001 by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and Mr Huhne , on behalf of the Group of the European Party of Liberals , Democrats and Reformers , to the Commission , on the ' Golden Share ' .
Mr President , in 1997 , the Commission approved an interpretative communication - and I stress interpretative - on intra-Community investments , which was not submitted to the European Parliament or to the Council .
And under the auspices of this Communication , the Commission has to date begun legal actions , if our calculations are correct , against nine of the fifteen Member States .
Nobody questions the Commission ' s duty to pursue alleged infringements of Community Law .
The Group of the European Peoples ' Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ' criticism is that , by means of an interpretative communication , the Commission has unilaterally set the rules of the game in such an important area , and this is proved by the fact that the Stockholm European Council has dealt with it , thereby side-stepping , in our view , the legislative competences of this Parliament and of the Council .
I assume that Commissioner Bolkestein will be aware that the Court of Justice has already set the precedent of annulling an interpretative communication similar to this one , on pension funds , precisely because the Commission exceeded its authority .
But it is also the case , Commissioner , that this Communication of 1997 has become obsolete because of recent economic developments .
For all these reasons , it is very important to this House that the Commissioner replies clearly whether he intends , in accordance with his competences , to present a legislative proposal on intra-Community investments to Parliament and the Council .
My Group , of course , believes this to be essential , given the current circumstances , and I am certain that , at the end of this debate , the Commissioner will be convinced that this presumption is agreed on by the enormous majority of this House .
Of these new circumstances which I have just referred to , I am going to expand on the opening up of national markets in key economic sectors , in which there still exist within the European Union monopoly systems which create asymmetry .
In fact , in accordance with Community guidelines , certain Member States have made great efforts to open up their telecommunications and other sectors to competition .
However , other States have not taken equivalent measures and their markets therefore remain closed to external competition .
This is why the PPE-DE Group believes that we should permit prevention mechanisms such as the " golden share " , because otherwise objective discrimination may arise .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner what measures the Commission intends to present in order to allow the Member States which are working to open up and privatise their economies to free competition to preserve the objective of that privatisation ?
Commissioner , on Thursday , this Parliament will vote on a resolution which will establish its position at the end of the debate .
I am convinced that the Commission will at all times apply the interinstitutional agreement which binds us and that you , Commissioner , will therefore act in accordance with your powers of legislative initiative and consequently present this House with a specific proposal immediately .
Mr President , Commissioner Bolkestein , ladies and gentlemen , in this proposal , which shares the concern expressed by the PPE-DE Group , our Group has expressed its unease at this distortion of competition , which arises in practice and which , as has been said , to an extent leaves those fields which certain Member States have opened up to competition and in which they have liberalised their companies unprotected . We are therefore in an unbalanced situation in which companies which still have the characteristics of public companies , and therefore have a monopoly in a Member State , take advantage of the openness of the external market and indulge in unfair competition in relation to companies which have entered into what we may call the free game of the market .
As Mr Galeote has said , disputes have arisen , and are arising , in Belgium , France , Italy , Spain , Portugal and the United Kingdom , and infringement procedures are under way in Denmark , Germany and Holland .
This is therefore a widespread situation , which demonstrates that the principles guiding the 1997 Communication referred to earlier , are no longer valid .
We therefore urge that the relevant legislation be updated , with the due participation of this Parliament , and that this should take place , on the one hand , to eliminate these positions of privilege and , on the other hand , to safeguard the actions of the Member States , which have behaved in accordance with the process of the opening up of markets , which are liberalising them and which need the relevant guarantees so that the companies which enter into this European internal market have all the safeguards resulting from being a part of it .

Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking both Mr Galeote Quecedo and Mr Gasòliba i Böhm for the questions they have put which indeed touch on an important aspect of the internal market .
May I begin by saying that the communication of 19 July 1997 on certain legal aspects concerning intra-EU investments to which both speakers made reference was adopted by the Commission , as was the case for a series of other communications , on the basis of its exclusive competence stemming from its role as guardian of the Treaties .
As is specified in the communication itself , its objective is to indicate to national authorities and economic operators in Member States how the Commission interprets the provisions of the Treaty on capital movements and the right of establishment in order to reduce the risk of divergent legal interpretations .
The principles set out in that communication are essentially based on the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice of the European Communities , which remains , of course , the sole competent institution to provide a definitive interpretation of Community law .
In accordance with Article 56 of the EC Treaty all restrictions on capital movements between Member States , be they discriminatory or non-discriminatory , are prohibited .
The communication , being devoted to intra-Community investment , goes more deeply into the respect for this fundamental principle insofar as two specific forms of capital movements are concerned : the acquisition of domestic securities and direct investments .
All restrictions applied to these capital movements can pose compatibility problems with , in particular , Article 56 which deals with the free movement of capital , and Article 43 , which deals with freedom of establishment .
The communication to which I referred a little while ago states that , in conformity with the very notion of direct investments , nationals of other Member States of the European Union should be free to acquire controlling stakes , exercise their voting rights attached to those stakes , and manage domestic companies under the same conditions as are laid down in a given Member State for its own nationals .
While the freedom of establishment and the free movement of capital are among the fundamental freedoms of the Treaty , certain exceptions to the general rules exist which allow Member States to impose certain restrictions .
As far as the freedom of establishment is concerned these restrictions may be motivated by the exercise of official authority or on the grounds of public policy , public security or public health - Article 46 .
As far as the free movement of capital is concerned they may be justified on the basis of requisite measures in the field of taxation , prudential supervision , or the use of declaration procedures , or by considerations in relation to public policy or public security - Article 58 .
Finally , Member States may take measures which they consider necessary for the protection of the essential interests of their security which are connected with the defence sector - Article 296 .
In accordance with the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice it is necessary to interpret those exceptions narrowly in order to satisfy the criterion of proportionality .
All interpretation based on economic criteria should be excluded .
An exception should not constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on the freedom of movement of capital .
In the light of the principles which I have just set out , and taking into account that the Treaty is neutral insofar as the private or public nature of companies is concerned , it clearly appears that all restrictions aimed at preventing subsequent purchases by investors of other Member States of controlling rights in privatised companies under the pretext that the capital of these investors is to different degrees in public ownership cannot be justified by the exceptions of the Treaty in the area of capital movements or the rights of establishment , exceptions which I delineated a few moments ago .
In conclusion , may I say that as Members of this Parliament may be aware , the Commission will shortly have a debate on restrictions on intra-Community investment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution which we are discussing this evening raises two issues .
Firstly , the problem of Community legislation .
If we examine the Community 's legal sources , we have the original Treaty law , on the one hand , and directives and regulations , which are adopted with the involvement of Council and Parliament , on the other .
But between the two , there is something else , which is often regarded as a source of law , namely the communications .
We are discussing one of these communications today .
Commissioner , you have rightly pointed out that this communication is merely an interpretation and is based on the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice .
But it often seems as if the Commission is the only body to interpret the law , without any involvement by the Council or the European Parliament .
The Commission acts as the sole legislator , as in the Byzantium of ancient times under Emperor Constantine .
My law lecturer in Freiburg sometimes described the Commission 's methods as the Imperial Byzantine approach to law-making as well .
This is why I think it is absolutely crucial , in these very important cases , that directives or regulations are submitted and - as is right and proper - adopted with the participation of Parliament and the Council .
The problem which we are addressing raises a second issue , namely competition in the European Community .
Liberalisation - i.e. the abolition of monopolies - is one of the EU 's success stories .
In telecommunications in particular , we have seen that cutting costs and prices has genuinely benefited citizens .
But there is a substantial danger here .
We face a situation in which some are liberalising and opening up to competition , but others are not doing so .
And we see that those who have not done sometimes win out , even with a monopoly , as long as the others are buying up , until the old public monopoly has been replaced by a private monopoly .
The citizen then still faces a monopoly , as before , and derives no benefit from liberalisation .
I think that the Commission needs to pay greater attention to this fact in its activities in future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am not sure Constantine was Byzantine , after all he was borderline between Byzantium and the Roman Empire .
Were it Justinian , of course , it would have been a different matter .
Anyway the issue we are addressing tonight is the extent to which a Member State is permitted under a treaty to place restrictions upon nationals of other Member States or its own nationals , I suppose , from conducting intra-EU investment within the sphere of its economy .
This matter is particularly relevant to investments in privatisation conducted by Member States .
The issue is of fundamental importance for the correct functioning of the European single market and I would like to thank colleagues for raising the subject this time given the number of cases the Commission has referred to the Court of Justice over recent years .
The Treaty establishing the European Communities under Article 43 on right of establishment and Article 56 , as mentioned by Commissioner Bolkestein , on free movement of capital , clearly creates a regime whereby nationals of any Member State have the right to invest in other Member States .
This is a right that a very large number of individuals and enterprises have availed themselves of as the European Union has developed .
Intra-EU investment has been increasing by staggering proportions over the last few years .
In 1998 , such investment totalled over EUR 132 billion ; in 1999 , it had increased by over 80 % to over EUR 240 billion .
We can reasonably expect that these figures will be easily surpassed and the rate of increase maintained as the establishment of the euro reduces intra-Community transactions , eliminates exchange risk and exchange cost for enterprises whilst at the same time increasing intra-Community investment opportunities .
Such is the success of the European economic project and the establishment of the euro .
However , one can always seek improvements .
There are still many tasks for the completion of the European single market and one of these is , of course , the gradual dismantling of state involvement in enterprises .
This dismantling has only been pursued with great political courage and with grave political risks .
Often it has only been achieved through the legal assurances that governments gave about their continued supervision and special interests in the strategic directions of the enterprises being privatised .
Such legal assurances came in many forms , such as the golden share , so that there is a case , I suppose , to argue that the golden share has not always been an impediment but may have actually helped politically the privatisation process .
In its 1997 communication , the Commission established its guidelines for the existence of these legal assurances .
It did so in a rather non-transparent way through a communication that was not discussed either in Parliament or by the Council .
The legal assurances that governments had created , on the other hand , were established in the full glare of publicity and public debate that necessarily exists in the privatisation process .
It really is rather an uncomfortable situation that such a dichotomy has been created between the establishment of fundamental Community rules and Member State regulations .
The Commission , using the communication as its operational guide , has since taken legal action against six Member States before the Court of Justice and opened infringement proceedings against the others .
None of these cases has , as yet , come to a conclusion .
It cannot be justified that the Commission has set up its own framework of rules under which it has been bringing actions against Member States , which have gone through enormous difficulties in bringing forward necessary privatisation programmes .
I agree with the Commission , when it states that the national interest argument used to justify such legal assurances by Member States , as has frequently happened , cannot be accepted as an adequate justification for such measures .
The national interest argument is simply not sufficiently transparent since it can cover a particularly wide range of economic and / or non-economic criteria .
I can , however , also agree with those of our colleagues who argue that the Commission too has been acting in a particularly non-transparent manner with regard to breaking down the barriers for intra-EU investment .
I join with them in requesting that the Commission update its policy in this area with a proposal for a directive , not only for the sake of intra-institutional transparency , but also to provide guidance to Member States so that lengthy procedures before the Court can be avoided .
Mr President , Commissioner , in my opinion , the speeches I have just heard , particularly that of Mr Galeote , could be misleading , for they imply that Parliament is , in some way , calling upon the Commission to consolidate the golden share , to strengthen the special powers of States so that they can , to some extent , protect markets being liberalised against markets in which monopolies with a high degree of liquidity operate which might take over the liberalised markets .
In my view , this would be an erroneous impression , for Parliament must speak out , loud and clear , in protest against the golden share and against all the instruments preventing the establishment of a genuine , dynamic internal market in the sectors which have traditionally , in recent decades , been occupied by the State in Europe .
I am speaking on behalf of the Italian radicals .
In 1997 , we introduced a referendum in Italy against the 1994 law which established the special powers of the golden share in Italy .
Eighty per cent of those who voted in that referendum - almost 10 million Italians - said yes , calling for what we wanted , the repeal of those rules which were hampering - as they still do today - the establishment of a genuine competitive market on the capital market for privatised companies .
I regret to say that , as often happens , those votes were thrown away , destroyed in the Italian climate , where the Constitution and expressions of the citizens ' will often count for no more than waste paper .
In 1998 , the government headed by Romano Prodi , the current President of the Commission , was subjected to an infringement procedure by the Commissioner for the Internal Market at the time , Mario Monti , for using this golden share .
In 1999 , a decree was issued which - in that typically Italian way - modified the golden share without making any substantial change .
Well then , in my opinion , the articles of the Treaty should be sufficient to prevent a State company operating a monopoly from taking over a company on the liberalised market .
This would be abuse of a dominant position , State aid .
There is no need to provide for companies to have the golden share to prevent them from being taken over by a State-owned company from another Member State .
Otherwise - as frequently happens - this excuse is , in actual fact , used to consolidate national governments and majority parties ' power of veto over the free placing on the market of public companies ; the financial markets are unable to establish the best , most efficient , optimum distribution of power and therefore of the management of companies in sectors which are highly important , key , crucial sectors for Europe , such as the telecommunications or energy sectors in particular .
Moreover , the golden share means that companies which are being placed on the market bring less cash into the State coffers because a company is being bought over which someone who has not invested even a penny has the power to make strategic decisions : governments lose money by privatising the golden share .

There is also the danger , with the golden share , of nationalising private investment : the citizens , the investors , buy companies which are under the thumb of the State , governments and therefore political parties .
The golden share gives rise to a remarkable conflict of interests between the State which remains the manager and , to some extent , the owner of the liberalised companies , and the State which should have the sole role of regulator guaranteeing the competition which protects the interests of the citizens .
This is one of the ways in which some of the European States - Italy , for instance - continue , in actual fact , to manage large parts of the economy of the country and prevent there being in these sectors - the telecommunications and energy sectors , for instance - efficient , competitive companies and markets , companies able to withstand international competition .
The fact that Enel in Italy or Deutsche Post in Germany or France Télécom exploit positions of monopoly in order to go and grab areas which have been liberalised in the markets of other countries must be opposed as dominant positions , as State aid , but this cannot be used as an excuse to allow countries which are moving towards a market-based economy to keep powers in companies which are supposed to have been privatised .
In fact , the golden share has been in the past and continues to be a barrier to the creation of genuinely European public services companies .
It removes companies from market dynamics and governments continue to interfere , continue to think they know best who should buy a company , following certain lines of reasoning which are not the most effective for the market , thus penalising the citizens .
We must not advocate that governments use the golden share as a shield to prevent companies being bought on the market in order to direct the purchase of privatised companies towards preferred groups because , in the long run , this leads to non-competitive markets , as is happening now .
This is why I have some reservations about the resolution to be put to the vote on Thursday .
I believe that Parliament must speak out , loud and clear , if possible avoiding a compromise , with nationalisers and liberalisers fighting it out , and state clearly that the articles of the Treaty relating to the movement of capital and freedom of establishment must be fully enforced in the light of today 's economic market conditions , not those of 40 years ago .
There is the danger that the State monopolies , which still exist , will lord it over the liberalised markets in Europe , a danger represented by the abuse of the dominant position and State aid .
This is the root of the matter .
Mr President , may I thank you once again for giving me the floor to reply to some of the comments made by Members .
Mr von Wogau said , if I understood him correctly , that the communication which has been referred to by Members of Parliament , and which I myself mentioned , is a source of law .
I cannot see it that way .
The source of law is the Treaty .
The Treaty is clear .
The Commission is the guardian of the Treaty and universally recognised as such .
It issued the communication in 1997 in order to clear up certain misunderstandings in connection with the relevant articles of the Treaty .
It did not do so without reason .
I shall refer to two particular instances .
Firstly in 1991 the United Kingdom tried to use golden shares to oppose the acquisition of certain British companies which had been privatised by public entities , public companies , of other Member States .
At the time , in 1991 , this was known as the " Lilley doctrine " .
The Commission took energetic action .
The United Kingdom changed its policy .
The second instance is a more recent one .
At international level my colleague , Mr Lamy , had to oppose an analogous American initiative which was taken against certain public European companies in the telecom area .
So in both these instances one sees that the Commission has taken action against the attempts , whether by a Member State , or in the case of the United States by a third country , to block investments by companies , whether private or public from other Member States , in privatised companies of the home state .
To return to the main point at issue , the Commission has done no more than interpret the relevant articles of the Treaty - basically Articles 56 and 43 .
That is what is laid down in the interpretative communication .
So it cannot be said , as Mr Katiforis said earlier tonight , that the Commission is constructing its own framework of rules .
Once again and for the last time , I will say that the Commission has been entrusted with the duty to act as guardian of the Treaty .
In the years running up to 1997 there was uncertainty about the way Articles 43 and 56 ought to be interpreted .
That is the reason for the interpretative communication .
The final instance that decides on what is right or wrong , what is legal and illegal , is the Court of Justice .
Naturally the Commission does not , in the end , decide what the legal situation is .
That is the responsibility of the Court of Justice .
But before the matter can be considered by the Court of Justice somebody has to bring the case to the attention of the Court .
That is what the Commission has done .
This Commissioner has played a certain role in this and has taken a number of Member States to court for making use of the golden share .
So I must reject the reproach made against the Commission that it has arrogated unto itself certain competences that it should not have , that it is framing its own system of rules .
No , the Commission is merely interpreting and stating what the law is .
That is the reason why it has taken some Member States to court .
Hopefully we will soon see what the Court of Justice has to say .
I was asked if I would issue a directive .
There is no need for a directive .
We have a treaty .
The Commission interprets the treaty and the Court of Justice decides .
So we do not need a directive .
Having said all that , the Commission is due to have a debate on this whole issue shortly .
After that has taken place perhaps I can further inform Parliament , but at this moment I see no reason to change the opinion that I have just given .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Bolkestein .
I have received four motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.15 p.m. )
Madam President , last month , Parliament adopted a resolution condemning the kidnapping of eight Portuguese citizens by the LFEC .
Yesterday , the LFEC released one of those hostages and I should like to welcome this positive gesture by the LFEC and call for it to be followed by seven more positive gestures , in other words , for the remaining seven Portuguese hostages to be released .
We condemn hostage taking as a form of political action and I wish to emphasise this once again now .
I would like you , Madam President , to act on our behalf in the following initiative : given that the Portuguese hostage who has just been released is in quite a poor state of health , we request that you ask the LFEC to give an international organisation , namely the Red Cross , immediate access to the seven remaining Portuguese citizens , who are still being held hostage in the enclave of Cabinda , in order to assess their state of health .
As you know , Mr Seguro , I did take action and I am keeping a very close eye on the situation .
I shall do as you have just suggested .
Statement by the President
Regarding the election of the Vice-President , which is scheduled to take place during today ' s voting time , I can inform you that the Group of the Party of European Socialists has proposed Mrs Lalumière as a candidate .
Outcome of the European Council of 23 / 24 March 2001 in Stockholm including the situation in the Middle East
The next item is the report by the European Council and the statement by the Commission on the outcome of the European Council of 23 and 24 March in Stockholm , including the situation in the Middle East .
Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , when I last addressed this House , it was to present to you the first Commission " Spring Report " to the European Council .
As you will remember , our report takes stock of Europe 's progress in implementing the Economic and Social Agenda agreed upon at Lisbon .
The Stockholm Summit was the first summit specifically dedicated to assessing our progress and to setting the priorities for the next 12 months .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Swedish Prime Minister , Mr Persson , for his firm , calm , enthusiastic chairmanship and organisation of our work at Stockholm .
I also greatly appreciated the opportunity he gave us to meet President Putin and to discuss with him the European Union 's partnership with Russia .
This was a very encouraging meeting and confirmed Russia 's strategic role .
Indeed , President Putin assured us that Russia and the European Union share common values .
We , in turn , made it clear that we want to help Russia to fully integrate into our community of values ; we want to identify the most appropriate means of cooperation , not only on the economy , the environment and energy , but on defence , security and the safeguarding of democratic rights as well .
In this connection , while we welcomed the announcement of another reform programme yesterday , we cannot hide our concern at the way , at the same time , the government is gradually taking control of the television system .
As Prime Minister Persson said , the discussions focused primarily on economic reforms in Russia , but the situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia received close attention as well .
As expected , the European Council assured President Trajkovski of its full support for the territorial integrity of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia but , at the same time , the Union called upon President Trajkovski to take the grievances of the Albanian minority in his country into consideration .
In any case , it would be a mistake to allow the current crisis in the FYROM to deflect us from our objective of helping the country integrate more closely with the European Union .
Indeed , we are about to pursue that objective further by signing the first Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I would like to emphasise that the European Union 's credibility depends largely on our ability not just to set political and strategic objectives but also to take swift , effective action on the ground .
At the same time , we must strive to bring about long-term stability in the Balkan region , and this means using all the tools available to us to integrate , little by little , the entire region into the European Union .
Milosevic 's departure from the scene is an important step forwards in this direction , bringing years of war and hatred to an end .
I would now like to move on to the debate on the Economic and Social Agenda taking place in the European Council .
I agree with Prime Minister Persson when he says that the mood prevailing among the Heads of State or Government at Stockholm was one of rational optimism .
A year ago , at Lisbon , we were still suffering from a sort of inferiority complex before the strength of the US economy .
Now things have changed and we can see that Europe is in a position of strength in three respects .
Firstly , the modernisation of our economy is now underway , secondly , we have a Social Agenda aimed at rejigging the European Social Model while preserving its character , and thirdly , we are making every endeavour to achieve sustainable development which will include the environmental dimension .
The position recently adopted by the United States on the environment is worrying .
Our concern is reflected in a joint letter from Prime Minister Persson and myself to President Bush .
In any event , Europe must continue to act consistently and must take the lead on this highly important issue .
A month ago , before this House , I stressed the problems of the distribution of labour and social exclusion .
It is therefore necessary to step up our efforts to modernise the European Social Model within the framework of the Agenda adopted at Nice .
In this regard , I must stress once again the need to adopt clearer strategies to tackle the issue of our ageing society .
It is with precisely this in mind that the Commission announced its undertaking to issue a Communication on the quality and sustainability of pensions in the light of demographic change .
On the basis of these premises , the Commission urged the European Council to commit the Member States to taking action at the very least in six key sectors in which fresh impetus is needed .
Firstly , we still need to improve skills and training in information technology .
Last Wednesday , the Commission adopted the eLearning Action Plan , which lays down specific measures on teacher training and partnerships between educational establishments , companies and industries .
Secondly , the Galileo programme .
At Stockholm , I outlined the state of play to the European Council , including the fresh undertaking by the private sector to provide immediate funding of EUR 200 million .
This means that the Member States no longer have any reason to hesitate .
In fact , a clear unanimous political commitment has been made by the Heads of State or Government to implementing this project rapidly .
I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate that beating about the bush is no longer acceptable : a project of such strategic importance for all European citizens for the next 20 years can no longer be held up by squabbles over minor details .
Decisions made by Prime Ministers should be implemented by the departmental ministers , who must oversee the practical implementation of projects .
Thirdly , the financial markets .
For some time , the Commission has been arguing for an integrated Europe-wide financial market .
We need a regulatory system which makes it possible for us to keep pace with this rapidly changing market .
I therefore welcome the fact that the Commission has emphasised the importance of this sector and its enormous potential for both job creation and reducing costs .
As recommended , a European Securities Committee will be set up , chaired by the Commission .
This body will act as a regulatory committee and assist the Commission in decisions regarding the measures to be adopted to implement practically the legislative acts agreed upon between the Council and Parliament in codecision .
Thus , together , we will be able to push forward to create an integrated securities market , one of the major pieces missing from our internal market .
The Commission will therefore be tabling major proposals in this field before the summer and I call upon this House to act on them without delay .
I believe the debate on this should be pursued within the codecision procedure by qualified majority voting .
Fourthly , the Community patent .
Progress in this field has run up against a number of national concerns ranging from language issues to loss of revenue for the Member States ' national patent offices .
I have to say that these positions taken up by the Member States seem to run counter to the interests of their own economic operators , who are constantly calling for us to produce a simple , clear , competitively priced Community patent .
I sincerely hope that this situation can be resolved .
Parliament and the Council must take swift , tangible steps to convert the commitments made in Lisbon into action .
Fifthly , the single European sky .
As we all know , a whole series of major proposals is currently blocked until Spain and the United Kingdom come to a bilateral agreement on Gibraltar .
For its part , the Commission will do all it can to help resolve this problem quickly .
Moreover , the two Member States have agreed to resume discussions on the matter .
Sixthly , postal services .
Postal services are to be deregulated by the end of 2001 , and the liberalisation of the energy markets will continue on the basis of the extremely clear , precise proposals we have already tabled .
With regard to the demographic challenge , the European Council recognised the importance of ensuring the long-term sustainability of public finances , social services , health care and pensions .
In any case , sustainability issues will have to be tackled within the framework of a more general European strategy for sustainable development , which will be one of the main focuses of the Gothenburg Summit in June .
Moreover , in future , the Commission will incorporate sustainable development into its annual spring report .
As of next year 's spring summit - and this is a very important point - in fact , the Commission will prepare just one report for each Spring Council , making the preparatory work clearer and more transparent .
In this way , we will , at last , be able to concentrate on political factors rather than technical details . It will also make it easier for the public to understand what is at stake .
Ladies and gentlemen , Stockholm has provided us with a very good basis for action over the next 12 months .
I have said this before and I shall say it again : effective action by the European Union is the only way to win public support for the European project .
The surest way to lose that support is to increase the number of unfulfilled promises .
We have got to close the gap between rhetoric and reality in Europe .
It is all very well and very necessary to agree on targets , to set up task forces and to develop indicators and strategic visions , but what matters is action : action to create jobs and disseminate new skills , action to recruit and train teachers , action in national parliaments to cut red tape , action by governments and industry to invest in people .
The citizens want a Europe that delivers the goods , and the Commission will continue to do so zealously and with total commitment . However , it is up to all of us , to all the institutions and especially this House , to the Member States and the social partners , to ensure that , in the wake of Stockholm , our words are translated into action .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President of the European Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the European Council , our Group welcomes your presence here today .
If you attend plenary after the Gothenburg Summit , as we naturally hope you will , you will have been here three times .
That is a good sign .
I hope that future presidencies will follow your example .
But do not rejoice too quickly ; we still have a few words of criticism .
But first let me stress once again how delighted we are that you are here .
We also understand that your presence here - albeit after three months - is the first time you personally will have been involved in the sort of dialogue with the groups of the European Parliament that your foreign minister and Mr Danielsson have already engaged in .
But , hopefully , today marks the start for you .
You still have plenty of opportunity in the remaining three months to implement what Sweden stands for , namely transparency .
We are , in fact , in the process of negotiating access to documents .
Please do something , take charge in the Council so that we achieve a Parliamentary-friendly result , by which I mean a result in the Council which satisfies Parliament .
Please do something in this regard .
The Stockholm Summit - like the Lisbon Summit - used very ambitious language , language which I find somewhat over the top .
A little more modesty would do us good .
We hear talk of the Union as the most competitive and dynamic science-based economic area in the world .
When you choose such ambitious words , then you must expect to be judged by your actions .
You yourself said crucially that you regret the fact that the postal services and energy markets have not been liberalised and that no date has been set for any such liberalisation .
I say to you quite frankly that this was only because a certain Member State , namely France , did not want a date and the Federal Republic of Germany followed suit .
It is a partnership of negation and blockade !
That is not how we see the Franco-German partnership .
It should not be used to block things , it should be used to move Europe forward and that is what I call on the governments of France and Germany to do .
( Applause )
Mr President of the European Council , you are not perceived as someone who is particularly fond of the Community method .
On the contrary , you prefer intergovernmental collaboration .
But this is precisely what happens when we rely solely on intergovernmental collaboration rather than the Community method !
We get blockades .
And it is the small countries which suffer in the end , because the large countries take Europe over , not forward .
( Applause )
We are absolutely delighted that progress has been made on the question of the investment market and financial services .
We are grateful for your commitment , but we also say quite openly - and this is directed at both the Council and the Commission - that we expect the legislative rights of the European Parliament to be safeguarded and for it to be suitably involved in future legislative decisions .
We shall insist on this and these remarks are addressed to both institutions , the Council and the Commission .
A word of criticism on the question of foreign policy problems , Mr President of the European Council .
Yesterday , the widow of Andrey Sakharov , Yelena Bonner , visited our Group .
Just as she arrived , news came in that the last free television station in Russia had been nationalised .
That is totally unacceptable as far as we are concerned .
The freedom of the press and media is one of the principles of democracy , in both the European Union and Russia .
What the President of Russia , Mr Putin - whom I am glad you invited - said in front of the television cameras about Chechnya , was an insult both to the people of Chechnya and the dignity of the human race .
We would have welcomed an immediate contradiction from you in front of the media !
( Applause )
We take developments in Russia very seriously because , like you , we believe that stability in 21st century Europe depends on having a strong European Union which can act , on the one hand , and a stable - hopefully democratic - Russia , on the other . Russia is not symbolised solely by the pretty town of St. Petersburg , I agree with you there .
The Russia of the future will also be symbolised by respect for democracy , freedom of the press and human rights and we must make that perfectly clear to the Russian leadership .
I should like to address a further point , namely developments in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I am delighted that the High Representative , Javier Solana , Commissioner Patten and the foreign minister of Sweden , Anna Lindh , as President-in-Office , are making this a focal point of their work and that - despite all the institutional complications which this entails - they are clearly all working well together .
But that is not the point right now .
The acid test , namely whether or not we help to bring about peace and stability , will be in the former Yugoslavia .
If we fail there , we might as well give up any claim to involvement in world politics !
We must set out our priorities in Europe , especially in the former Yugoslavia .
That brings me to my final point .
The American President , George W. Bush , will be with you in Gothenburg .
Our Group is a close friend and partner of the United States of America and always has been .
And that being so , we feel bound to tell our American allies that we cannot accept America ' s refusal to abide by the Kyoto protocol .
We criticise this as emphatically as we know how .
We agree when America demands burden sharing in security and defence policy and for Europe to do more .
But burden sharing also applies to environmental protection .
We cannot leave a few countries to shoulder the responsibility while others shrug it off .
Burden sharing also applies to environmental policy .
( Applause )
I should like to encourage you to speak out loud and clear : we stand for Europe and our values .
If you are again successful - in Gothenburg hopefully even more so than in Stockholm - then we shall all benefit from the success .
I wish this success on both you and us .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank the President-in-Office for coming to Parliament for the second time and giving such a clear and concise presentation .
We have seen how good he is with the ball , because the Europe of sport is also a Europe that we have to build together .
I congratulate him on this agreement .
I emphasise that there is a new element in our relationship , which is that you have the opportunity to put the relations between Parliament and the Council on a new footing .
We are still at the level of the Single Act ; we have the codecision procedure and we have the common foreign and security policy and we hope to be able to reach an agreement with you for there to be a balanced relationship in the legislative field between the Council and Parliament .
With regard to your report , we see it as a positive step that we are still on the Lisbon road ; it is a long road , which you make as you go along , as the poet Antonio Machado said .
For us it is absolutely crucial that there should be a balance between job creation , competitiveness and social cohesion .
You have added a very timely element : that we Europeans need to reflect on our ageing population , develop an immigration policy , and think about pensions .
I believe this is the framework within which we have to work together , and I should especially like to thank the Swedish Presidency for always placing such importance on social cohesion , because I think this expresses a fundamental value for Europeans .
There are a few pending issues : with regard to sustainable development you can count on our full support ; on the liberalisation of the capital market , which we believe is necessary , you have supported the Lamfalussy report and have proposed a route which does not include Parliament having the chance of democratically controlling the standards being developed .
Despite that , I believe we are on the right road .
In connection with the liberalisation of services and electricity and gas , the Socialist Group thinks that apart from its inherent worth it brings up a key issue : the power relations in society and the economy .
We must take the citizens into account and the obligation to provide services of general interest .
We do not want to see public monopolies being replaced by private monopolies .
We criticise the United States a lot because President Bush has unilaterally denounced the Kyoto Protocol , but we never ask ourselves why he has done so .
If you look at how the American electoral campaign was financed you will understand why the President of the United States has given in to the interests of the big oil companies : because he received massive donations from them .
This problem faces us too , now that we are debating the status of the political parties .
It is what is called ' soft money ' and ' hard money ' .
Funding must have limits , and a basic principle of democracy is that there should not be any accumulation of power .
For us it is essential that there should not be unlimited economic powers .
As for our external relations , we are very concerned , not only because the United States has unilaterally denounced the Kyoto Protocol , but also because we notice a growing unilateral outlook in the United States in relation to issues that affect the international community .
This is happening in the Middle East and the Balkans , and I believe it is important that , in this fundamental transatlantic relationship that we Europeans have , we should indicate to our partner that we do not share this view of the shape of international relations .
We should do so at the start of the American Presidency in order to achieve a balanced , positive relationship .
Lastly , allow me to speak of the future of Europe .
The Swedish Presidency has the responsibility of organising a democratic and transparent debate on the future of Europe in the best Swedish tradition .
You have launched the virtual debate on the web page ; we did so a week earlier , but we are on the same lines as you .
Yet a debate is something more than just a web page .
A serious , open debate has to be held with civil society , with the social and political forces , but we also have to know how we want to decide and organise the future of Europe .
There is a proposal here that both the Commission and Parliament agree upon , which is to organise a debate in three stages , using a working method inspired by the convention , to culminate in a short , decisive conference .
The Swedish Presidency should consider , support and improve this proposal at the Gothenburg European Council .
On behalf of the Liberal Group , I should like to thank the Swedish Presidency for its skilful leadership and the good start it has made .
We have high expectations in connection with the key issues identified by Sweden , and we hope that Sweden will also make transparency a key issue .
On that point , we can all learn from Sweden .
We must have access to more documents , and it is completely unacceptable that we should sit here in Parliament without knowing what our own ministers are saying and doing in the Council when they legislate .
That is something which must be changed .
We are delighted to see the Swedish foreign minister , who of course comes from a neutral non-aligned country , travelling around with her new travelling companions , the Commissioner for External Relations , Mr Patten and NATO ' s former Secretary-General , Mr Solana , and we are delighted when , today , we hear the Swedish Prime Minister speak in favour of a common foreign policy .
We hope that he too will discover the value of using the European institutions , that is to say the Community method , rather than the intergovernmental method he has so far been a little too fond of .
In Macedonia , we sincerely hope for success in ensuring greater equality for the Albanians .
That is the only way to peace .
If only we could also learn to take action before extremists begin to use violence . In that way , it would be the moderates and not the men of violence who obtain the credit for the results .
With regard to enlargement , which is also a Swedish priority , we should like to see still greater commitment on the part of Sweden .
That is more important than anything else for securing peace , freedom and prosperity in Europe .
It is also high time to prepare for the crucial reform of agricultural policy .
We in the Liberal Group hope that you will listen to our colleague , Mr Olsson , who has proposed holding a round-table conference with the new countries on the subject of future agricultural policy .
It is high time we put our minds to the problem .
We wish you every success , Mr Persson , and , regarding the Lisbon process , my fellow Liberal MEP will take the floor later and comment on what you have said .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that there are some positive elements in the statements by the President of the Council and the President of the Commission , in particular when Mr Persson spoke firmly about the position of the United States regarding the Kyoto Protocol , and when Mr Prodi reminded us of what is really at stake in the Lisbon process , namely an integrated strategy which is economic , social and environmental at the same time .

Having said that , it is very rare , in Parliament , for the plenary session to have in front of it , as it has now , a joint resolution signed by the European Socialists , the ecologists and the European United Left as well .
The significance of this resolution is a clear political signal to both the Council and the Commission .

It is based , Messrs Persson and Prodi , on the established fact that although the European economy is undoubtedly competitive , at the moment it is neither sustainable , nor does it have sufficient solidarity .
This is not a statement before the event : a number of indicators are already set to red , whether in the field of sustainable development , in transport , in energy - not to mention the common agricultural policy - or in employment , where most of the new jobs being created are vulnerable , and where not enough of the added value is accounted for by wages .
You only have to read the latest report from the European Environment Agency .
We therefore need to change direction on development , so as to make it more sustainable and give it more solidarity .
This is the real challenge of the twenty-first century , and it is on this subject that I should like , briefly , to make a few proposals .
Mr Bolkestein , what are we doing about company tax and the Primarolo group ?
There must be limits , Mr Persson , to increasing competitiveness : we must not forget our public service obligations .
Mr Solbes Mira , substantial public investment is necessary to meet the Lisbon objectives , particularly on education and training , but also , for example , on transport and the rational use of energy .
Mrs Diamantopoulou , if the social dialogue founders on the issue of temporary work , it is the Commission ' s responsibility to propose legislation that will allow people to live their lives with dignity on what they earn .
I heard a woman - a worker at a Danone factory - call for solidarity by saying ' people should boycott Danone ' s products ' .
I think it would be more reasonable for the European Union to adopt legislation imposing social and ecological obligations on companies .
Our future depends on it too .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , other members of my Group will be speaking on various aspects of the Stockholm European Council .
For my part , I shall stick to just one subject , which should , in principle , have been central to the work of the summit : the subject of employment .
The ink was not even dry on the final declaration by the Fifteen , in which you reiterated , and I quote , ' the goal of full employment ' , and in which you welcomed the initiatives taken by businesses to promote corporate social responsibility , when suddenly , like a bombshell , came the announcements that 1 780 jobs were being axed by Danone and that Marks & Spencer were closing all their stores outside the United Kingdom .
These are just the latest examples , so far , of shareholder value , in other words , shareholder law , and just like Michelin , Ericsson , Nokia , Telefonica and so many others , they illustrate everything that is no longer acceptable .
I ask you this , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , what are you going to do about these company directors who so brazenly thumb their noses at your declared intentions ?
The Commission , you write , in the conclusions of the Stockholm Summit , and I quote , will ' present in June 2001 a Green Paper on corporate social responsibility ' and will ' encourage a wide exchange of ideas with a view to promoting further initiatives in this area ' .
All well and good , but will you now , in the light of these new facts , be defining precisely what the Commission ' s mandate will be ?
And will we , Parliament , be waiting , arms at the ready ?
I suggest that we should decide to create , perhaps within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , a new permanent body - let us call it a ' subcommittee ' , since that is the sort of language we use - which will be responsible for monitoring the strategies of major companies in Europe , a subcommittee open to contributions from trades union organisations , works committees , consumers ' associations and elected representatives .
We could thus help to create , at our level , an effective monitoring device , which would be able to put some meat on the bones of the intermediate employment objectives that the Stockholm European Council has just set itself .
We already know who the first employees will be : those of the French agri-food group that I have just mentioned , whose shareholders have just seen a 17 % rise in the net profit from their shares , and those of the British chain whose shares have just gone to blazes on the London stock exchange .
If we ourselves take action to demolish the divine right of the big companies to sack people as they see fit , we shall , after all , be doing nothing more than defending , by our actions , a European project that is worthy of the name , and a Parliament that is closer to the people .
Madam President , the Stockholm Summit was hardly the greatest diplomatic achievement with regard to the development of the European Union ; however , the business conducted at the Stockholm Council did certainly reflect the reality of what is happening in the European Union at this time .
European Union leaders demonstrated solidarity in the face of the problem of foot-and-mouth disease , which threatens the European agricultural sector at this time .
European leaders acted as a force for peace in the Balkans by offering timely support for the Macedonian Government and there was a full political and economic dialogue with the Russian President , Mr Putin .
Some progress was certainly made towards achieving the targets set at Lisbon last year to make the EU the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world by the year 2010 .
The Member States of the European Union are fully committed to the goal of full employment and we also see the achievement of this objective as an important way of meeting the challenge of an ageing population in Europe .
The European Union employment rate targets , which have to be reached by the year 2010 , mean that steady progress has to be made over this period if these objectives are to be met .
Increasing employment rates will demand the active implementation of employment policies as foreseen under the European employment guidelines .
We do not want to build a two-tier Europe Union , a European Union of the haves and a European Union of the have-nots .
We want to ensure that all the citizens of the Union are given opportunities to integrate fully into the workplace and to this extent we must ensure the intensification of training and education programmes for those without skills as well as putting in place retraining opportunities for the existing workforce .
Certainly , much progress has been made in the last 12 months with regard to educating and training the European workforce in the benefits which lie open for us all from the use of the Internet and related e-commerce opportunities .
The European Council did address the demographic challenge of an ageing population of which people of working age constitute an even smaller part .
The issue of how best the Union is going to deal with future public and private pension programmes is a serious matter , which must be addressed by all EU Member States as a matter of priority .
Agreement was not reached on how best to liberalise the gas and electricity sectors in Europe .
However , the structures do exist for addressing these outstanding issues on the basis of cooperation between the Member States of the Union .
On this latter point , any further liberalisation of postal service operations in Europe must be fair and must be balanced and postal services play an important social and economic function in rural towns and villages within the Union .
I certainly will not support a structure whereby postal services are liberalised in Europe and this only results in the quality of the postal service operations being diminished within the territories of the Union .
I certainly will not support a situation whereby postal service operations will be cherry-picked by private operators , servicing only key lucrative urban areas which will benefit from such reform programmes at the expense of the rural parts .
Finally , certainly an achievement of the Council at Stockholm was the agreement to fast-track the development of a common approach for the regulation of financial services within the Union .
The implementation of this plan has been subject to delays , which have prevented Europe , in the past , from taking full advantage of the benefits of the single market .
Madam President , the Swedish Presidency began well but will now be remembered for having introduced more secrecy and less democracy .
The Lamfalussy report transfers legislative power from elected representatives in open assemblies to officials behind the closed doors of committee rooms .
Sweden has identified transparency as a key issue and has a culture of transparency from which we can all learn . In the negotiations concerning transparency , however , Sweden has now accepted a new internal set of regulations producing more secrecy instead of more transparency .
On 19 March , the Council also decided that future relaxations in the rules of confidentiality must be adopted by qualified majority voting and not , as is the case at present , by a simple majority .
Thus , it will never be possible for the rules to be relaxed as long as Spain , France and Germany do not want them to be .
It is those three countries which are the villains in the negotiations concerning transparency .
This is something of which the public in our countries should be aware .
How can a German , Green foreign minister accept responsibility for secrecy ?
The Council ' s new rules on confidentiality are clearly unlawful .
The Council cannot itself alter the Treaty ' s regulations from simple to qualified majority voting .
The new rules directly interfere with the section in the Treaty of Amsterdam promising new rules on transparency .
Nor has the Swedish Presidency submitted the rules to the European Parliament .
We must call upon our fellow MEPs from Spain , France and Germany to strike a blow for transparency now .
Those three countries have placed the Swedish Presidency in such a humiliating position that it is having to betray its own key concerns regarding transparency and deliver secrecy instead .
We still have an EU in which neither the ombudsman , the Court of Auditors nor the Committee on Budgetary Control can obtain all documents for perusal .
To that extent , we need the commendable Swedish rules on the right of access to documents and the freedom to provide information .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , President Prodi has communicated his concern about the situation of the press , of the mass media in Russia .
In my view , the President of the Commission is crying over spilt milk .
He is lamenting something which is the result of a policy that he himself helped to develop .
This European Union policy on Russia is a policy of tolerance , a policy of prostituting our values , Mr President .
What is happening now to the mass media has already happened in Central Asia in those ex-Soviet countries in which President Putin is re-establishing a postcolonial policy , a region which the European Union does not see the strategic importance of , just as it does not recognise the strategic importance of the Caucasus region .
I would like to thank Group Chairman , Mr Poettering , who voiced the concerns of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
However , I would urge Mr Poettering to talk to Mr Oostlander , who is the author of a report which , in the main , follows the line taken by the policy proposed by the Commission , a policy entirely focused on the fact that the Union 's first priority must be to guarantee supply of Russian gas and oil , with the development and consolidation of the Rule of Law in Russia relegated to second place .
Yesterday , in this very Chamber , Mr President of the Commission , Mr Posselt and I asked Commissioner Nielson for the umpteenth time to produce a policy on Chechnya which is , at the very least , a humanitarian policy , Mr President .
For months , or rather for a year and a half now , we have been urging Commissioner Nielson to go to Chechnya .
Just to go to Chechnya , nothing more .
For his part , Commissioner Nielson has told us repeatedly that the situation there is such as to make a visit impossible .
Yesterday , in view of the Commissioner 's concern , I asked him to go to Georgia and Azerbaijan to open hospitals at least in these areas , which are not directly under Russian influence , as requested by the Chechen Minister for Health , Mr Umarkambiev , so that , at least , the Chechen people could receive health care instead of having to pay millions of dollars for treatment in a Baku hospital .
Commissioner Nielson made no response .
Mr President of the Commission , I have run out of patience , and I call upon you formally to remove Commissioner Nielson 's mandate for humanitarian aid .
Commissioner Nielson is a bureaucrat , Mr President : his travel availability is already booked up for the next four or five years .
He pays a quick visit here and there to make sure that the Commission 's development cooperation policy is running smoothly , but he has no real time for genuine humanitarian issues .
I am not asking you to kick him out of the Commission , just to take this portfolio away from him and appoint someone else who will pay genuine attention to these issues and who will , at last , do something about the question of Chechnya .
What is currently happening in Chechnya is an outrage .
There is absolutely no difference between events there and what took place in Bosnia , in Kosovo , incidents at which , after years and years , Parliament and the European Union eventually protested .
We must make political investments , Mr President-in-Office .
Our humiliating treatment of the members of President Mashkadov 's government must stop .
It is unthinkable that a minister of the Mashkadov government should have to apply for a visa and do so month after month .
It is unthinkable that the European Union should not be able to grant a permanent residence authorisation to those whom you will have to visit in the future and persuade to sit round a negotiating table with the Russians .
These are our consultative partners of tomorrow , and all we can do is humiliate them .
And all this while the US government welcomes - as it did last week - the Chechen Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Akhmadov .
Territorial integrity is not a theory : it is a practical concept in which integrity means that the entire territory is guaranteed , not that anything goes .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has set itself the ambitious target of achieving full employment in Europe by 2010 .
However , the Council should be clear on one thing : jobs can only be created if economic reforms are implemented consistently .
What was begun in Lisbon and announced in Nice was not continued in Stockholm .
In Stockholm , the brakes were applied .
In this sense , the lack of agreement on Community patents is disappointing .
The absence of a European patent is a powerful brake on the European economy , as has been confirmed in numerous talks with American researchers .
If we want a Europe which promotes private commitment , risk taking and entrepreneurship , then these long overdue liberalisation measures must be taken .
Competition-distorting aid must be prevented as and where possible and an internal market for services must at last become a reality .
Madam President , I am pleased to be able to welcome the Swedish Prime Minister once more and see him here together with several of the Swedish ministers .
In the Swedish media the Prime Minister has summed up the meeting in Stockholm as an ideal example of a successful European summit .
Considering the meagre results , one might wonder what an unsuccessful summit looks like .
For those of us who read the newspapers and the conclusions , it is uncertain whether anything happened other than President Putin visiting the summit as a guest .
The 15-page conclusion document mainly describes decisions intended to be taken at a later date .
It is true that it was decided to start competing on which country has the most children in childcare and that the Commission will complete a project which is already underway .
No concrete date was set for deregulation of the electricity and gas markets in the Union .
The Swedish Presidency has completely given up on the question of liberalisation of postal services and , as we know , nothing came of the Community Patent idea .
Football was played for longer than the question which most concerns Europe today was discussed , namely the agriculture crisis .
I think that the Council should evaluate and consider what role these summits should have .
Are they to play an important institutional role to resolve and pass decisions on important questions which have achieved little progress at other councils , or should they be developed into gimmicks with ever weaker and more toned down conclusions ?
It is worrying that the Lisbon Process , which got off to a good start a year ago , is now being watered down .
The upcoming Spanish Presidency has an important task ahead in ensuring that Lisbon comes to mean something concrete and is not just words on paper .
The situation is precisely as the Council ' s acting president admits : Work is not progressing sufficiently fast to maintain the rate of change .
If you listen to Mr Barón Crespo , you understand that the social democrats in Europe are not having such an easy time of it at the moment .
The European economy flagging is no reason to stop the reform .
Instead one has to put in more effort to be able to achieve competitiveness and increased wellbeing .
I have two questions for the Council ' s acting president .
One point in the conclusions addresses the upcoming WTO negotiations , and I concur with that stated .
I would therefore like to repeat the question which was dismissed last time as being far too national , and which concerns the Tobin tax .
Has the presidency any view on the Tobin tax or shall we interpret the Swedish ministers ' publicly consorting with the Attac movement as indicating their position on an international tax on currency transactions ?
My second question concerns enlargement .
It has been said that the enlargement negotiations are progressing and are one of the most urgent priorities of the presidency .
Will you succeed with your goals ?
What is actually meant by a ' political breakthrough ' in the negotiations ?
Will the presidency at the summit in Gothenburg be able to state the EU ' s point of view on the sensitive and difficult areas remaining so that the negotiations and a conclusion to them will become possible for the most successful candidate countries during 2001 ?
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Parliament welcomes the onset of spring at the Stockholm Summit .
Because one thing is clear : the spring summit will become standard practice in the future , so that we not only bank on a future-orientated , knowledge-based society , but can also actually live in it .
We need the ambitious strategy of change decided in Lisbon .
We need to make it tighter and more dynamic and Stockholm has added another brick to this edifice .
And rightly so , given the jitters in the world economy , the shadow being cast over growth in the European economy and the crashes on the stock exchanges .
The successes of the year 2000 , with record growth , healthy finances , the lowest inflation and interest rates and 2.5 million new jobs , should not be underestimated .
They say something about the need to continue the process of open coordination and link economic , employment and social policies .
We must hold on to this , otherwise there will be no further progress .
We must also anchor this in specific basic aspects of economic policy for the year 2001 .
We must be able to go on reaping benefits here , even if Europe has to overcome other weaknesses , such as excessively low , interrupted growth , unacceptable unemployment and the exclusion of too many people .
The European summit is rightly interested in economic reform , properly functioning markets and regulation , where having qualitative yardsticks is in people ' s interests .
We must therefore welcome the fact that the summit was not just a liberalisation and deregulation summit but that , at the same time , it is banking on pan-European regulation , where such regulation is needed in the interest of universal services , fair distribution and consumer protection .
Even the promotion of entrepreneurial initiative , with special attention to small and medium-sized enterprises and the venture capital and start-up finance which is vital to them , is in its infancy .
And the EU summit rightly took account of the importance of research , innovation and new technologies in creating jobs and prosperity .
In this context , we must clearly recognise that the analysis and use of public funding and the quality of such funding - including state aid - must be assessed more closely for its impact on employment .
I think we need to invest still more in people and better quality jobs .
And a further change of tack from a passive to an active employment policy , over and above the previous objectives of the European employment strategy , is still on the agenda .
Mr President-in-Office , the presidency is promising more democracy and transparency in economic policy .
But where are they when it comes to the financial action plan and the regulation of investment markets ?
The European Parliament wants speed and flexibility in the legislative area - just as you do - and welcomes the Lamfalussy report .
But we insist on full transparency and proper symmetry between the institutions in the codecision procedure .
We here in the European Parliament want the rights which the Council already enjoys .
Help us to secure them . You too , Mr President of the Commission , can help to make this possible .
Just one more thing : we also want more democracy and a real partnership when the economic policy guidelines are decided .
Both the Commission and the Council really can help in this regard and I call on them to do so .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , as my fellow Group member , Mr Haarder , announced in his intervention , I am going to focus on the specific aspects of the follow-up to the Lisbon European Council .
In this respect our Group is critical , as it sees that the results are poor .
In Lisbon what was agreed upon was a process of economic liberalisation , a process of structural reforms , the consolidation of the single European market and a move towards a single market for services , with the ambition of making the European economy the most competitive internationally by 2010 , without , of course , giving up the social dimension or the levels of well-being that characterise the societies belonging to the Union .
At this European Council , however , we have found that the individual interests of Member States have blocked necessary processes of liberalisation .
Others , through internal disputes , as the Swedish Prime Minister has said in his capacity as President of the Council , have not been able to reach the necessary agreement for the single European sky , and so it has not been possible to turn what were good proposals at Lisbon into a reality .
That is why our assessment is critical and we think the results are poor .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , if Europe wants to be more significant in the world , it has to increase in size , but Europe must also be more democratic and more transparent .
This is the view taken by many fellow MEPs .
I would add that the Europe of the Member States is not sufficiently European .
There is also the Europe of the regions which remains hidden away .
For example , you mentioned a shortage in the workforce , but there are regions in Europe which have unemployment of 6 % or even of 16 % and 20 % .
This is where Europe , and also the Member States , fail to come up to scratch .
Additionally , we need a bigger Europe in order to translate the Union ' s weight into political clout for the benefit of stability and peace .
We have already mentioned Macedonia .
It is necessary for everyone to be aware that the existence of second-class citizens always leads to difficulties .
I would like to conclude by making an observation with regard to the Middle East , where an escalating conflict is claiming victims in Palestine on a daily basis .
We too have worked hard for peace but , every day , we watch it being increasingly shot to tatters .
We are , in fact , a major donor to the Palestinians and have granted Israel privileged relations .
But we are lacking in commitment to the right to self-determination on the part of the Palestinians .
We do not exert enough pressure to obtain peace .
Mr President , in my view the emphasis at the Stockholm Summit lay on developing the internal market , in other words on economic liberalisation as stated earlier .
The social issues , particularly the question of unemployment , were hardly touched upon .
Göran Persson , it was the intention that the meeting was to focus on employment and employment policy .
However , there are two different forms of employment policy .
The first is about increasing provision on the labour market by increasing the labour force , i.e. increasing the employment rate . The second is about reducing the number of unemployed .
These are two different areas of policy .
In Stockholm you devoted yourselves to expanding the labour force by adding new groups to the labour market .
This was to be achieved by reducing the number of women at home in Europe and by retaining the elderly on the labour market for a few more years .
I have nothing against measures to increase the available workforce but no one can claim that they provide any direct benefit for the unemployed .
In fact it is rather the reverse , such that the 14 - 15 million people who are unemployed face increasing competition for jobs by the addition of new groups at the same time as wage-related pressures increase .
It would have been possible to combine both these areas of employment policy , within which the aim is both to increase overall employment and combat unemployment , by also proposing a reduction in normal working hours to 35 hours a week , or six hours a day .
It has been claimed that a cut in working hours would not result in new jobs but this does not apply to low-paid jobs where there is a very clear link between reduced working hours and more jobs .
Cutting working hours would also benefit all those who are already in work and make it easier for them to combine work and family life .
I would like to see actual measures for the unemployed .
It is not yet too late as the Swedish Presidency still has a few months left to run .
I would like to see measures specifically focused on those who are unemployed and which help them here and now .
Mr President , I have listened with great interest to the words of the President of the Commission - moreover , the press was informative on the matter - and I would like to clarify one point .
President Prodi has rightly stressed that the glass is half full and half empty , that some results have been achieved , but not all .
He is right .
However , I would like him to summon all the determination and courage which he has displayed on other occasions and make it clear that the single currency is going to come into force next year and that , if certain large-scale reforms which should have been dealt with at Stockholm are not completed before then , we will be in danger of having a currency but no control over the economy , with the consequences which are already apparent in Europe and the world .
The issues of energy , liberalisation of energy and the European patent are fundamental .
President Prodi , in my view , you would be performing a great service for Europe if , with great courage and determination , you were to declare openly - which I am sure you will do - that these are essential reforms that must be carried out without delay in the interests of all the European countries .
Mr President , a political paradox of the highest order .
This is how we can best describe the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union and Macedonia this coming Monday in Luxembourg .
This is evident from the continuing efforts by both parties to prevent an ethnic division of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , FYROM .
We need to see Europe ' s wish in that light , namely the wish for the leaders of all parties represented in the Macedonian Parliament - including Slavonic and Albanian Macedonians , therefore - to grace that ceremony with their presence .
The symbolism is crystal clear .
In that way , Macedonia ' s entire political forum would demonstrate that it is choosing to walk a peaceful , European course .
Is this symbolism , employed by Europe , misleading and , therefore , dangerous ?
The European Council ' s lucid explanation in Stockholm seems to contradict this negative interpretation .
This applies equally to the busy shuttle diplomacy on the part of Mr Solana and Mr Patten vis-à-vis Macedonia and Kosovo .
The role of NATO in this European policy on crisis management is unmistakable .
However , this encouraging note is not in accordance with the press information I received yesterday .
According to that notification , Commissioner Patten has asked for six extra KFOR infantries to reinforce the border control between Kosovo and Macedonia , a request which is , in fact , entirely in line with the European Council ' s declaration in Stockholm .
According to that press report , however , only three countries have apparently responded to Mr Patten ' s request .
If Europe is to make every effort to prevent a Yugoslavian scenario in Macedonia , European and American levers will really need to be deployed to the best possible effect .
Mr President , in economic and social terms , the Stockholm Council set itself a major strategic objective : to define the main conditions necessary in order to turn Europe into a competitive area with full employment .
Yet the Council ' s conclusions give a rather odd double impression of unrestrained intervention on the one hand and abstention on the other .
As far as multidirectional interventions are concerned , there is hardly any subject in the economic and social field which has not been mentioned , even when there was nothing new to say about it .
This makes it hard to identify the main thrusts , and in particular it is no longer possible to distinguish between what is Europe ' s responsibility and what is the Member States ' responsibility .
For example , the Stockholm Council was very concerned about the viability of social protection systems , a subject which the previous Council , in Nice , had expressly designated as being the responsibility of the Member States .
One only has to mention , somewhere in a sentence , the need to respect subsidiarity , and the machine can rumble on its way as if nothing had happened .
This omnipresent method raises not only the question of subsidiarity , but also the question of how effective the work of the Council actually is .
We very much doubt whether the Heads of State or Government were really able to examine all these subjects , and we very much doubt whether it is possible to make things happen by using such methods .
The large number of subjects dealt with merely serves to show up , even more sharply , the almost total absence of any role for the euro , despite the fact that the euro had been presented to us as the number one priority in order to achieve a competitive Europe , which was the principal objective of the Stockholm Summit .
The Council ' s conclusions contain , buried somewhere beneath a mass of words , an indication that , in less than 300 days , the euro should be circulating in the form of notes and coins , but there is no mention of the organisational reforms needed to extricate it from its present weak position in the exchange markets .
There is also no mention of the Commission ' s recent communication on this subject , which seems to have been put aside .
However , if the euro does not recover , Mr President , its credibility in the eyes of the public will be called into question .
Mr President , Prime Minister , Mr Prodi , on the front page of yesterday ' s Financial Times , Horst Köhler , the head of the International Monetary Fund , was lashing out at European political leaders , albeit in a very civilised way .
Referring to the economic situation , he said that a reduction in interest rates by the European Central Bank would undoubtedly help the European economy , but it is at least as important for Europe to bring about more ambitious transformations .
When , in the same connection , he says the IMF would probably lower its forecast for growth for the euro area for this year to 2.5 % , we can see that the financial players have reacted to the totally indecisive outcome of the Stockholm Summit with as much disappointment as my own Group , the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , here in Parliament .
We have thus already fallen below the 3 % growth target that was set for the mid term as a basis for sustaining and improving employment and social security in Europe .
Stockholm was like a mini Nice , without the squabbles .
Nobody wanted to speak up for the European common good , and most governments clung to their own interests , such as they imagined them to be .
That is what happened , despite what was certainly an enormous effort to achieve results on the part of the country to hold the presidency .
At the beginning of the year someone joked that the aims of Lisbon had become the promises of Nikita Khrushchev .
It was he who said at the start of the 1960s that the Soviet Union would overtake the United States in ten years in terms of economic power .
In the wake of the Stockholm meeting , there is going to be a grain of truth in that joke .
We have to remember that the decisions that are now required concerning European patents , the liberalisation of competition among the gas and electricity boards and in the Post Office , making air traffic more flexible , Galileo , and other matters , will not result in any real changes until four to ten years have gone by after the political decision is taken .
I would nonetheless like to mention one positive decision that was taken at Stockholm .
At last a nugget of something concrete has been found for a policy on the northern dimension .
Hopefully , it will encourage not just us in the European Union , but the Russians too , to seek and find suitable targets of cooperation in other areas .
As a Finn , I would ask the Prime Minister of our beloved neighbour and the country to hold the presidency the following question .
The conclusions of Stockholm state that the sound economic situation that has lasted quite a long time now in the European Union would not have been possible without monetary and economic union : has the Swedish government started preparations to fulfil their Community obligations by joining the third phase of monetary and economic union ?
Och på svenska : Sverige är alltid välkommen i klubben . [ And in Swedish : Sweden is always welcome to join the club . ]
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I would like to say a few words on the foreign policy decisions taken in Stockholm .
Last weekend , we all witnessed the television reports and the tension surrounding former President Milosevic ' s arrest .
Our Group , undoubtedly like many others here , welcomes this arrest with open arms .
We also have a great deal of respect for the way in which the authorities of the former republic of Yugoslavia handled this matter .
It must have been an extremely difficult situation to deal with .
There was a great deal of tangible tension .
The fact that this step was ultimately taken indicates that another move has been made towards more integration within our law-based community , also here in Europe .
At the same time , our wish remains , of course , to ultimately see Mr Milosevic brought before the International War Tribunal in The Hague .
We assume , as before , that the European Union will keep the pressure on in that respect and that the International War Tribunal will ultimately be the place where he will face his final reckoning .
At the same time , we have seen a great deal of tension , probably more than some of us had expected , in FYROM ' s border regions .
We have to say that , for all the problems in the past , we still have a great deal of respect for the way in which Mr Patten and Mr Solana dealt with the situation there , in tandem with the Swedish Presidency .
Needless to say , the early warning systems are still not fully functioning .
We probably could have reacted more promptly in a number of areas .
The consultation structures are not yet completely in place either , but we certainly have more tools at our disposal than before .
We are better able to operate in those regions , and we are seeing the first signs of a common foreign policy , something which we would very much like to promote further .
Once again , the Association Agreement too could be an excellent tool in this respect .
Here in Parliament , we are ready to adopt this agreement as quickly as possible , and we want to encourage everything which can make progress possible in this respect .
With regard to the Middle East , the Ministers Perez and Nabil Shaath of the Palestinian Authority are supposed to meet in Athens today .
In actual fact , violence increases with each passing day , while we would like to return to the old agreements , which , at the very least , ensure that both parties keep their own troops in check , and retrace our steps in terms of violence .
The UN resolutions , the Oslo agreements : it is as if some things no longer exist , and both parties operate in a very irresponsible manner .
We hope that Moratinos , our representative , in conjunction with Mr Solana and the Swedish Presidency , succeed at least in bringing those parties around the negotiating table once more , for there is no other alternative .
Either we talk and negotiate - which will bring the things which were discussed in Camp David , as well as the different possibilities , back on the negotiating table - or we end up in a situation where this spiral of violence , from which so many of the extreme factions on both sides stand to benefit , is given a chance to develop .
This brings me to my third point .
We are pleased that the Swedish Presidency has managed to bring the northern dimensions as a whole back to the fore once again .
St Petersburg has been mentioned .
This is a crucial point for us .
You have relations and contacts there which provide extra opportunities .
Which brings me to my final point .
The Swedish Presidency has , traditionally , always played a very clear role , not as the Swedish Presidency , but as Sweden in the UN Security Council .
It is evident that during the Bush administration , the cowards of this world threaten to change their course again .
It is important that Europe in this respect - Mr Barón Crespo has actually said this on behalf of our Group - adopt its own , self-assured role .
Not so much an anti-stance : we should not fall back on old patterns .
It is a ' global village ' , and we rely on global partnership .
In that respect , a unilateral withdrawal from Kyoto cannot be accepted .
This is also true of the unilateral withdrawal of the United States in other respects , such as in the field of rocket defence systems .
As Europe , we must counter this with intelligent , partnership-focused policy , and I expect that the Swedish Presidency , together with our former fellow MEP , Mr Schori from the Security Council on behalf of the Swedish Presidency , can play an excellent role in this matter .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the President of the Council on a successful summit in Stockholm .
I believe that many Swedes were delighted to see their country finally being able to act as host to the leaders of the EU .
Stockholm was supposed to be about the creation of a competitive Europe .
It was supposed to be about action , not EU rhetoric , but was that the case ?
No , unfortunately not enough , as the President of the Council himself has admitted .
Reform of the EU is going too slowly .
It was unfortunate that those in Stockholm were unable to agree on a timetable for deregulation of the energy markets .
On the other hand , they did succeed in agreeing to create a common financial market , which has been eagerly awaited .
We liberals now assume that the Council is prepared to act such that we achieve a solution which can also be accepted by Parliament .
Mr President , this is about democratic support and openness .
The Swedish Presidency has an overall vision of bringing the Union closer to its citizens .
This is an excellent ambition .
It therefore surprises me that at the Stockholm Summit the first step was not taken towards wide-ranging reform of agriculture and food policy , as this is the question possibly most under discussion over the breakfast tables in Europe , even - as I have understood - in the Prime Minister ' s own home .
Finally , I would like to point out we are now halfway through the Swedish Presidency .
One issue is becoming ever clearer : - It is becoming more and more problematic for Sweden to remain outside the EMU .
My question to the President of the Council is therefore this : according to the Council , what difficulties will be posed in terms of a more cohesive Union by Britain , Denmark and Sweden remaining outside EMU in the long term ?
I am not seeking an answer in terms of domestic policy but a theoretical opinion from an EU perspective .
Mr President , I welcome the statement that future spring summits are going to be sustainability summits , and thank the Swedish Presidency for their real leadership on this .
But if we were looking at the world properly , all our summits would be about sustainability .
The environmental and social effects of the liberalisation of the energy sector , for example , are sustainable issues .
Liberalisation alone will not help us reach our pretty meagre Kyoto targets .
How will liberalisation ensure that all people can afford warm homes if they do not have an adequate basic income ?
Will the development of our trade with Russia simply strip that country of its natural resources for the lowest possible price ?
How will this ensure its sustainable development in future ?
Sustainability is not just a domestic issue .
It is an international and inter-generational concept .
If we are to take it seriously it will radically reform the European Union agenda , which will make it a far more relevant and exciting one than people find at present .
Mr President , suffering and tragedy will continue to mark the days and nights of the Palestinians and Israelis if the international community and the European Union do not decide to take firm action to restore the international and human rights violated by the Israeli government .

The two sides are not equal : on the one hand , there is a State , which has never defined its borders , which is expanding its settlements and has one of the strongest armies in the world ; on the other , there is an occupied people and an occupied territory , without either State or army , which is unable even to exercise any control over bean imports , let alone borders : since 29 September , this people has been besieged , bombed , its villages sealed off , with its sick dying at military check points , its doctors and nurses attacked and its parliament unable to meet .
There is no European Union diplomat who does not speak openly of the way the Israeli government has contravened international rules .
Human rights organisations such as the United Nations and Amnesty International and Israeli organisations such as Betrelem also condemn this .
We must do something to restore the possibility of peace and put an end to the cycle of violence .
The Palestinian Authority must make every endeavour to stop the terrorism perpetrated by Palestinian extremists but , on the other hand , the Sharon government in Israel is not sending out peace signals : murders outside the Occupied Territories , bombings , expansion of settlements , carte blanche for the settlers , who have bombed architectural structures in Hebron which are part of our human heritage .
It is time for the European Union to find something which will convince the Israeli leaders : not sanctions or embargoes , given the disastrous results where that strategy has been adopted , but at least the suspension of the EU-Israel Association Agreement , which would probably suffice , according to Israeli organisations like Rabbis for Peace and others .
I feel that this is extremely important : we must speak out for peace , but peace in respect for all ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the excessive optimism in the wake of Stockholm and the numerous objectives on the agenda do not reflect the bitter , discouraging reality .
It is not clear , now the Stockholm Summit is over , how Europe intends to deal rationally and practically with the extremely serious issue of our ageing population and the resulting decline in the work force , while , at the same time , ensuring that it maintains a sufficient standard of living .
The outrageous on-going lack of social service provision , the discriminatory treatment of pensioners , the poverty zones which are becoming increasingly common throughout Europe , require clear , courageous choices to be made .
In other words , the single currency will not suffice without reform of the financial market .
It is pointless to attempt to achieve a stable European Union without a genuine , effective foreign policy .
As President Prodi rightly said , Europe 's credibility is at stake : too many promises have been made and not kept after recent European summits ; there have been too many dashed hopes .
Either we do act resolutely right now , or Stockholm will go down in history as yet another pointless stage in the long , exhausting attempt to produce the promised Europe for the Europeans .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I have questions to ask on three points : do you not think that the huge crises which we have seen in Macedonia are , in the final analysis , a consequence of our failure to coordinate our policies in Kosovo ?
Should we not put them down to the fact that we were not really able to do our job there , that we failed to disarm the UCK , that the fragmentation of responsibilities between numerous international organisations and within the European Union itself is a fact of life and that the crisis has again taken hold because we failed in our duty ?
I have a second question .
Mr President-in-Office . I know it is not your sole responsibility as a result of this summit , but how , in your view , will future European Councils operate once the number of seats rises and there are 27 participants , if the European Council is to discuss every detail ?
The European Council was founded so that the Heads of State or Government could discuss fundamental questions .
Now there are sometimes 30 , 40 or 50 items on the agenda .
Do you not think that the heads of government are trying - and more ' s the pity - to assume responsibility for every detail , undermining the authority of their own work and the work of the European Council in the process ?
The third point that I wish to address concerns the Council itself .
I think that , if we want to implement a reform process , the Council of Ministers must become more transparent , more efficient and more open .
Everything gets passed to the European Council because of the inefficiency and inability to take decisions of the weakest institution which we have in the European Union , namely the Council of Ministers .
That is not your personal responsibility ; it is a structural question which we urgently need to address .
I think that , for this reason , now that we are heading for a Union of 27 members , the question of legislating in public needs to be raised .
This applies to the Council , when it acts as legislator , and should demonstrate that we have an interaction in political debate in Europe .
Responsibilities must be clearly outlined and we must make clear that we need decision-making mechanisms here which bring about results .
We cannot offload everything on to the Heads of State or Government , on to you , only to find that we are unable to reach a solution .
Mr President , I would like to begin by welcoming the Prime Minister of Sweden once more to the European Parliament .
I would also like to congratulate him on a successful meeting in Stockholm .
I will concentrate on the Lisbon Process .
A discussion has taken place here concerning whether or not the process represents progress , and criticism has been heard from the right that insufficient progress has been made .
However , this depends on how the meeting of the European Council is perceived .
If the progress of the Europe of the future is measured only in terms of deregulation , it is clear that the meeting was possibly not a success .
I myself , who am also in favour of deregulation , would have liked to have seen us progress further in that direction .
However , the most important aspect of the Stockholm Summit was balance ; in other words , the fact that the deregulation which nevertheless was achieved was balanced by a policy for employment , social security and justice .
We can never create a Europe for its citizens if these ingredients are not also present .
Mrs Carlsson said that the Social Democrats in Europe were having a difficult time of it .
Let me name these ' difficulties ' , which in actual fact centre on a social democracy that has produced fairly good economic growth and which is responsible for political development in practically every country within the EU .
The difficulties are probably rather in another direction on the political spectrum , namely among Mrs Carlsson ' s friends .
I see the Stockholm Summit as a success , especially in terms of the drafts provided by the Commission , because the balance is once more established .
There are clear targets for employment , intermediate targets and employment targets for older people . Moreover , and I would address this particular point to Mr Schmid - there is certainly a link between reducing unemployment and increasing employment !
I would like to state that employment targets are more important than unemployment targets , although both are important .
In Sweden , we have combined unemployment targets and employment targets .
This , together with an active labour market policy , means an increased supply of labour but also reduced unemployment .
It is important that we have achieved this .
It is also important that childcare be introduced as a social right taking different forms in different countries , partly in order to give men and women the chance to participate in the labour market .
The issue concerns quality at work , not just creating more jobs but creating jobs where health and safety are good , where employees have substantial influence and where opportunities for skills development and professional development are in place .
All these ingredients were present at the Stockholm Summit .
This was the first stage of a process which will go on for many years .
It was also particularly important because this first stage means that the process will be able to continue in Barcelona .
Finally , I would like to see a link with the Gothenburg Summit and the ecological dimension , which is the next step .
Link this to the open coordination method and we will achieve a coherent policy .
Mr President , acting President of the Council , I welcome the addition to the agenda of the Stockholm Summit in which sustainable development and environmentally-driven growth are to be incorporated into the Lisbon strategy .
I consider that this addition is only the decent minimum .
What in fact does it mean politically ?
Might it possibly be nothing but words ?
Both the Council ' s decision and the Commission ' s basis for discussion for sustainable development , which were presented after the Stockholm Summit , place far too great an emphasis on economic policy and on competition-driven growth .
Ecofin ' s structural indicators were adopted in full but not a single environmental indicator was included , not even the Commission ' s proposal for indicators on energy efficiency nor any indicators on emissions of greenhouse gases .
In this sense the Stockholm Summit was a disappointment .
The US now threatening to withdraw from the Kyoto Agreement is scandalous and the EU ' s leaders must consider serious measures to show ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I would first of all like to congratulate the President of the Council on the results of the Stockholm Summit .
Needless to say , we want more , but sound results have been achieved .
Despite this , I would like to underline a number of the warnings which Mr Prodi flagged .
The summit is increasingly running the risk of degenerating into a media spectacle .
We have had Mr Putin , the next time we will get President Bush and , as a result , the other topics will , of course , be pushed into the background .
I should like to ask the President of the Council the following .
Yesterday , we received a visit from Mr Sakharov ' s widow in the group .
Mrs Sakharov made the following statement : ' Look , in Russia , the situation at the moment is such that there are most certainly democratic institutions and there is freedom of press , but they are no longer functioning properly . '
I wanted to ask you if these kinds of concerns which are around in the European Union also came up in the meeting with Mr Putin .
My second question concerns the following . We are all grateful for the fact that Milosevic is behind bars .
Needless to say , this is not about whether or not the Bush diplomacy has scored a victory .
This is about whether the European Union can help the former Yugoslavia , namely Serbia and Montenegro , in the fight against poverty , with the economic reforms which need to take place and with offering the people a future .
Could the Council not take an initiative in this respect , also to demonstrate to the people that it is indeed worthwhile having Milosevic behind bars ?
Finally , I hope that the summit in Gothenburg will not be overshadowed by the presence of President Bush , but will instead focus on enlargement .
This is supposedly the last summit of the year on enlargement .
Let us remove the obstacles .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , Stockholm has highlighted at least three subjects on which I should like to comment this morning .
Regarding progress and the conditions for economic growth in Europe , I think that important signals have been given . This morning I have heard some people criticising the halt that has been called on certain forms of liberalisation .
I believe that if we look at the situation with regard to Ericsson in Sweden and Marks & Spencer or Danone in France , it is time to start asking questions about the cost of the growth that we are in the process of creating .
Mr President of the Commission , I have listened to your appeal that Europe should keep its promises , but it cannot do this if it shows the door to thousands of workers .
In that respect , Mr President of the Council , when you call for a balance between liberalisation and social responsibility , it seems to us that you are in agreement with the real concerns of our fellow citizens .
From this point of view , I believe , and this will be my second point , that any progress that can be made in restructuring our services of general interest is essential .
There is this draft framework directive .
We are waiting for it to progress further , because unless it does , what is the point of defining this draft framework when we have already liberalised every sector ?
We are already well behind schedule : it is time to act and to restructure these sectors .
My second point is method .
Many people have already said this before me : Lisbon marked a certain stage , and Stockholm makes it official .
It seems to us essential that the conclusions that you adopted regarding better coordination between the Luxembourg process , the social agenda , the Lisbon process and the broad guidelines of economic policy should enable this spring Council to rediscover , or discover , its true role , that of defining policy on the basis of the preparatory work carried out by the Commission , which enables everybody to play their part , the Commission in its role as instigator , and the European Council in its role as policy maker .
Because if everyone wants to do everything , though one sometimes has the impression that it is less painful , very often it is also less effective .
Then again , in using these methods , it seems to us that , if we want to take into consideration this social responsibility that you have talked about , Mr President , we shall also have to modify our indicators .
We are not entirely clear about these social situations .
Admittedly , we have made some progress since Luxembourg , but what do we really know about the way added value is distributed ?
What do we know about how employees are defined in terms of their mobility ?
What do we know about ways of opposing these job cuts , which were supposed to be merely economic job cuts , and which are becoming financial job cuts ?
This is certainly not the Europe that we want to have .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was good that Dr Trajkovski , the President of Macedonia , was in Stockholm .
He is a man who has made an all-out commitment to interethnic coexistence .
However , if you look closely at the situation in Macedonia , you cannot but conclude that the root cause of the extremist incidents lies not so much in Macedonia as in the hesitant action of the West in Kosovo .
The fact of the matter is that the minority rules in Macedonia for the Walachians , Serbs , Romas and Turks are exemplary and many countries in the region would do well to follow its example .
Secondly : the Albanian minority of around 28 % naturally needs special treatment .
They have 4 ministers in key positions in this government .
What the previous government unfortunately failed to take into account was the question of higher education for these people and the need to resolve the problem of Tetovo University .
This government made a start on all this , despite the Kosovo crisis , and just as it did so , along came extremists from outside and upset everything .
I call on the Council to help this government to continue on its chosen path and to call on the opposition in Macedonia to support it .
And I call on the Member States to send money to Tetovo University so that it can start the academic year .
As far as Kosovo is concerned , I urgently call for the borders with Serbia and Macedonia to be closed to extremists .
We can probably do this with the help called for .
But UNMIC must get elections under way in Kosovo at long last , so that elected Albanian politicians can take their fate in their own hands and put the extremists in their place .
Governments in the west must realise that problems need to be monitored closely and a solution found .
If we keep stopping half way , we just give the extremists room to manoeuvre .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have the impression that those who are keen to emphasise the fact that Stockholm was only a half-hearted attempt at a summit , with a great deal of rhetoric and little in the way of results , would very much like to make us overlook the fact that , in Stockholm , a number of vital steps were taken in order to bring the European policy we have pursued back on track , both socially and ecologically .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you made reference to the Spanish Presidency in your introduction a moment ago .
I would , in turn , like to refer to the Belgian Presidency , for Stockholm has given this Belgian Presidency a number of very essential and firm mandates .
First and foremost , it was given the mandate to formulate goals with a view to taking up the fight against poverty and social exclusion in concrete terms at European level .
This is a very important mandate in my view .
In fact , I hope - and this hope is shared by my Group - that the opportunity will arise to discuss once again a poverty standard and a proper income for all citizens of this Union as part of the agenda .
Secondly , demographic development , to which you yourself have already referred .
I am pleased that the European pensions debate is at long last no longer held among the Finance Ministers within the framework of healthy government finance , but also among the Social Affairs Ministers with a view to guaranteeing everyone a proper pension .
Solidarity between the different generations , solidarity among the older generation and hence , the priority of guaranteeing the quality of pension schemes , will form an essential task and responsibility of the Belgian Presidency , admittedly after the homework in Gothenburg has been handed in .
In this framework , my Group is , in fact , giving its unqualified support to the decision to start formulating concrete goals on employment for older employees .
However , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , choices must be made in these areas too .
It is quite clear to me : this choice is not about brazenly discontinuing early retirement schemes or increasing the pensionable age , but rather about choosing to introduce flexible end-of-career schemes and to improve the quality of work .
This brings me to my final point , Mr President-in-Office : the quality of work .
Here too , we expect a great deal from the Council and the Commission , which has to provide us with indicators so as to , thanks to this open coordination , secure us not just more , but also better jobs .
Ladies and gentlemen , the quality of work , however , is not just a question of indicators and open coordination .
It is also a question of legislation .
We therefore expect an extra effort , both from the Commission and from the Council , to provide us with a revised directive on European works councils , within the framework of restructuring - which we are now experiencing once again - and to make a start on the directive on information and advice as a matter of urgency .
These too will help guarantee the quality of work , and we are relying on the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies to do their bit .
Mr President , let me briefly comment on what has been said .
Firstly , I would like to thank you for the support you have expressed for the Swedish Presidency and the work which we are carrying out together with yourselves and , naturally , with the Commission , and which gave us a very good basis to work on ahead of the Stockholm Summit .
This means that we were well-placed to achieve success .
I will comment on the points you raised from two perspectives .
I want to talk firstly about foreign relations and secondly about the Lisbon Process , as my initial report was primarily structured in that way .
With regard to foreign relations , I am happy that so many people here have recognised that there is an aim on the part of the presidency to get the Union ' s Member States to really work together when they are able to act together .
This is based on consensus , unanimity .
We are aware that not all of us within the Union agree on every issue , but on this issue we are agreed .
When we are able to put forward common principles , we must naturally also act together .
Naturally we attracted a great deal of attention in the media when we received President Putin as a guest .
I would not be surprised to see even greater attention from the media when we receive President Bush , but those who believe that in receiving these visitors we are seeking media attention are naturally mistaken about the fundamental work of the Union .
We have an obligation , we have a right , to take the initiative in our relations both with the United States and Russia .
Relations must be deepened and developed , and dialogue must be open .
It must be honest and it must be critical , but we must naturally , on the basis of our size and our strength , carry out this dialogue with very , very great self-confidence .
This is what this is about .
I am pleased that you realise that , during the Swedish Presidency , we are seeking to highlight joint action in foreign affairs also within the European Union and within the framework of the Council .
This is far from unimportant .
Now , a few words on the Lisbon Process .
Let me comment on the discussion on deregulation and liberalisation .
I am the Prime Minister of a country which has opened up many markets , which has liberalised and deregulated .
I primarily see positive effects of this , but I would be a very poor politician if I did not also recognise the difficulties in carrying out such a process .
This is a very large and fundamental reorganisation .
It is far from simple .
I have very great respect for the colleagues who , in their respective countries , are to begin this process in a number of central areas and deal with the political debate which many of us have already had in our countries .
It is no easy debate .
I believe that it would be an incredibly great mistake to force through decisions and so create a situation where these fundamental changes in many countries would immediately lead to extremely strong national opposition .
Therefore , I believe that the method we are using in the Lisbon Process is superior for this type of fundamental change in financial and political conditions .
I say this as a response to Mr Poettering of the Conservative Group , as I can see how the process will develop over time .
The process is heading in the right direction , and we are implementing it in such a way that we have the support of national political opinion in each country .
We can never ignore this .
I also wish to state that I myself do not wish to see deregulation and liberalisation unless the advantages created and the increased growth achieved are used to give ordinary people the chance to live better and richer lives .
We constantly have to maintain this balance .
Here I am talking to those who said that we have not produced any initiatives to combat unemployment .
Our work in this respect is characterised by the fact that unemployment is best combated by economic growth and economic development .
Without increased production , we will have no opportunities to successfully combat unemployment .
We can create various programmes , reduce working hours , carry out a large number of different initiatives - but for those people who are most hard pressed , this will always be a defensive programme .
If we are to be proactive in addressing unemployment , we must do so by increasing the cake by developing the economy .
This is why we have drawn up guidelines in Stockholm .
Several speakers have mentioned enlargement of the Union .
We are currently negotiating intensively with the active participation of the Commission .
As far as I can judge , the negotiations are successful , but they are not easy .
My task as President-in-Office of the Council is to ensure that the Union ' s regulations are highlighted in the negotiations and that we run the negotiations so as to achieve a change in legislation , markets and political systems in the countries now seeking to join the Union .
This change must make their accession as painless and successful as possible .
These negotiations are difficult and we are in the middle of them .
I am hopeful that , in the negotiations in the spring during the Swedish Presidency , we shall achieve success that we will be able to describe as a breakthrough .
Regarding openness , the presidency and Parliament are in alliance .
I hope that we succeed .
I myself would agree with the criticism which Bertel Haarder makes of the situation .
These are not reasonable conditions for political work , and we have to create greater openness if our citizens are also to have a greater chance of becoming directly involved in what forms the basis of the political decisions .
I would also like to discuss the prior conditions for Sweden , as a small country , being able to contribute to the issue of EMU and other issues : but I do not intend to take up your time over this .
I will be happy to talk about this question again in a bilateral context .
What is important for us now is to jointly ensure that the Union ' s economy is in as good a condition as possible on the day , in almost a year ' s time , when the single European currency is introduced .
We all have an interest in this , whether we are participating in the currency union from the start or whether we will be joining later .
Success , which is what we are seeking , is to the advantage of the entire European economy .
Mr President , thank you once more for your many constructive contributions and points of view .
I would also like to thank the Commission for working so well with us in the run-up to the Stockholm Summit .
I look forward to meeting Parliament again following the Gothenburg Summit , where I hope we will be able to say that we have taken a step forward on enlargement , even though a great deal of work will remain to be done on that point .
Mr President , I shall be very brief in my reply because it differs only slightly from what Prime Minister Persson said .
The reaction to this summit of tempered optimism but awareness that difficult objectives have been achieved has been common to almost all of today 's speeches , as has commitment to meeting the need for future progress and the even greater need to focus on action and implementation of decisions taken .
Having said that , I do acknowledge the objections raised and comments made by many Members on the issue of decision-making processes , on the need for new decision-making processes .

Mr Brok , Mr Poettering and Mr Segni made it clear , from the different areas of the House , that the decision-making processes observed during summits and in all our work must be strictly reformed in this lengthy review process which we have undertaken , due to be completed between the end of 2003 and early 2004 .
This is a clear commitment made by Parliament and all of us .
Another general point , then , was covered by many speakers : on the one hand , the conviction that globalisation is absolutely essential , and not just a necessity but an extremely positive debate for Europe , but , on the other , the justified - genuine - fear of some of the effects of globalisation .
I cannot , in this Chamber , fail to make my deep concern known to Parliament at the way the excellent economic progress and the rise in employment which have taken place in recent years in Europe have been accompanied by increased disparity in the distribution of wealth in what could ultimately be called a social injustice indicator , which does not necessarily have to be part of the globalisation package .
Quite the contrary : it is possible to rectify the situation and combine globalisation and social justice .
This is a subject which requires a great deal of thought for , all too often , we confuse the two things : we believe , that is , that globalisation , the fact that we are opening up our economies , will automatically lead to a less equitable , wider disparity in the distribution of wealth .
This does not have to be the case at all .
Furthermore , another point emerged as a common concern , linked to the forthcoming Gothenburg Summit , and that is the adoption of a unanimous position on the Kyoto Protocol .
This is certainly not an attack on the United States , merely awareness that we must act responsibly .
And , as Europeans , we must have a general sense of responsibility towards all the citizens of the world .
I would like to end with one last point , which might appear minor but which I consider to be extremely important .
It concerns one of the most important issues dealt with at the Stockholm Summit , and that is the implications of the enlargement of financial market relations and the resulting relationship between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
Mrs Randzio-Plath has raised this issue and rightly so , and I would like to respond briefly right here before Parliament , for it is extremely important .
I would like to make it clear that the agreement reached in Stockholm refers to a Decision on comitology , reproducing the 1999 Decision word for word - what is known colloquially as the Aerosol case - including the statements it contains and the Commission 's statement .
In this case , the Commission did not declare in Stockholm that the entire securities sector should be considered to be a sensitive sector , as requested by certain States , but it did undertake to avoid going against predominant views which might emerge within the Council in the case - and only in the case - of particularly sensitive implementing measures .
In other words , in particular , the Commission will assess each case individually , and I can therefore see no reason to change the current balance between the institutions in terms of delegated powers .
Indeed , Parliament will be able to comment on the distinction between the essential elements and the technical provisions of the measures proposed by the Commission .
Clearly , this distinction must be established through the usual procedure for codecision between Parliament and the Council .
In addition , Parliament will , and must , be informed on a regular basis by the Commission of the Securities Committee 's proceedings and , If the European Parliament resolves that the draft measures submitted by the Commission exceed the implementing powers provided for in the framework legislation , the Commission commits itself to expeditiously re-examine those draft measures , taking the utmost account of Parliament 's position .
There it is : we have to decide on the basis of concrete legislative proposals within the framework of the codecision procedure .
I wanted to point this out because it would be a shame for the progress of such an important matter as this , decided upon at Stockholm - the most important decision taken in Stockholm - to be hampered by our procedural problems or our difficulties in adopting a common position .
This must not happen : we must proceed with all transparency , for the very reason that the European citizens expect the decisions taken by the highest assembly , that is the decisions taken by the Council , then to be rapidly implemented , or Europe 's credibility will fall even more .
This will be extremely important at the Gothenburg Council .
I hope that the preparations for the forthcoming summit will be made with the same diligence and the same transparency which characterised the Stockholm preparations because , ultimately , Gothenburg is Act II of the Stockholm Council : that is , it will end the series of reforms decided upon in Lisbon , reforms whose long-term compatibility must be assessed , which is something we are no longer in the habit of doing .
But if we do not learn to do this as well , all the decisions we take will have to be revised in the future .
Mr President , it was not only courteous of the Swedish Prime Minister to come here , but also rather courageous .
As so many speakers have said , on the economic front , Stockholm was a great disappointment .
Once again Heads of Government could only agree to set theoretical deadlines for ministers to liberalise markets in the future , rather than actually set the seal on agreements that should already have been made or reach those agreements themselves .
To coin a phrase , the liberalising talk is ' all spin and no delivery ' .
We are witnessing serious under-performance by standards which Europe 's socialist leaders have set themselves .
It is all a far cry from the spirit of the single market when the centre right ran Europe .
One of the major failures of the Stockholm Summit was in the foreign affairs field .
With the great events taking place in the world , it was as if the Stockholm Summit was ignoring them .
For example , the General Affairs Council on 19 March decided once again not to table a critical motion in the United Nations sub-committee in Geneva , dealing with human rights abuses in China .
Until 1997 , every year the European Union did so .
Now the socialists are failing , it is business as usual .
Even more important - as Mr Poettering told the House earlier on , and other speakers have referred to this - last night the PPE-DE Group heard Yelena Bonner describe the situation in Russia today : Mr Putin came to Stockholm , Mr Persson gave him a cheque for EUR 100 million , the very next week Mr Putin begins yet another crack-down on the media .

There is now no single independent media channel in Russia .
This is a scandal .
I am very disappointed indeed that Mr Persson did not take the opportunity this morning to criticise President Putin for the way in which he is repressing the media in Russia , the way in which democracy is being rolled back .
This is our great neighbour to the east .
We must deal with it on a practical and political basis , but with frankness and determination .
God help us if the socialists had run Europe during the cold war .
( Loud applause from the right )
Mr President , God help us if the conservatives ever run Europe again .
I wish to concentrate on two issues which I know Parliament considers to be of the utmost importance , namely the Galileo project and the future of postal services .
Having the opportunity to speak in this debate gives me the chance to welcome not only the Council 's conclusions on the creation of a single European sky , but its determination to submit proposals on slot allocation at Community airports to Parliament by June .
With regard to Galileo it is worth remembering that this programme was actually instigated by the Council in March 1998 .
This commitment was emphasised by the Cologne Council and Feira when it was stated that strategic decisions had to be taken by December 2000 .
But then , to be blunt , the Council , no doubt under pressure from finance ministers , got cold feet .
I accept that the cost of Galileo is around EUR 3 billion , which means the involvement of the private sector is essential , but the benefits to Europe in both economic and social terms will be immense .
We have a commitment from the main European companies in this sector .
What we need now is a political commitment from the Member States not only to push ahead with Galileo , but to push ahead in a positive and determined way , working alongside the private sector .
Earlier in the day Mr Poettering criticised the Council for not giving a timetable for the liberalisation of postal services .
I actually agree with the Council on this and would remind not only Mr Poettering , but also Commissioner Bolkestein , of the position Parliament took at its first reading on postal services a couple of months ago .
By an overwhelming majority it voted for a controlled , gradual liberalisation down to 150 000 with no end-date for liberalisation .
So when I read in the Stockholm conclusions that the Council wishes to work with Parliament , I welcome this .
But I would remind the Council that Parliament 's position is clear , unambiguous and has been arrived at with a clear political consensus across political divides .
On post Parliament does not have a problem .
The Council does .
This solution is clear : accept Parliament 's position , abandon the extreme policies put forward by Commissioner Bolkestein and I am sure we can have an agreement on the future of postal services within days .
Mr President , I should like to begin by pointing out on the positive side that the Stockholm European Council has emphasised the strategy drawn up in Lisbon , and has even added to and strengthened it in certain concrete matters .
The importance placed on the Social Agenda is certainly very positive , particularly regarding the social security and health care systems , the setting of employment rates , the willingness to cut public subsidies ( although I would have liked us to have gone further ) , the development of new technologies , or the decision to create a European Food Authority .
In contrast , as regards the liberalisation processes , Mr Prodi , serious asymmetries are being created within the European Union , and this urgently requires draft legislation to regulate intra-Community investments , as almost all the Parliamentary Groups reminded Mr Bolkestein yesterday .
I shall finish by referring in this context to the intention of creating a single European sky that has been put forward by both the presidency of the Council and that of the Commission , and I should like to say to Mr Prodi that we trust that the Commission will act in this matter with the determination and prudence needed in view of the commitments undertaken , and in any case in accordance with the Community acquis .
Part of the Community acquis too , Mr Prodi , is the Gibraltar clause , which does not date back to the eighteenth century but to a 1987 agreement between the governments of the United Kingdom and Spain , within which we must push forward in order to finalise this agreement in Gothenburg .
President .
As it is time to proceed to the vote , the debate is suspended and will be resumed at 3 p.m.
Mr President , I wish to inform the Bureau that , as a result of the initiative adopted by Parliament for the release of the Portuguese citizens being held hostage in Cabinda , one of these hostages was released yesterday .
I wish to say , Mr President , that Parliament ' s initiative played an important role in this hostage being released and that we must continue to do all that we can to ensure that the remaining Portuguese hostages in Cabinda are also finally released .
I welcome the progress made thus far .
We shall now proceed to the votes .
VOTE
Pursuant to Rules 15 and 18 of the Rules of Procedure , we shall now proceed to the election of a Vice-President .
Since there is only one vacancy and only one candidate has been nominated , Mrs Catherine Lalumière , I propose that we should vote by acclamation .
( Parliament elected Mrs Lalumière by acclamation ) I proclaim Mrs Catherine Lalumière Vice-President of the European Parliament .
The incoming Vice-President will take the place of the outgoing Vice-President in the order of precedence .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Lalumière on her election and wish her every success in her mandate .
( Sustained applause )
Report without debate on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 738 / 93 amending the transitional measures governing the common organisation of the market in cereals and rice in Portugal as provided for by Regulation ( EEC ) No 3653 / 90 [ COM ( 2000 ) 763 - C5-0716 / 2000 - 2000 / 0295 ( CNS ) ]

( Parliament adopted the proposal )
Report ( A5-0104 / 2001 ) by Mr Trakatellis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council adopting a programme of Community action in the field of public health ( 2001-2006 ) [ COM ( 2000 ) 285 - C5-0299 / 2000 - 2000 / 0119 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0112 / 2001 ) by Mr Stauner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission report on the measures taken in the light of the observations of the European Parliament in its 1998 discharge resolution [ COM ( 2000 ) 558 - C5-0560 / 2000 - 2000 / 2263 ( DEC ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.35 p.m. )

Report ( A5-0113 / 2001 ) by Mr Blak , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , concerning discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1999 financial year ( Commission ) [ SEC ( 2000 ) 537 - C5-0310 / 2000 - 2000 / 2155 ( DEC ) ]
Before the vote :
Mr President , normally any corrigenda to the various language versions are announced before the vote commences .
I understand that corrections are needed to the Spanish version .
Is the Bureau aware of this or not ?
If it is , I would be grateful if they could be announced .
According to my information , there is a point in the Spanish version which has not been brought into line with the basic English version .
Mr President , I intervene in the same sense as my colleague to stress that in the draft resolution in the Blak report - and of course I am intervening after checking with the rapporteur - I want to state for the record first that it is the English version that is authentic .
Secondly , in conclusion number 8 ( ii ) , under the title Flax , there should be a language correction not only in the Spanish but also in most other languages : where in English it says ' competent authorities ' it should be translated in Spanish as ' autoridades competentes ' , and the same in all the other languages .
Mr President , I agree that the English version is the authentic one , and with regard to Mr Izquierdo ' s last statement I must say that for us ' autoridades competentes ' [ competent authorities ] and ' autoridades de control ' [ controlling authorities ] is still the same thing , in both cases they are the Autonomous Communities , but if the English version speaks of ' competent authorities ' we agree it should be so .
Mr President , I want to reiterate that this proposal was negotiated in Spanish and in English and that therefore the only thing Mr Pomés ' s intervention is trying to do is generate confusion .
I maintain that the corresponding Spanish translation of the English text is ' autoridades competentes ' , because that is the truth and that is what is correct .
Mr President , I think there has been a problem with the translations into Spanish , because in the Folias report too , there are clear differences between the English text , which is the authentic one , and the Spanish text .
In particular , I should like the translation of Section 19 to be reviewed .
There may be problems in general , but particularly Section 19 in Spanish is totally different from the English original .
This proposal for a regulation seeks to temporarily stabilise the degressivity of specific aid to Portugal for cereals , by maintaining the same level of aid for the 2001 / 2002 season as for this year .
This decision , with which we agree , was taken under the Portuguese Presidency of the EU , and seeks to maintain the cofinancing of aid for one year , thereby compensating for the collapse in income of Portuguese farmers .
Nevertheless , given the pressures from the CAP on farmers ' incomes and bearing in mind the needs of Portuguese farmers , stabilising degressivity should cover the whole period of the current financial framework , in other words , until the 2005 / 2006 season .
Furthermore , an upper limit must be imposed for the stabilisation of cofinanced aid , twice the limit of the simplified system , for example , as a means of making savings that could finance either the extension of stabilisation or the creation of support mechanisms for the production of protein crops , or the establishment of a conversion programme for alternative crops to cereals , in order to make the best use of land that cannot be so intensively farmed .
It is worth pointing out that many small farmers in Portugal are prevented from receiving proper aid for not selling all of their produce .
These farmers should be able to use their produce for on-farm consumption , which would guarantee their right to aid , if , for example , they base their application on the income brackets of their farms .
Trakatellis report ( A5-0104 / 2001 )
Mr President , as the UK Labour delegation spokesperson on health , I would like to give an explanation of vote on the Trakatellis report .
Although there are many good features in this report which deserve support - and we support them - given the voting list method of voting en bloc we have followed the PSE position throughout .
However , I would like to make it clear that the proposal for the centre mentioned in the Trakatellis report gives us great concern .
We feel that this proposal is ill-thought through , the cost implications ill-considered and the legal implications could possibly delay all that is good in this report .
As I said last night , and I will say again , health is an issue which connects with the citizen .
Therefore , it is important that we get this proposal through as quickly as possible .
I look forward to the second reading .
Mr President , as the elected representative of the Pensioners ' Party to this Parliament , I was very happy to vote for the Trakatellis report , a very important report .
I was worried about what I was going to say in my explanation of vote because I did not dream at all last night , and I was very heavy eyed when I woke up .
However , precisely because I was very tired , I closed my eyes a little while ago and had a vision .
I saw Mrs Trakatellis as if in a dream .
However , she looked like a pill , and there was writing on the pill which said " for use against cardiovascular diseases " , while other types of pills , also Trakatellis pills , bore the words " for use against neuro-psychiatric disorders " , " for use against children 's diseases " , etc .
I therefore saw Mrs Trakatellis ' important report as the sole means of curing the diseases of all the citizens of Europe .
Congratulations Mrs Trakatellis !
We consider that questions concerning public health and health care must be determined at national and regional level .
We therefore do not wish to develop the work of the EU in the area into something which increasingly controls the actions of nations in more and more detail .
We consider that with an increased budget and the foundation of a new Health Coordination and Monitoring Centre , the Trakatellis report is heading in such a direction .
We have therefore voted against the report .
Following recent events and their serious impact on public health and the food chain , such as " mad cows " , dioxin , the depleted uranium bombs dropped on Yugoslavia and a host of other incidents , we find it very hard to believe the EU 's professed interest in , or the sincerity of , its declarations of good intent regarding public health .
The EU has confirmed beyond all doubt that any intervention on its part is designed mainly to allay fears , not deal with the problems which its very policies are creating for large swathes of the population .
The EU 's intentions in the particularly sensitive area of public health are clearly set out in the conclusions of the recent Council summit in Stockholm .
Thus , it declares war on much that the workers have fought for ( by calling for spending cuts , budgetary discipline , personal responsibility etc . ) and , in the same breath , announces that it intends to " modernise the European social model " which , in the health sector , translates into more private health services and greater personal responsibility for individual needs , thereby benefiting private-sector initiative and the huge economic interests at work in the health sector and social systems .
In its specific action plan in the public health sector for 2001-2006 , the ÅU caters to the aims and needs of big business and the monopolies in the health sector .
It is no accident that there is no mention or specification whatsoever of the state ' s obligation in any area or for any aspect of these issues .
This strategy on the part of the ÅU makes health totally dependent on the laws of the market , cost considerations , profits and returns .
Health systems are now seen as a drain on public funds - rather than an investment in human resources - which need to adhere to the terms of budgetary discipline .
In Community-speak , this means cutting back on health spending , shifting the responsibility and the cost on to the people , strengthening private initiative and turning health care into a profit-making activity , the aim being to convert the health sector into a ' competitive market ' and secure the best possible terms for the powerful monopolies to win market shares and achieve market penetration while , at the same time , reducing employment and social rights and everything the workers have fought for in the health sector to the lowest common denominator and cutting back on public spending in this sector .
The European Parliament ' s rapporteur takes the same line as the Commission .
Thus , despite quite rightly referring to serious and persistent health problems , he makes no mention of the real social causes of or the circumstances which aggravate the health and threaten the lives of our citizens , such as deteriorating working conditions , alternating and night shifts , the dramatic drop in the standard of living of large swathes of the population , the spread of poverty and unemployment , the repercussions of unbridled , profit-driven liberalisation of the market on the food chain , the deterioration in the environment etc .
In the rapporteur ' s own words , " health should not be considered as a commodity , which can be the subject of political or financial compromises " and on this we are in perfect agreement .
Unfortunately , he then contradicts his good intentions by using his report to commend and back the EU 's aggressive , anti-grass roots policy in the public health sector .
This is why we shall not be voting for the report , preferring instead to stand by the workers and help them organise their resistance movement and fight for a proper , high-quality public health service which benefits the people .
We support the rapporteur ' s action on this proposal , on two points .
First , the harmonisation of the health policies of European countries would be a sensible decision , provided that it is in an upward direction , and second , the budget planned for a health policy at European Union level is ridiculously small .
Disease prevention and early diagnosis of cancers and other serious diseases , where early treatment can reduce the risks , should be one of the basic principles of the Union if it is more concerned with people than with the flow of capital and goods .
This is not the case , however .
The amendments proposed to Parliament , some of which are a step in the right direction , would not be enough , even if they were adopted , to make the policy recommended by the Commission acceptable .
A valid health policy requires resources that the Commission is refusing to provide itself with .
We have therefore abstained from voting on this report , though we have voted on certain proposals .
The 2001 ­ 2006 health programme is a fine theoretical document , which follows the philosophy of the public health Eurocrats , although it is somewhat cautious on some issues , specifically :
human public health is an issue which is crucial to sustainable human development .
Therefore , all public and private services should exist to serve it and regional coordination and funding should clearly demonstrate the importance of human health without undermining national responsibilities ;
therapeutic and diagnostic measures must not be considered to be exclusively commercial and industrial activities .
It should be noted that this component of public health has been treated as a separate commercial area and is currently controlled by multinationals , which undermines national and regional interests . We will not , therefore , be able to have a good public health programme until we change this situation ;
The programme avoids talking about factors for health in the workplace and for workers ' health .
We cannot start from the premise that the direct and indirect costs of people working in poor conditions should be met by society , leaving the capitalists with the increased profits from having their employees work in such conditions .
Lastly , I must mention the need to make more progress in protecting human public health by increasing the programme ' s funding , amongst other things , as stated in the amendments for which we have voted .
I voted against the Trakatellis report , my reasons , which also apply to my fellow CSU members from Bavaria , being as follows : the European Community is still not responsible for health policy and can therefore only coordinate .
Parliament calls in its text for a " Health Coordination and Monitoring Centre " ( HCMC ) to be set up , operated and extended .
We vehemently rejected this because this is a matter for the Member States .
In addition , there is a series of calls which go against the principle of subsidiarity , such as recommendations for school education programmes , quality standards applicable to health and training and further training .
The text adopted by Parliament also contains no specification that the limited funds available should be used in a sensible and targeted manner .
Stauner report ( A5-0112 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the Stauner report , although I would have liked to have been able to be more whole-hearted about it .
Why is that ?
Because , when I meet the pensioner , Mr Rossi , in Bergamo , he always asks me : " What do you do at the European Parliament ? " , and the pensioner , Mr Verdi , asks me every afternoon : " You spend so much money : where does it all go to ? " , and so on and so forth all day long .
My life is one continual question from citizens and pensioners , in particular , asking what we spend Europe 's money on .
What I want , therefore , is for us to ensure , in future , that we monitor all this money we spend as well .
Of course , we do spend it wisely , but what on ?
Let us therefore verify whether this money is used to bring practical benefit to the European citizens .
Blak report ( A5-0113 / 001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted against the discharge to the Commission for the 1999 financial year . Why is that ?
Because I hope that the Commission will make much , much greater efforts . But to do what ?
To resolve the problems of pensioners and elderly people in Europe .
And how ? In totally the opposite way to that which I regret to say is continuously advocated , not just by the Commission , but also in this House and by the Council .
I should like to make it clear in this explanation of vote that workers do not want to work forever : they want to reach the point where they can receive a pension soon , a good pension which is enough to live on , in order to make way for young people .
The Pensioners ' Party is totally against any attempt by the European governments or Europe to extend the length of citizens ' working lives .
Rather , we are calling for the length of time spent working to be reduced and the length of time spent at leisure , when it is not obligatory for citizens to work , to be increased .
Naturally we have voted against giving any discharge to the European Commission .
We disapprove of both past budgets and the future budget , and of the very function of a Commission that is entirely in the service of industrial and financial groups .
Our negative votes on individual points are merely a continuation of this general lack of confidence .
Mr Blak ' s report contains many points of criticism with regard to the European Union ' s expenditure and the responsibility for this .
According to his recommendations , a great deal needs to change yet .
Further to this justified criticism , the logical conclusion would be for Parliament once again to vote against the discharge of the previous budget year .
Voting against is Parliament ' s only means of exercising power in order to bring about change and to challenge the Council ' s and the Commission ' s arrogance .
Voting in favour , following a series of pleas , is not such a powerful weapon .
That would be a mere signal that everything can simply stay the same , even if there is little or no change ultimately .
Does approval mean that , after a few demands and critical remarks , we will turn a blind eye to a number of fraud cases , such as the fraud case in Spain on which an OLAF report has been published recently ?
I will not grant approval until these instances of fraud have been resolved , the perpetrators penalised and the money concerned paid back .
Until such time , it is not wise to trust to the good intentions of the new European Commission which took up office in the autumn of 1999 .
To my great surprise , the otherwise so critical rapporteur now proposes to grant approval . I do not share his view on this .
I voted against discharge for the following reasons : I welcome the explanation given to plenary by the Commissioner for budgets on the Fléchard case on 3 April 2001 .
However , this alone is not tantamount to a fresh start in the Commission ' s policy on dealing with cases of fraud .
There is no clear statement that the way in which the case was handled after January 1994 was illegal .
Nor has there been any significant change in the Commission ' s inadequate information policy vis-à-vis Parliament compared with the 1998 discharge .
I find it unacceptable that the budgetary authority called for but , as the rapporteur details in annex 2 to his report , failed to receive 11 audit reports , including all the delegations ' audit reports .
This inadequate Commission information policy is exacerbated by the framework agreement which only allows the rapporteur access to documents .
I also feel that I must abide by the resolution passed by plenary in December 2000 on the so-called Morgan report to the effect that , in future , discharge must be postponed if the documents requested have not all been submitted by the Commission .
According to the rapporteur ' s own information , this applies here .
van der Laan report ( A5-0108 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for this report , which regulates and comments on the granting of discharge to a number of European Union bodies , and I would like to explain why I voted for one specific heading : the heading on the budget set aside for the Committee of the Regions .
Some people - and I will tell you who , the British conservatives in particular - are calling for the Committee of the Regions to be abolished .
I do not support them .
In my opinion , the regions in Europe should be more highly valued and their importance stressed and appreciated because I feel that the future of Europe is , on the one hand , Europe , and , on the other , the regions of Europe .
The national States have to decide to take a step backwards .
We cannot have everything : therefore , let us hear less of the national States , and more of the regions and more of Europe .
Seppänen report ( A5-0097 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , the Seppänen report comments on the abolition of the ECSC .
I have had a passion for Europe since I was ten years old , and my heart bleeds to read this report on how to liquidate the ECSC , the European Coal and Steel Community .
In stating that I voted for the report , I would therefore like to propose to Mr Seppänen that he should organise a day of - joyful , enjoyable - commemoration , full of hope for the future , of that major initial step which was the signing of the ECSC and Euratom Treaties .
Rühle report ( A5-0109 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I told you just now that I had dropped off for a moment .
Well , I had a day-dream - as opposed to a real dream - on precisely the Rühle report , which gives me the opportunity to explain why I voted for the motion .
I was Gulliver-Fatuzzo , a minuscule man , and I was surrounded by giants .
Who were these giants ?
They were an African , an Asian , a South American and a man from the Bahamas : in other words , they were the inhabitants of the developing countries covered by this report .
These giants bent down towards the dwarf-like Fatuzzo and said : " Listen : do you think that we are the countries which need to develop or is it that you , the peoples of Europe , the modern peoples , appear to be developed countries but , in actual fact , have tiny brains ?
You are the ones who need to develop , for we are already developed enough ! "
Hermange report ( A5-0084 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , in my speech yesterday , I explained to Commissioner Diamantopoulou that I would like her to pass on the requests that our entire Parliament is making to the national States for there to be genuine equality in Europe for people with disabilities .
In fact , this morning , during the forty winks which I have already mentioned , I saw myself having dinner with Mrs Diamantopoulou , who has thus far not taken up the invitation I extended to her .
In any case , in my dream , I was having dinner with her , and she said to me : " Look , Mr Fatuzzo , I have succeeded in having the Italian law abolished which prevents people with disabilities who are over 65 years old receiving a disability allowance .
Look , Mr Fatuzzo , I have succeeded in getting the European Union to adopt the regulation which makes it possible for people with disabilities to move around within the Union without losing their pensions . "
It was only a dream , Mr President !
The European Commission ' s proposal is based on the ruling class ' s familiar tack of providing so-called equal opportunities and free access to people with disabilities , as can be seen from the title of the report in question , " Towards a barrier-free Europe for people with disabilities " .
The effort to mask the class aspects of the problem is obvious .
How can a child with disabilities from a poor lower-class family and a child from a rich family have equal opportunities ?
It is also quite deliberate , because any positive measures proposed in the report ( design standards , new services etc . ) will basically be enjoyed by disabled people from the wealthy classes .
Finally , what is interesting is that the requirements of people with disabilities have been commercialised in all areas , e.g. in education , on the market for technical aids , in securing cheap labour etc .
And the odd positive measure , such as access to transport , the recognition of national cards to promote freedom of movement in the Member States of the ÅU or the facility to transfer disability allowances from one state to another , does nothing to change this .
People with disabilities are the first and the most tragic victims of the policy to cut social spending on health and welfare and abolish social security systems .
Typically , not one EU text mentions the need for social spending in order to address the problems of people with disabilities and , here too , we must rely on non-governmental organisations , volunteers and the family to deal with the acute social problems of people with disabilities .
They may go on ad infinitum about new services , technical aids etc . , but nowhere does it state that these will be provided free of charge or that the cost of purchasing them will be subsidised .
The only good thing is that employers are subsidised for taking on people with disabilities .
And yet , despite the fact that employment subsidy programmes have been around for years , unemployment among the disabled is nearly 70 % , according to periodic studies published by independent organisations .
As far as special education and training are concerned , apart from a few generally positive but non-binding proposals relating mainly to tertiary education , the text is based on the unscientific approach of placing pupils with disabilities in mainstream schools , ostensibly with a view to integrating them into society as a whole .
The authors of the report must surely be aware of the fact that this experiment failed in Germany and France , where a series of special schools were closed at the beginning of the 1980s , only to open again at the end of the 1980s , in order to prevent a social outcry .
How can deaf , blind or paraplegic children attend lessons in downtrodden state schools , play etc. when specialists say that even special books are needed for blind and deaf children ?
No one dared to apply these measures in England , because there was a huge reaction from universities , associations of the disabled etc .
All the integration approach does is to cut social spending , shift the financial burden onto the family and provide the disabled with a second-rate education .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will not be voting in favour of the report .
I congratulate my French Conservative colleague , Mme Hermange , on her imaginative and constructive report .
Conservatives in the UK have voted in favour .
Member States need to be much more proactive in recognising the special needs of the disabled , and we hope that they will very much take on board the thrust as well as some of the specific ideas in this report .
However , we urge that the report must not be used as a lever to try and harmonise social security benefits across the EU : this has to remain a Member State competence .
We particularly applaud two firsts today - the appearance of the report in Braille in three languages , and the use of sign language in the debate .
The EPP / ED Group is not just talking about the needs of the disabled : we are actually doing something positive about it .
In speaking with regard to the issue of people with disabilities in Europe , we should always start with the premise that this issue is firstly and foremost a civil and human rights issue .
We have a duty not just to pontificate about rights , but to actively encourage access to education , training , employment and opportunity .
We can go back over previous resolutions and reports from this house concerning people with disabilities .
However , the same basic barriers and problems still exist .
Some Member States and some NGOs have valiantly brought forward innovative initiatives to remove the barriers and obstacles to equal opportunity for all .
However , some still see this as a specific sector rather than as a reflection of our society ' s failure to give opportunity for all .
At the dawn of the 21st century , we should send a message to the world that the EU recognises the ability in all , the right to equal treatment and equal access to opportunity .
In supporting this report , I commend to members the points concerning the role of organisations dealing with disabilities and other NGOs who have been powerful advocates on their behalf , and who have listened to the voices of the people and who grasp the opportunity to change the world for the better for all of us .
We should work towards ensuring that by 2003 , which is the European Year for disabled persons , we have guaranteed that the majority of those barriers have been removed .
I warmly welcome Mrs Hermange 's report on a barrier-free Europe for people with disabilities .
It is crucial that we in the European Parliament support such important measures to improve equal opportunities for people with disabilities .
This report calls for an equal treatment directive covering a range of areas such as employment , education and training , transport , the information society and consumer policy .
It also underlines the need to mainstream disability issues into all policies .
The EU Heads of State or Government at the Lisbon and Stockholm Summits aimed to create the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-driven economy in the world , capable of sustainable economic growth accompanied by quantitative and qualitative improvement of employment and of greater social cohesion .
However , we have a desperate shortage of skilled workers in the IT sector across the European Union .
Surely it is pure common sense to train and make use of all our citizens so that we have a more skilled workforce to fulfil this ambition .
I strongly believe that those with disabilities will be indispensable in this sector .
The manpower is available , we just need to introduce effective training and ensure there is no discrimination in allocating the jobs .
The need is there , the manpower is there - we must seize the opportunity and respond to this challenge of a new economy .
I fully support measures to improve accessibility for people with disabilities in all areas of life ranging from employment to IT .
This will not only transform the lives of many people with disabilities who will now be encouraged to play as full a role in society as everyone else , but it will also transform the economy of the European Union and make it truly the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world based on greater social cohesion .
I welcome the fact that the communication implements the process set out in Declaration 22 , annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam , which states that , when measures are drafted to create the single market , the needs of people with disabilities will be taken into account .
It refers to the 1996 communication concerning equal opportunities for people with disabilities , recognising their rights , rather than regarding them as people in need of charity .
This is a fundamental change in attitude which should be emphasised .
This initiative seeks to fill the gaps in the strategy for incorporating the rights of people with disabilities into Community policies in the fields of transport , access to public buildings and public areas , the information society , research and development and consumer policy .
The concept of people with disabilities includes all types of disability , whether physical , mental or sensory .
This is another important fundamental change .
The lack of statistics on this subject has been apparent since 1998 .
In order to remedy it , Eurostat will be supplying three studies : a new module of the survey on the workforce in March 2003 , the publication , at the beginning of 2001 , of indicators that can be used as a basis for analysing the level of participation of disabled persons in the employment market , cultural life , and a broadening of the scope of the survey by the Community household panel on the daily obstacles perceived in each household .
The report makes a useful point in emphasising that the initial barriers to people with disabilities arise mainly during childhood .
Following the Luxembourg Charter on education for all , first priority should be given to parents where education is concerned , so as to give them the means of having a real choice , while respecting their family values and traditions .
( Intervention shortened pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.12 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Outcome of the European Council of 23 / 24 March 2001 in Stockholm including the situation in the Middle East ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the outcome of the European Council of 23 / 24 March 2001 in Stockholm including the situation in the Middle East .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am really sorry that we did not manage to conclude the debate this morning , as a rounded overview depended on it .
I think that the Stockholm Summit set the wrong priorities .
Too much social and education policy - matters which , according to the Treaties on European Union , are not its concern - and too little market liberalisation .
The liberalisation of the energy markets was blocked by my country and by France .
As for the liberalisation of air space , we are still wrangling over how to deal with Gibraltar airport , meaning that umpteen thousand tourists will again be left sitting in airports this summer due to delayed flights .
And all the while , Stockholm was busy setting specifications for social and education policy !
It is unacceptable .
Europe is putting the cart before the horse .
It needs to continue with its liberalisation policy so that the markets can develop in the consumers ' interest .
This also qualifies as consumer and social policy because more competition means cheaper prices .
As far as social and education policy per se are concerned , we should again abide strictly by the principle of subsidiarity and leave it to the Member States to put flesh on the bones of these concepts .
Europe is not culturally homogenous , nor should it become so .
Therein lies our strength because , on the contrary , Europe thrives on its diversity .
I think that Europe should stop wasting its energy and should again focus on tasks which it is able to carry out .
The next Council in Gothenburg in June will give the Heads of State or Government an opportunity to do so .
I hope that they will make use of it for the good of Europe .
Mr President , at the beginning of this discussion , I was reminded by Mr Dupuis of the moral depths to which I had sunk with my report on Russia .
I harbour no hard feelings towards him for saying that , and I remain faithful to this dual-track policy , also politically speaking .
With regard to the Russian Federation , it is , in my opinion , very judicious always to talk in no uncertain terms , even if this involves Chechnya .
We therefore regret that the presidency in Stockholm failed immediately to refute the statements by Mr Putin , who draws parallels between the conflict in Macedonia and that in Chechnya , and did not substantiate our stance .
I believe that our Russian colleagues respond better to tough talking than evasive behaviour .
Furthermore , it appears to me to be of the utmost importance , with regard to Russia , to underline how important matters such as the northern dimension are - no need to convince Sweden of this - but also how important Kaliningrad is becoming , especially as it will form an enclave in the European Union where the rules for the inhabitants will need to be adapted in such a way that they , for example , will benefit from the Schengen acquis .
In this day and age , in which Schengen is becoming increasingly computerised , this should be child 's play , and it should also be possible for the citizens of Kaliningrad to benefit from the regulation on obtaining visas .
With regard to the Balkans , I am delighted that the Serbian police had the courage to arrest Milosevic .
I hope the SFOR stabilisation force will pluck up the same courage to arrest Karadzic , for now that Belgrade has been able to take this step , we cannot afford to lag behind in Bosnia .
The Council must therefore exert pressure on all those who are responsible for SFOR to arrest Karadzic .
It is also clear that the Serbian Head of State cannot be treated differently from any other Head of State in this respect , simply because his actions have been more evil .
I believe it is absolutely vital that he should be brought to The Hague , and that Serbia should certainly not form an exception in this respect .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposals made by Alexander Lamfalussy on the type of legislative process needed in connection with the implementation of the financial services package are a step in the right direction because , for the first time , a clear distinction has been made here between the law , the directive , the regulation passed by the Council and Parliament and the technical implementation of the directive .
As a result , adjustments to new developments in the technical sector can be made much more quickly than was the case in the past .
The Heads of State or Government decided that the European Economic Area should become the most modern and the most competitive economic area , and this calls for a modern legislative procedure .
If what has been thought up here later proves its worth , it can be applied in other areas during the technical legislative procedure , perhaps including agriculture .
So what exactly is the problem ?
The problem is that even technical implementation , i.e. even the regulations issued on this basis , often conceal problems for our citizens .
Here policy must be able to intervene and pull these points back into the decision-making process of the policy .
When this happens , given that it is a codecision procedure , the European Parliament must have the same rights as the Council .
What was agreed in Stockholm is a good agreement between the Commission and the Council , but Parliament has still been left out , which is why we need further negotiations in order to bring about a result which will also satisfy Parliament .
Mr President , I fully subscribe to the intervention by Mr Von Wogau and I shall make some additional remarks .
The Lamfalussy report is based on one sure fact : the legislative procedure we have is too slow and prevents us from shaping legislation to market needs in time .
What the Lamfalussy report does not say is that the point where legislation on this matter normally gets bogged down is in the Council .
Therefore I think the telling-off was aimed at the wrong culprit .
Secondly , the Lamfalussy report tries to solve this problem by delegating the drawing up of enforcement measures to a stocks and shares committee in which the Council and Commission do not lose an iota of the power they had , while Parliament ' s power is cut back .
In my opinion , the solution prescribed may generate a lack of confidence which , in the long term , will result in an even slower process than we have had until now .
What Parliament is asking is that when a rule of enforcement goes too far in relation to general principles , it must not be seen as a mandatory rule but as an unlawful one .
We are not asking the Commission to take our opinion into consideration ; if the rule goes too far , the rule is not a rule .
That is what the theory of the mandate says , which I learnt in Roman Law , or the theory of the delegation of powers , which I learnt in Political Law .
But perhaps the most important thing in this deviation of the Lamfalussy report , which has been taken up by the Stockholm Council , is the intergovernmental deviation to the detriment of the Community method of drawing up rules , and secondly , and even more importantly , the desire to speed up the liberalisation of the internal financial services market without , at the same time , adjusting the rules and measures that provide controls or safeguards .
Under these conditions we could find ourselves with a hypermarket with no political control , in which the nation states are subordinated to semi-political decisions made by economic agents that would move with absolute freedom around the Union .
We had more or less the same discussion before the Single European Act , when fortunately Mrs Thatcher ' s ideas did not triumph .
Mr President , a decision with serious consequences for Europe and its information society will be taken tomorrow .
I am counting on a ' Yes ' to Galileo and on the insight of the Council of Transport Ministers .
We need a unanimous political vote and no more beating about the bush .
The critics still around should be told that the public-private partnership is feasible provided there is a clear political vote .
Military use may be possible , but it is not a prerequisite .
The infrastructure created by Galileo will have a much higher added value in the future than other previous infrastructure measures .
Technologically-minded young people in Europe will find attractive new jobs through Galileo .
Europe ' s high tech industry will be at the top of the world league in this forward-looking sector .
The so-called market value of Galileo increases in indirect proportion to the start-up capital needed .
We must be able to insist on the European negotiating principle of burden sharing in this sector too .
It should not be too painful for the Member States to meet each other half way under these circumstances ; on the contrary it should be a piece of cake .
We must do the job properly now !
Tomorrow will be too late !
Our biggest competitor , the USA , is laughing all the way to the bank and is delighted at every setback in Europe .
After all , we still need seven or eight years to roll out .
Presidents Persson and Prodi rightly and emphatically drew our attention to this new technological opportunity for a modern Europe at the start of this morning ' s debate .
I repeat : Galileo is a gateway to a European information society and I expect the Council of Transport Ministers to perceive it as such tomorrow .
Mr President , on the Galileo project I would like to seek some clarification from the Commission and the Council on important issues which need to be addressed before the definitive phase of the project can be approved .
The Memorandum of Understanding signalling the provisional funding from private bodies of EUR 200 million needs further explanation .
Could the Commission therefore give specific examples of some of the businesses which have agreed to the funding ?
Could the Commission also confirm reports that unless a firm political decision is taken on the definitive phase by June 2001 , then such engagement of funding by private industry will become obsolete ?
Could the Commission also comment in this regard on the lack of a political commitment to come out of the Stockholm Summit ?
Surely vague rhetoric will not suffice when billions of euro are at stake and the deadline , according to the Commission 's timetable , is less than three months away ?
In the interests of transparency , may I call on the Commission to make absolutely clear its intentions with regard to the funding of this project and whether , in the absence of substantial private-sector interest , it will fund the project solely from the EU budget , including the EUR 220 million it will cost to maintain the project per annum ?
Could the Commission also provide an up-to-date breakdown of the contributions foreseen from individual Member States ?
On development , is the Commission aware that whilst the EU has been spending millions on Galileo the US has been updating its existing technology ?
Could the Commission justify why Galileo will only be used for civilian purposes , as it seems absurd that the EU decides to build its own satellite navigation system , yet denies its military capacity ?
In conclusion , launching satellites is a very expensive business .
We need firm assurances that investments in the Galileo project will produce an adequate return .
Fundamental questions and less than three months to go .
Unless the Commission comes forward immediately with some answers on this project , we in the EU run the risk of appearing amateurish and irresponsible .
I therefore urge the Commission and Council to consider these points .
At a cost of billions to the taxpayer , to whom we are directly responsible , we are entitled to some answers .
I have received seventeen motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Area of freedom , security and justice
Mr President , today we are debating the annual report on the area of freedom , security and justice created at the Tampere Summit in October 1999 .
I think we should in fact call it an area of justice , freedom and security , because justice is the cornerstone of our European Union , which sees itself as a Community of justice .
We made two important steps forward in Nice , which we welcome : first , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which was adopted and should now be made legally binding and , secondly , the reform of the European Court of Justice ; these are two of the pièces de résistance of the Nice Treaty .
Nonetheless , Europe as a Community of justice still has a long way to go , especially as regards cross-border judicial collaboration in civil and criminal matters and - and I think this is most important - in human and civil rights , precisely because the Charter of Fundamental rights is still not binding .
And , of course , being a Community of justice also means that we require not only that candidate countries comply with the acquis communautaire , but that we implement and comply with our own resolutions and legal acts .
Hence , our main question to the Council and to the Commission is , what is the current state of play as regards the implementation of the agreements and resolutions which form part of the acquis communautaire , what is the timetable here and why are there still so many delays in this area ?
The second issue is freedom .
Freedom is a product of justice .
Freedom is based on human dignity .
But , to prevent freedom from being abused , we need security , because without security and without justice , freedom is the law of the strongest .
We do not want a law of the strongest , we want a law of the weakest , which is why we need a security policy based on justice .
There are considerable deficits in the cross-border fight against crime , in collaboration in judicial matters and in the unification of law .
In this sense , I should like to call on the Council to expand Europol without delay , to make some headway at long last with parliamentary control of Europol , to finalise the establishment of the European police academy in coming weeks - here too there have been delays , even if the Commission had positive developments to report yesterday - and to ensure that there are common European border controls .
The European Parliament suggested this on my initiative three years ago .
I am grateful that a few Member States are now pressing in the Council for uniform border controls on the external borders of the European Union .
But we also want to ask the Council in this extremely important debate exactly how it sees its responsibility vis-à-vis the European Parliament .
We have begun excellent collaboration with the Commission and with Commissioner Vitorino but we have identified a number of clear deficits as regards cooperation in the area of justice and internal affairs .
We are holding today ' s debate without a written annual report or any documents on the part of the Council on what has been done and still needs to be done in this crucial political area .
The Commission scoreboard here is exemplary .
But there is no annual report from the Council on what happened in the year 2000 in this crucial area .
I think that Parliament should be properly informed and taken into account and that Parliament needs to be more involved in the crucial area of justice and internal affairs .
We can see crucial deficits on the part of the Council here .
You cannot build a citizens ' Europe and yet bypass the elected representatives of the people , namely us parliamentarians .
Finally , I should like to comment on the sensitive area of asylum law .
What we are lacking here - as in justice and internal affairs as a whole - is a strategic approach on the part of the Council .
We have a plethora of often contradictory initiatives from the individual states .
We have a multitude of individual approaches , but still no strategic approach to a common asylum policy , a common immigration policy or a division of the burden , a division of the numbers between the Member States .
We call on the Council to make good these deficits .
Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for inviting myself and my colleague Mrs Klingvall .
It is a great honour to be able to talk to you today .
The European Parliament is a very important player in European integration and the Swedish Presidency places great emphasis on having a good relationship with you .
We hope we have been able to demonstrate this ambition in part , particularly in meeting committees in Stockholm .
This is a very relevant area which we are discussing today .
Studies clearly show that judicial cooperation is close to the heart of European citizens .
Today , organised crime largely transcends national borders , not least because of the development of new technology .
There are justified demands and higher expectations from the European citizens that we really will deliver results , in both the field of justice and home affairs .
As you possibly know , on justice issues we currently have the heaviest legislation programme within the whole Union .
In the Treaty of Amsterdam and the conclusions from the Tampere Summit the EU has put forward a very ambitious plan for how we are to succeed in achieving an area of freedom , security and justice .
Implementation is , as you know , now at a very intense stage .
As you also know , the Treaty on European Union lays down that each year the European Parliament is to hold a debate on the progress which has been made in the areas covered by Title VI of the Treaty on European Union .
Although the Treaty only refers to the third pillar , I and my colleagues do not wish to restrict the debate to questions concerning the third pillar .
Often there is an intimate link between issues falling under the first and third pillars .
In general it can be said that the year 2000 , which is what we are reporting on today , is year one of the post-Tampere period .
As I said , Tampere meant a major step forward in justice and home affairs , and a very ambitious programme was adopted .
I would like to begin by briefly mentioning some of the progress made in the field of justice during 2000 .
In that year the Justice and Home Affairs Council passed around twenty legal instruments , eight of which were regulations and three conventions .
Action plans have been adopted for almost all areas of activity on justice and home affairs .
Over and above this the Council adopted over thirty conclusions , resolutions , recommendations and reports .
Progress was made on a number of issues by the very successful French and Portuguese presidencies .
Decisions were reached in several important areas in terms of combating economic crime .
A decision was passed on protection of the Euro , and at the joint meeting of JHA / Ecofin in Luxembourg on 17 October , a number of important decisions were adopted , e.g. concerning money laundering .
We took the first step in the process towards setting up Eurojust , which we consider an incredibly important aspect in the fight against organised crime .
We made major efforts in the fight against IT crime , e.g. by adopting a decision on combating child pornography on the Internet .
Furthermore , we succeeded in developing the principle of mutual recognition by adopting a programme of measures regarding mutual recognition of judgments in criminal cases .
Several decisions were also passed to improve cooperation in the field of civil law , for example , on the service of documents , insolvency and on the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters .
Having said this I would like to focus on the question posed by Mr Posselt .
I will attempt to respond to the parts concerning justice and home affairs , while my colleague Mrs Klingvall will reply to the questions concerning asylum and immigration .
Mr President , part of the question asked concerns the dialogue between the institutions and the measures which have been planned to make this dialogue more efficient and more clearly define the relationship between the institutions , the Member States and , for example , Europol and Eurojust .
The Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere Conclusions have meant major changes in the field of justice and home affairs .
As I said earlier , ambitious plans have been laid down and the rate of work is increasing .
Not only the scope but also the character of cooperation has changed .
The institutions have partly taken on new roles and the way they work is being redesigned .
We are in the middle of the implementation of Tampere , and we can identify certain areas in which all the institutions are adapting to new conditions .
It is my firm conviction that setting up an area of freedom , security and justice requires close cooperation between the Council , the Commission and Parliament , and it is in this spirit that the Swedish Presidency wishes to act .
The Treaty provides a clear framework for formal relations between the Council and the European Parliament when legal instruments and other instruments are being drawn up in the field of justice and home affairs .
The Council is fully aware that the ambitious work in this area also means a considerable workload for you in Parliament .
The Council ' s deadlines for statements from the European Parliament must be determined by balancing considerations on the one hand of the importance of the issue being dealt with promptly and , on the other , of the workload of the European Parliament .
Here we have to jointly take responsibility for the future of the EU .
It is important that we focus on what is important and really focus our time and energy on the central issues of EU development .
The Swedish Presidency has begun discussions on the way the Council works .
At an informal Council meeting on 8 and 9 February , where we also had the pleasure of meeting Mr Watson , we all agreed that making the work of the Council more efficient is necessary if we are to achieve the targets which were laid down in Tampere .
One question which will be addressed in the overview which has begun is the constantly increasing multitude of initiatives in the area of justice and home affairs .
It is my conviction that we must achieve better predictability and coordination when it comes to new legislation initiatives .
Such an improvement would make the joint work of the institutions much easier .
I would also like to say something about the relationship between the institutions and Europol and Eurojust respectively .
It is the conviction of the presidency that Parliament ' s access to and opportunities to monitor , for instance , the work of Europol , can and should be improved .
The presidency considers that this ought to be able to be arranged in practice .
There may be measures which can be taken in the short term and which may not require any regulatory changes .
When it comes to Eurojust , the Council has not yet begun to discuss how Parliament and Commission are to be involved in the work and given the opportunity to monitor operations .
It is nonetheless clear that questions concerning relations between Eurojust , the Commission and Parliament will be addressed in the negotiations .
The proposed Council decisions on which Parliament is to issue its opinion are based on the regulations in the Europol Convention , both in terms of the Commission ' s participation in the work and the opportunity of Parliament to monitor it .
Where this issue , too , is concerned , I would like , however , to emphasise that we must consider the opportunity of further improving conditions for Parliament to gain access .
Before addressing the next question , I would like to emphasise our aim of maintaining good relations with you .
To emphasise this we submitted a written report to you yesterday that clearly lays out the work of the Council in the field of justice and home affairs during the past year .
Mr Posselt also mentions the principle of mutual recognition and the measures which are planned to improve the mutual recognition of judgments in the field of criminal law .
The mutual recognition of judgments in criminal cases and traditional judicial cooperation have the same purpose : for cooperation between Member States to improve such that we can achieve an area of freedom , security and justice .
In December last year , in the light of the conclusions from Tampere , the Council adopted a programme of measures to implement the principle of mutual recognition .
This programme of measures is ambitious and wide-ranging .
It contains a large number of measures which are to be implemented .
The principle of mutual recognition as expressed in the programme of measures covers decisions before the judgment , the judgment itself and decisions after the judgment .
In light of this , Sweden , together with Belgium and France , has taken the initiative for an instrument on decisions before judgments .
This concerns mutual recognition of decisions , and the freezing of assets and evidence .
The instrument aims to quickly prevent assets and evidence being hidden from the authorities investigating the crime .
When the instrument was presented , it was received positively , and negotiations will begin this spring during the Swedish Presidency .
During the spring it is likely that initiatives concerning mutual recognition and enforcement of fines will be submitted .
This will see the beginning of work in recognising and implementing the judgments themselves .
I would also like to mention cooperation in the field of civil law , particularly the work which has commenced to create a European Enforcement Order for uncontested debts .
A European Enforcement Order , unlike a national one , could be enforced in all Member States without any inter-state control .
This is the first important step towards our goals , namely for judgments in one Member State to be able to be recognised and enforced directly throughout the entire Union .
To conclude I would like to answer Mr Posselt ' s questions on the implementation of legislation in our field and the issue of what we just mentioned , an annual report on implementation .
In the work in creating an area of freedom , security and justice , we are largely dependent on legal instruments which must be implemented in the national law of Member States .
A number of instruments which we agreed on at the end of the 1990s have already been able to enter into force .
Furthermore , we currently have an opportunity to implement several instruments despite the fact that they have not entered into force in all Member States .
After the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , several community legal instruments , such as regulations , have been adopted in the field of justice and home affairs .
Several of these instruments have already entered into force or are on the way to doing so .
One concrete example is what is known as the Brussels II Regulation on the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters .
We initially also mentioned that we are in the process of producing an overview of our working methods at JHA .
The question of the Member States ' implementation of the measures taken in the field of JHA is one of the questions addressed in this context .
I do not rule out further measures being needed if Member States are better to live up to what they have undertaken in the Council .
Some form of control of implementation may be one way of putting pressure on all of us to really fulfil our undertakings .
The presidency today has no final solutions as to what such a mechanism would look like .
The proposal referred to in the question , an annual report , may be one way but the Council will have to return to that question with more concrete information at a later date .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Members of the Council , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Posselt for having tabled the oral question that has formed the basis for this debate .
In answering the questions he has raised , I shall not focus on what was done in 2000 , because an exhaustive and rigorous assessment of this subject has already been made by the representatives of the Council . First and foremost , I wish to outline the most important landmarks in the process of preparing for the Laeken European Council , which is the occasion that has been chosen for the first in-depth assessment of the results we have achieved in implementing the Tampere mandate .
1999 was a turning point in the field of justice and home affairs .
2000 marked the beginning of the implementation of the Tampere mandate .
In the Commission ' s opinion , it is no exaggeration to say that we have made a good start .
We feel that we have made a proposal for a scoreboard with whose structure and content you are all familiar and I shall therefore not go into this in detail . Through this scoreboard , however , we will be able to identify , transparently , clearly and with a sense of responsibility , the progress as well as the delays in the way we are implementing the Tampere mandate .
I shall , therefore , not be referring to the scoreboard ' s content , but I do wish to begin by referring to an issue raised by Mr Posselt ; that of drafting an annual budget on progress made in consolidating the area of freedom , security and justice .
The Commission takes the view that a dynamic scoreboard such as we would wish this to be responds to Mr Posselt ' s concern .
I think , however , that we can improve the scoreboard in two ways : firstly , by strengthening the political dimension of the part of the process we have already completed when we introduce each revised version of the scorecard at the end of each presidency .
Secondly , improvements can be made by adapting the very structure of the scoreboard in future editions , particularly in the light of the outcome of the Laeken European Council , so that the scoreboard also reflects the way in which each Member State is implementing decisions taken at European level within its own national law .
I acknowledge that , although we have made a good start , we are entitled to have conflicting feelings about the Union ' s decision-making power in this field . Here we are faced with two problems that I see no reason to hide .
The first concerns the myriad initiatives of the Member States , the reasoning behind which sometimes escapes us .
It is not my intention to question the Member States ' right of initiative .
Consolidating an area of freedom , security and justice can only be achieved through close cooperation between all the Union ' s institutions and also - and perhaps most importantly - between the Member States .
The Commission does share Parliament ' s concerns , however , about the sometimes fragmented approach to many of the Member States ' initiatives , and the danger that they will fail to provide added value to our common project .
I am not questioning the good intentions behind these initiatives , but they are sometimes rather unfocused ; if they are in line with the priorities of the European common agenda , these initiatives will be welcome .
If , however , these initiatives simply serve each Member State ' s internal political agenda of the day , then I am afraid that they will not help us to fulfil the very demanding programme laid down in Tampere .
Hence the Commission ' s willingness to explore all avenues for improving cooperation with Member States in exercising legislative initiative .
Secondly , and it is worth saying this now , in advance of Laeken , we risk facing delays in meeting the Tampere timetable .
Unless the Council ' s pace and decision making pick up , in other words , if we maintain our current speed , when we reach Laeken , we will be lagging a long way behind the objectives outlined in Tampere .
I am therefore greatly encouraged by the discussion held at the initiative of the Swedish Presidency , which I welcomed , at the informal Stockholm Council on the need to speed up the pace of decision making and the need to improve the Commission ' s working methods .
The Commission is willing to play its part , under the leadership of the Swedish Presidency , in this task of discussing and streamlining the Council ' s methods for taking action .
With regard to the specific questions raised by Mr Posselt , I shall be very brief .
In the field of transposing the Community acquis into national law , it must be said that , where the conventions of the third pillar are concerned , only one has been signed and ratified by all Member States and that is the Europol Convention .
None of the other conventions has , to date , been signed and ratified by all 15 Member States .
With regard to the framework decisions , it is too early to talk about their transposal because they are still very recent and there are not yet enough of them to be able to produce an assessment report .
On the second question , concerning a common immigration policy , the Commission has already contributed , in the communication it submitted to the Council and to Parliament in November of last year , to what can be considered to be the basis of such a policy , which is the creation of a European concept of immigration and of a vision for framing an immigration policy .
In this communication , we focused on two objectives .
The first of these was a raft of legislative initiatives establishing a common Community acquis and the second was the launch of a process of open coordination within the Council to coordinate the management of migration flow policies .
We presented a proposal on family reunification , which I hope will be adopted during the Swedish Presidency .
We also presented a proposal on the rights and responsibilities of third-country nationals who are long-term residents .
In July , we shall be presenting a proposal on conditions for the admission of immigrants for purposes of work and , at the end of the year , we shall be presenting an additional proposal on the admission of citizens of third countries for the purpose of study , training or for other purposes .
By July of this year , the Commission intends to put forward a proposal to make the method for open coordination in the field of immigration policy operational , with a view to this being up and running in 2002 , in parallel with the Swedish Presidency ' s initiative to improve our statistical mechanisms in the field of immigration .
At the same time , the new Odysseus programme will enable us to launch a programme of administrative cooperation between the Member States and we hope to launch the bases of what will be the creation of a common border police force , as mentioned by Mr Posselt .
In the field of immigration , I do not think that we should ignore the prospect of a proactive policy of integrating immigrant communities into the reception societies . We must therefore explore all the options contained in the anti-discrimination package that the Commission presented last year and , at the same time , build on the immigration component in the Lisbon strategy , confirmed in Stockholm , of combating social exclusion .
In this policy of integrating immigrants , we must be able to count on the commitment and support of the Member States ' regions and local authorities .
With regard to illegal immigration , the Commission has already presented two proposals for a framework decision on the trafficking of human beings and intends to present two communications .
One of these will concern the fight against illegal immigration and the other will be on repatriation policies . I shall conclude this point by emphasising my hope that following the Conference being organised by the Belgian Presidency , we may see political agreement on the overall concept of European immigration policy at the Laeken Council , so that , from then on , no more excuses are given for the lack of a joint vision preventing us from adopting practical legislative measures .
In the field of asylum , I wish to point out that the Commission has embraced the principle of solidarity , both in its proposal on the ' European Refugee Fund ' and in its proposal on ' Temporary Protection ' based on the principle of ' double voluntary action ' .
I hope that , under the leadership of the Swedish Presidency , we will be able to conclude a political agreement on temporary protection .
I acknowledge , however , along with Mr Posselt , that the discussions in Council have not led to much opportunity for improving the financial dimension of solidarity and prove that the process of defining any form of imposing the distribution of asylum seekers amongst Member States will not be easy .
The best solution to the problem of sharing responsibility is likely to be a common European asylum system based on the ideas outlined in the Commission ' s communication of last November .
In the field of the mutual recognition of judgments , I simply wish to inform Parliament that we are working on a major package in the field of extradition and the European search and arrest warrant , as well as a package dealing with the mutual recognition of judgments in criminal matters , specifically protective orders in investigations carried out within the fight against cybercrime .
In civil matters , by the end of the year , we will be supplementing the ' Brussels ­ I ' initiative with a proposal for a European enforcement order in civil matters , and with additional initiatives from ' Brussels-II ' on the mutual recognition of judgments in the field of family law , in domestic issues and matters concerning parental power and the issuing of proposals on the recognition of low-value claims and undisputed claims .
With regard to the interinstitutional dialogue , Mr President , the Commission wishes to confirm here that the dialogue between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament is essential to a successful outcome .
In this field , the Commission and Parliament must be given a greater role to play in the democratic control of Europol .
This is another initiative that the Commission will be adopting in the course of this year .
We have an ambitious programme and I am confident that the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies will ensure that the right pace is set for us to achieve a favourable outcome at Laeken .
I should like to conclude by simply expressing the Commission ' s appreciation to Parliament , and particularly to the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , in the person of its chairman , Mr Watson , for the way in which you have responded , sometimes with very little time , to requests concerning the Commission ' s proposals and those of the Member States .
If there have been delays , they are certainly not due to a lack of proposals or opinions issued by Parliament .
Secondly , I should like to reiterate the Commission ' s desire to deepen political dialogue with the European Parliament so that together we can find the best solutions , which will , in this House , enjoy the broad political support of the various European political families .
I respect the diversity of Parliament ' s political and ideological opinions , but we do have a common objective , which is to convey to the people of Europe a clear political message that meets their expectations .
This is a simple message : the European institutions make a decisive contribution to confirming freedom , security and justice as inseparable values , true cornerstones laid out in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and which express what we have in common and what we can be proud of .
Let us take pride in our European identity .
Mr President , Council representatives , Commissioner , as you will certainly have understood from the applause , we value your work and your efforts to find good , pragmatic solutions and work together with Parliament , as well as the progress which you have chalked up on the scoreboard .
I am delighted at the commitment of the Swedish Presidency , even if a great many problems still remain to be resolved .
But , that notwithstanding , allow me to draw your attention to three problem areas , parts of which have already been addressed , namely the deficits which we have , secondly , the solutions which we still need , because the proposals seem to bear no relation to reality and , thirdly , the uncoordinated initiatives by Member States .
I shall start with the last point . You have my support here , Commissioner .
You feel that we need a new modus operandi here .
We spend a great deal of time on parallel initiatives which very often have no legal basis and which we often suspect are nationally motivated rather than concerned with finding European solutions .
We need an efficient mechanism for pushing ahead with the positive aspects here .
The second point is that there has been a dramatic increase in both drug abuse in the European Union and in drug production , especially the production of synthetic drugs , in the European Union .
In the meantime , there are now over 5 million young people taking synthetic drugs .
The European Union has become the biggest producer and exporter of synthetic drugs in the world .
And if we look at the scoreboard , then we can see that very little action has been taken .
An initiative plan was submitted in 2000 , but no further action was taken .
I would ask for this to be made a new focal point .
Finally , I should like to mention one more thing .
Where there is no bearing on reality , as in the case of family reunion ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , to analyse this year zero of the Tampere era we have , for the first time , a tool that will be extraordinarily useful , both now and in the future : the scoreboard set up by the Commission which , in future years , should include the progress made in the Council and the progress made in each of the Member States .
A comparison between the initial forecasts and the latest revision of the scoreboard shows , for instance , how we have progressed - I would say remarkably - in matters of judicial cooperation .
We have hopes for the future of Eurojust and this Parliament welcomes the decisions taken by the Council and the Member States ' initiatives which , in the field of judicial cooperation , have added to the Commission proposals , thus creating a circle that should be maintained in future .
My Group also values the highly significant Commission communication on the mutual recognition of sentences in criminal matters .
We hope it will be a solid base from which to combat crime , especially those more callous and intolerable versions such as terrorism .
Ministers , we are well aware of what the European Commission has presented this last year in connection with the Tampere Agenda : it is on the scoreboard .
What we do not know is what the Council is thinking of doing with them in the immediate future .
In exchange , we have seen concrete and fragmentary proposals - I do not want to return to the debate we had in the previous sitting - from each Member State , which in this case we cannot accept at all , either now or in the future .
Today we have also talked about the shock caused by the arrival of the " East Sea " in Europe .
It shocked everyone , and I think it would have done so even more if the citizens knew that even before Tampere we had set up something which ( talking of cooperation with the countries of origin ) is called an action plan for northern Iraq , i.e. the Kurds .
But the citizens do not know .
Just as those of my country do not know that we have set up an action plan for Morocco , and while they keep finding the bodies of our young neighbours on their beaches they wonder what the European Union is doing .
In fact , the impression given by the press is that not even our government knows .
Laeken is going to be a new opportunity for the common immigration and asylum policy .
Please do not just reaffirm the Tampere decisions again .
Tell us how you intend to move forward .
Please do not repeat that things are on the right road .
Really convince yourselves that your decisions are good ones , and uphold them clearly and with determination and courage .
Parliament - and I am sure in this respect the citizens too - will follow .
Mr President , our efforts to create an area of freedom , security and justice are dispersed and rather incoherent .
Firstly , they are spread over half a dozen sections of the Treaties , from the third-pillar articles on intergovernmental police and judicial cooperation , to the provisions on asylum and immigration , to other scattered articles on fundamental rights , non-discrimination , EU citizenship and free movement .
In this crucial area of creating a citizens ' Europe , we start with a pretty incoherent framework .
Our procedures are also inadequate ; add to that the way in which Member States have showered upon us a host of uncoordinated initiatives , and it is not surprising that two years after the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force , we have a lot of frenetic activity but not enough real progress .
We have big issues to deal with , from a policy on immigration , to combating racism and xenophobia , to ending the huge injustice of 20 million European residents having no right of movement , because they are third-country nationals .
On asylum policy , it is crucial that we absolutely respect humanitarian obligations and practise coherent thinking .
How can we speak derogatorily of the 1 000 Iraqi Kurds in the " East Sea " as illegal economic migrants , when NATO members , including my own Member State , are sufficiently conscious of their vulnerability to Saddam Hussein 's persecution , as demonstrated in the past , to enforce a no-fly zone in northern Iraq ?
We really do not have much joined-up thinking on that subject .
We must change the way we work , so as to make the area of freedom , security and justice as visible to the citizen as it is politically significant .
Perhaps then we could have a debate which might attract a fuller chamber and convey something of the passion and vision that we heard from the President of the Federal Republic of Germany this morning .
Mr President , during the night of 31 March , another ship carrying illegal immigrants ran aground to the north-east of Athens , just like the Kurdish refugees on 18 February off the coast of Var , in France .
These are not national problems .
Regularly , in Gibraltar , at Calais and elsewhere , refugees are coming ashore at European ports .
They risk their lives to flee from dictatorships , conflict and misery .
However , they are likely to end up as illegal immigrants , and they know it .
One only has to look at France , where 94 % of applications for asylum are rejected .
Yet the right of asylum is a fundamental and inalienable right .
There is a European fund to provide support for the consequences of receiving these people here .
In order to improve efficiency , is the Council thinking of assessing the use of resources from this fund ?
Acting at European level means more than merely denouncing and condemning those who trade in human misery : as you have pointed out , Mrs Ludford , only an overall solution will deal with these problems , with the emphasis on a foreign policy of cooperation just as much as on a genuine policy of integration which recognises the equality of the rights of all citizens .
Does the Council therefore not think that as a matter of urgency the Union should provide itself with an effective statutory instrument in the form of a framework directive which would enable it to regularise the position of all illegal immigrants , in order to adopt a more realistic and humane attitude towards immigration .
At the present time , two mechanisms are being studied ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , we all know that words are no longer enough to condemn these situations in which whole families are thrown out of their country , like the 908 people crammed into the holds of the " East Sea " , seeking a better life , or fleeing war , violence or poverty , sometimes both .
Words should now be followed by actions .
In March , when Parliament rejected , fortunately , several Council initiatives , I wondered when we would have any Council initiatives and proposed directives drawn up in a spirit of openness towards the world , of welcome and humanity , rather than reflecting an approach concerned solely with policing and security .
Yes , Europe does have a duty to take initiatives , but not the sort of initiatives that would cause a breach of solidarity , or impose arbitrary sanctions on transport companies .
On the contrary , a common policy on immigration requires ambitious initiatives based on improving and strengthening the right of asylum , guaranteeing both that right and the right to freedom of movement , and facilities for receiving migrants with dignity and with respect for human rights .
We also need to take restrictive and punitive measures , not against the victims , but against those who are behind this human traffic .
So when shall we see an end to the expulsions , when will the situation of illegal immigrants living on European soil be regularised , and when will non-Community foreigners have the right to vote in local elections ?
It is impossible to avoid answering these questions if we want to move towards a policy that is more just , more humane and more effective .
I have three remarks in connection with this question .
First of all , a comment on the semantics .
Both the Treaty and the question talk about introducing an ' area of freedom , security and justice ' .
The impression might be created that freedom , security and justice did not exist in the Member States , as if our countries were a legal vacuum .
However , that is not the case .
The situation , of course , is that we have a wide range of very traditional and deeply rooted legal systems which are distinguished primarily by their extraordinary difference from one another .
It is not going too far to say that the dominant system is one based upon Roman law but , in addition , there exist of course the common law system , which is significantly different , a Germanic and even a Scandinavian legal tradition , and these legal traditions differ from one another on crucial points .
To introduce an area of freedom , security and justice is an absurdity from a semantic point of view .
However , there is also , of course , another objective , and that brings me on to my second remark , which is of a legal nature .
What we are concerned with here is the desire to establish a single area and to homogenise these legal areas in the EU style , nipping and tucking in the interests of a better fit and in such a way as to obtain one common criminal law and one common judicial area .
Finally , I have a political remark to make .
This empire building through the establishment of a legal system represents one of the most repressive systems of oppression in world history .
What has been established in the light of these words , ' freedom , security and justice ' , is a system of monitoring and control without parallel in world history .
A system is being developed which suspends the crucial aspects of legal security .
Objection can also be made to this perversion of the language which should ideally , of course , reflect reality as carefully as possible .
That is something it is nowhere near doing .
Mr President , how many minutes ' silence have we held so far in this Parliament for the victims of ETA and in condemning terrorism ?
How many people have lost their lives in attempting to tread on European soil along the Andalusian coastline , in Dover , or on the coasts of southern France or Italy ?
How many women and children have been and still are exploited by organised criminal networks that - and this is the worst part - act with impunity in European territory ?
We must begin to find answers to these questions now , and fast !
The fight against organised crime , terrorism , drugs or the trafficking of human beings requires new police methods , a readjustment of legislation , and the immediate adaptation of police and judicial cooperation to the new European area .
No terrorist , drug trafficker or trafficker in human beings must find shelter in a Member State .
And it is urgent , as the Commissioner has said , to set the European search and capture order in motion against these enemies of freedom and security .
I particularly wish to thank you , Commissioner , for the interest you have shown in setting this European search and capture order in motion .
In Spain a recent survey has shown that terrorism and immigration have become two of the main concerns of Spanish citizens .
These concerns also require European responses .
We are going to have two great debates in the coming months : a report on terrorism and another on immigration and asylum .
I hope that we Members of Parliament , the Commission and the Council will rise to the occasion and succeed in offering European citizens and those who legally wish to live in our territory precisely what we set forth in the recent Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Mr President , the fact of the matter is that a very ambitious and serious attempt is under way to resolve the everyday problems of European citizens , the success of which will help strengthen the political dimension of European unification , because European unification and a single European area obviously imply more than just a single market and a common currency .
Which is why we need to strengthen our citizens ' sense of security , fight organised crime , strengthen police and judicial cooperation , mutually recognise court judgments , develop an integrated , viable immigration policy based on our common European values and fight racism and xenophobia in the European Union .
If we take stock of how far we have come since October 1999 , we will see that there have been serious delays and setbacks in achieving our aims .
This is because , on the one hand , we have an energetic Commission and a creative Commissioner and , on the other hand , a Council which is irresolute and appears unwilling even to implement what the governments themselves decide .
Instead , we are faced with fragmentary and uncoordinated initiatives on individual issues on the part of the Member States , initiatives which often fall outside the framework agreed at Tampere .
And as we know , this sort of situation causes serious problems , both to the working of the Commission , which does not have the human resources needed to respond to all these initiatives , and to the working and the agenda of the European Parliament .
Of course , the Council must be credited in 2000 with the decision to set up the refugee fund and mutually recognise civil court judgments , such as in divorce cases .
And , of course , the list of achievements in 2000 also includes the adoption of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in Nice , although not , of course , in the manner which Parliament had hoped for .
I should also like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency on working to strengthen the political dimension of the venture to create a common area of freedom , security and justice in the Union , especially in its endeavour to get a framework Council decision adopted during the six-month Swedish Presidency on a Commission proposal to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
As far as immigration policy is concerned and the huge gap in this area , some Member States , including Greece , have decided to plug this gap with national legislation under the Tampere agenda .
Last week , the Greek government passed an immigration bill legalising and regulating the status of thousands of immigrants who entered Greece over the last ten years , thereby finding a positive solution to serious issues which the Council has stubbornly kept on the back burner .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , as the Member who has the honour of chairing the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I would like to thank Commissioner Vitorino and Ministers Bodström and Klingvall for the spirit of loyal cooperation in which they have approached the construction of the area of freedom , security and justice .
Progress has been made in finding ways to work together in a policy field in which the Treaties are anything but satisfactory .
But to say this throws some light on the difficulties we have encountered in the 18 months since the Tampere Summit : difficulties such as the need for separate legal arrangements in the first pillar and the third pillar ; the need to cater for Member States which are members of Schengen and those which are not ; the depressing predisposition of some Member States to pile headlong into individual initiatives before institutions have fully debated an overall approach .
The house that we are building for our citizens should be able to withstand an earthquake .
Let us lay the most solid foundations - those of the Community framework in which architects , builders and surveyors work together in concert .
Parliament has called for an annual report on the implementation of the area of freedom , security and justice .
In welcoming the report that I have just received from the presidency , I note that it is essentially a list of actions .
What we will need is an assessment of the impact of measures taken .
Minister Klingvall said it is hard to comment on the case of the " East Sea " because it is a matter for individual Member States .
Arguably that may be true for 24 hours ; thereafter it is a matter for all of us .
Surely , Minister , that is the whole point of the area of freedom , security and justice .
Member States must understand that this is an area in which citizens want more Europe .
We must rise to that challenge , not become bidders in a depressing downward auction of rights for our citizens or those arriving from elsewhere .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is arguably the most important development that we have seen .
We must incorporate it into the law of the Union for there is no area of freedom , security and justice without rights and there are no rights without judges .
Mr President , when the EU ' s fortress policy fails , then we end up with shipwrecks such as that which occurred in France , and again in Greece , and which will probably claim many more lives .
The question is : if we really want more freedom , security and justice , what must we do in order to prevent this policy from claiming even more lives ?
First , freedom is achieved by giving people a free choice of where they wish to live .
Secondly , security is given to people by pressing a passport into their hand and giving them the legal wherewithal to set up home wherever they want .
This results in more justice and greater fairness because it is the global economic conditions which the industrialised countries have forced on the world which turn many people into refugees in the first place .
Which is why I call on the Council to take prevention seriously .
A uniform modus operandi - yes , start a legalisation initiative now , because that is the only consistent policy against racism .
Mr President , the running aground of the " East Sea " on the French coast is a tragic illustration of a twofold problem : the problem of oppressed nations and the problem of the oppression of immigrants .
At the present time , the Kurdish people , scattered over several countries , are experiencing pitiless oppression which highlights the on-going struggle to force the government to respect the right to self-determination and to respect national minorities .
Moreover , these tragedies that we have seen occurring on Spanish beaches or at Dover cannot result merely in our condemning the people who ship in the illegal immigrants .
The Schengen area is a fortress which forces the victims of hunger or of political dictatorships to take illegal action .
Yet everyone knows that no amount of policing can halt the flow of people who are in fear of their lives .
Those who organise these shipments of illegal immigrants are now growing fat on these repressive laws , which in any case are a violation of the Geneva Convention .
It is time to open up the borders to the free circulation of people , just as you have done for capital .
We no longer want to see the spectacle of entire families entering Europe by paying large sums of money to risk their lives in decrepit old tubs .
Mr President , in view of the short time available , I will address the most important point first .
Mrs Klingvall has just stated that she intends to help to achieve agreement in three areas , in precisely the three areas where the European Parliament has said no , for we have voted against the reports by Mr Ceyhun , Mr Nassauer and Mr Kirkhope .

It is quite worrying that the presidency does not respect the opinion of Parliament .
I myself think that it is fairly clear after the debate today that responsibility for overall policy in this field should rest with the Commission .
Alarming figures are presented regarding population trends - Europe is shrinking .
Member States are estimated to lose 10 percent and candidate countries 20 percent .
We will see a shortage of both highly qualified and less qualified labour , and both in the short and the long term .
Our external borders are under great pressure .
The fact that Europe must be opened up to immigration of labour is a conclusion which even the toughest opposition have adopted .
However , we know nothing about how this will work - nothing about how the system will be designed , nothing about quota systems or green cards , whether these openings and solutions are only to apply to those who are highly educated or whether they will also cover those with few qualifications .
Has the Council no practical solutions in this area ?
Will crime and harsh reality decide ?
We look forward to the proposals which the Commission will present in this field .
The Commission appears to be the most suitable body to do this .
Mr President , I would like to thank both the ministers from Sweden , as well as the Commission , for their comments .
Some people describe Europe as a Europe which locks people out .
They term it ' Fortress Europe ' .
Those of us who want to create a humane Europe , which takes into account people with a need for protection , and who are seeking a humane asylum and refugee policy use the concepts of freedom , justice and security .
I share the view of the Commission and the presidency that the current deficiencies in the field of asylum and refugees are linked to the problem that we have no common policy .
At the moment , there are different policies in different countries .
The policy we have to develop must be based on international conventions , needs for protection and family reunification .
I also noted that , when it came to carriers ' liability , debated by Parliament at length during the last part-session , the presidency was to take into account the opinions of Parliament .
At least that is the way I clearly understood it .
I also think that we should distinguish between immigration of labour , and asylum and refugee policy .
The latter is based on people ' s need for protection .
The former is based on the fact that we are suddenly realising that we will have a shortage of labour in the years to come , and here we are considering our need for labour .
In this context , we talk far too little about integration policy , as linked to asylum and refugee policy is an integration policy where we look after those people who come here with a need for protection .
Today , however , we are seeing these people remain largely outside society , that they do not have the same rights and that they are not utilised on the labour market .
They tend to be found among the 14 million unemployed .
Before we talk about the immigration of labour - it is possible that there may be a question of this - I would primarily like to see us emphasising integration policy and a common asylum and immigration policy .
Mr President , it is touching to hear how loyally the Swedish minister has adopted the propaganda language of the EU liturgy .
Freedom , security , justice - but there is no such thing !
Freedom in Gibraltar , for those who drown in attempting to enter the EU ?
Freedom at the Polish Eastern border where the Soviet border is now physically being used as the EU ' s external border in the opposite direction ?
Is this freedom ?
Security - when we are all being monitored by the SIS register , which knows everything , even down to whether we have any sexual peculiarities ?
Justice - when all the police officers working on this say that the identity checks which will become compulsory under the Schengen Agreement will affect those who look non-European ?
Mrs Klingvall , Mr Bodström !
There is a word for this , a rude word : - ' Fortress Europe ! '
That is what you are building , precisely what you promised you would not build !
How would it be if you built in the opposite direction instead of solely going along with the federalists and power builders in this institution ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , almost every day we read articles in the papers about refugees stranded on the coasts of Europe .
Just last Sunday , 447 Kurdish refugees landed in Greece .
In February the " East Sea " freighter ran aground in St. Rafael in France with almost 1 000 Kurdish refugees , including over 300 children , on board .
Their Odyssey to Europe had lasted ten days under inhumane conditions .
Three women gave birth to children in these conditions .
The refugees sell all their worldly possessions in order to buy a passage to Europe .
That refugees are putting their lives at even greater risk is the consequence of the EU 's segregation policy .
It is intolerable .
Europe ' s borders must be open to people in need , fleeing their homeland .
Why does anyone leave their homeland ?
Where are the refugees who willingly leave their homeland ?
No one leaves their homeland willingly unless they are being persecuted and fear torture and maltreatment .
I think we should fight the reasons why they flee .
We need an active human rights policy , we need to rethink arms exports and we need to give poor countries and regions financial aid , so that their people do not need to flee .
I call on the Commission , the Council and the governments of the European Union to apply this policy and put it into practice .
Europe does not just need an economic face , it also needs a human face .
Mr President , the European Union 's behaviour is inconsistent : we recognise that it is necessary to bring the citizens closer to Europe and that , in order to do this , the Union must show that it is able to guarantee rights , freedom and security , but when it comes to implementing these proposals , the Member States ' governments become highly overcautious and indecisive , concerned more for their own powers than for the rights of all .
This is how we manage to adopt a Charter of Fundamental Rights and then not incorporate it into the Treaties , how we write in the Treaties that the Union must be developed as an area of freedom , security and justice , but then the good intentions are lost in conventions which are not ratified , in decisions which are not implemented and in the confusion that is created by the fragmentation of competences , initiatives and procedures .
The governments raise hopes once again at Tampere and then dash them because they are unwilling to entrust the implementation to those whose job it is to concern themselves with the Union and not the internal affairs of individual States .
Our action arrives late and is ineffective because Community initiatives come to a halt on the threshold of cooperation in matters of criminal justice , which are still dealt with on an intergovernmental basis .
We need to be more courageous in protecting the rights of the citizens .
In my opinion , there is one genuine solution which I hope will be adopted with the next Treaty : as is already the case for cooperation in matters of civil justice , every aspect of the creation of the area of freedom , security and justice must become Community responsibility .
There is nothing to fear from this solution : the distribution of competences between Union and Member States would remain the same , but the effect of having standardised procedures would ensure that policies were coherent and also that the forthcoming enlargement of the Union would not , as it is in danger of becoming , be a barrier to the timely protection of citizens ' rights .
Mr President , I should like to emphasise certain issues which are no less important for being evident and having been reiterated in this debate .
First of all , I want to draw the Council ' s attention to the slowness and lack of coordination of some of its decisions regarding what was approved in Tampere , and I want to stress that this situation may lead to the failure of the agenda that you yourselves decided .
What is needed is a new boost and greater political will to be able to fulfil the agenda and the objectives that are set out for us .
Secondly I also urge you to work at developing the Tampere proposals and not Member State initiatives ; although such initiatives are legitimate , this Parliament considers them lacking in coherence , partial in their presentation and content , guided by each country ' s own situation , and not contributing at all to the overall view needed in this matter .
Therefore , let me remind you that we already have a programme of initiatives presented by the Commission which , in my view , meets these requirements .
Why do we not all focus on this programme ?
I must stress the need to combat illegal immigration and the vital importance of all the measures being taken to prevent the trade in human beings , the constant deaths in the Straits of Gibraltar , the fight against Mafia-like organisations and the exploitation of these people economically and in the workplace .
All this has our support , but we must not lose sight of the need to adopt a balanced policy on the immigration question . Therefore , with the same determination and willpower we must all , including , of course , the Council , draw up and implement policies that truly integrate these citizens that live amongst us , and thus we shall avoid racist and xenophobic acts which regrettably and shamefully take place in the European Union .
We shall avoid the tragedies that occur on the coasts of southern Spain every day , with boats laden with human beings reaching our shores and with people dying in their holds .
For this we need a clear political will and sufficient budgetary funding .
This is what I urge you to do , and I am certain that in this way we shall help build the area of freedom , security and justice we desire , and that we shall have the understanding and support of the European citizens in this important task .
Mr President , jag vill prata franska [ I should now like to speak in French ] .
Everything was for the best in the best of all worlds .
Everyone knew that there were several million illegal immigrants in Western Europe , everyone knew that they were coming in every day , trickling through our sieve-like borders , coming from all over the world , everyone knows the routes that they take and the main countries of entry , but at least , until now , all this has been going on quietly and discreetly , so as not to disturb good bourgeois consciences and the sleep of the self-righteous .
Everyone finds their own particular satisfaction in this : this is how the pro-immigrant associations justify their existence , and the public subsidies that they enjoy .
Governments end up regularising everybody , or almost everybody , thereby demonstrating their attachment to the essential values of tolerance , human rights and openness towards others .
The bishops fill the desperately empty churches with illegal immigrants .
Trades unions and industry find , thanks to immigration , the reinforcements that they so much require to make up for European workers ' lack of interest , and , of course , the bosses welcome the new labour force arriving on the market .
In short , it was an ill wind , and then suddenly , catastrophe : on 17 February , the cargo of the " East Sea " was deliberately beached on the French coast .
On board were 912 illegal immigrants , of which 420 were children . And there you are , they landed , they are there , or rather - it has to be said - they were there .
For the question we are asking now , regardless of the reasons why they were beached and the conditions in which it happened , is this : what has become of them ?
They have disappeared , melted into the background , over 600 of these illegal immigrants have miraculously vanished , they have done a disappearing act .
For example , when the camp was closed by the prefect of Var , on 1 March , 449 people were supposed to have been taken into custody .
Since then , more than 200 of them have disappeared .
At Modane , the destination of the first people leaving via the Fréjus Pass , of the 82 Kurds welcomed with such ceremony , 40 have vanished into thin air .
But why has this happened ?
Why , when all the politicians , the various interest groups and others have all called unanimously for these immigrants to be permanently received here ?
Why , when the French government has arranged everything so well , giving them an eight-day pass of safe conduct so as to allow them to complete the formalities that will enable them to obtain official status as political refugees ?
Simply because these illegal immigrants preferred to use parallel secret networks for slipping into France and slipping out again .
What a psychological shock , what a cause for concern to the self-righteous .
Unfortunately , this business is purely symbolic , it is a drop in the ocean , because every month there are thousands of illegal immigrants who succeed in getting into France .
But others will follow , millions of others , who will arrive on foot and by train .
Our problem is to organise their return to their own countries so that they can live and work in those countries with dignity .
Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking you for an extremely interesting debate with many interesting questions , but , above all , I would like to thank you for your substantial commitment in the area of legal and home affairs .
I will attempt to summarise and comment on your viewpoints and questions .
Let me start by making it clear that we are working for a union characterised by freedom , security and justice .
None of us is interested in building a " Fortress Europe " .
Rather our work is characterised by very great dynamism , a deeper cooperation in a Europe which we also wish to see enlarged .
One of the foremost aims of the Swedish Presidency is enlargement .
It is to make this region larger , to integrate further countries into a deeper cooperation , not just for freedom , security and justice , but also for peace .
This work obviously has considerable dynamism .
We are working with countries around the Mediterranean and we are working on strengthening our cooperation with Russia and with China - to take just a few examples of the process that is going on and in which the Union is a powerful driving force in this cooperation and in the work on expanding this area .
This naturally also characterises our work on a harmonised asylum and immigration policy .
In addition , it characterises the holistic perspective that we are imposing on the harmonisation work emanating from the Treaty of Amsterdam and the conclusions reached in Tampere .
We want to have a modern immigration policy which means that not only do we work on eliminating the fundamental causes of involuntary migration but that , at the same time , we guarantee protection for those who are in need of protection .
We have all been incredibly moved and affected by the tragedies and catastrophes that we have seen come to us on our television screens .
This is a continuing and despicable trade .
It exploits people in vulnerable situations .
It is something that we must work against with considerable strength .
However , we must do so in a number of different ways - one way is not sufficient .
That is why work such as the increased cooperation with the candidate countries and the work to ensure that these countries , too , have a good legal system and a good asylum system is incredibly important with a view to preventing illegal immigration and preventing these tragedies .
We must deal with the underlying causes of involuntary migration .
Last week I was in the Balkans together with Commissioner Vitorino and the Belgian internal affairs minister , Mr Duquesne .
We met representatives of five of the Baltic states in order to discuss precisely these matters .
We accepted a far-reaching declaration incorporating this very holistic perspective that deals with both a legally secure asylum , reception and integration system and measures to achieve good border controls and an efficient visa policy .
As far as some of the practical questions are concerned with regard to what we are doing and what consideration is being given to the statements that have come from the European Parliament , allow me to shed light on just two matters .
The first of these is the issue of human trafficking .
Where this is concerned I want to make a clear distinction between human trafficking which exploits vulnerable people and what we call humanitarian acts .
Humanitarian acts must not be punishable .
We are working on a humanitarian clause concerning illegal entry .
We have decided that , where illegal residence is concerned , the existence or otherwise of the profit motive will be the key factor in determining which acts are of a specifically humanitarian character and cannot therefore be punished .
As far as the penalties are concerned : these must be severe .
We have not yet reached agreement on this , but we are currently discussing a primary proposal for a minimum penalty of six years .
Where the question of transporters ' liability is concerned I wish to strongly reject what was said by Mrs Cederschiöld .
Our exploratory work that is currently in progress provides a basis for reaching agreement on this in accordance with guidelines from the French Presidency .
There are two viewpoints from the European Parliament which I , as President , have also brought into the discussions .
The first issue is that transporters must not be punished where an asylum application is granted or when a person is granted residence for other reasons .
This should mean that we defer the enforcement of fines on those who come to the EU and seek asylum despite the fact that they do not have adequate documents .
Only when the asylum process is complete must those persons who are not allowed to stay be liable to pay these fines .
The second issue that was also included in the statement from the European Parliament concerns the fact that airlines and shipping companies can only be expected to discover obviously forged documents and people who lack any travel documents whatsoever .
At the same time , it is , of course , reasonable for us to demand that transporters check passports and any visas .
However , the sanctions must not be disproportionately severe .
We do not yet know whether we will arrive at a solution that is acceptable to everyone , but we are sounding out the basis for this .
Some of the contributions during the debate , such as the contributions from Mrs Terrón i Cusí and Baroness Ludford , dealt with the continued work .
They wondered : " What is actually happening ?
You have this vision and the aim from Tampere , but what are you actually doing ? "
I reported on some of the decisions taken .
I also reported on the status of the work in respect of some of the directives that are relevant .
Allow me simply to emphasise that we hope that at our meeting in May we will be able to make decisions concerning the Directive on temporary protection and the Directive on the reunification of families .
The negotiating work on these directives is currently progressing well .
It is thus our hope that we will be able to make decisions in May .
We have also come a long way in respect of launching the Eurodac system .
The test runs will be started in late summer 2001 .
We believe that this is a system which will be able to give us a more effective application of the Dublin Convention .
As regards the proposal for third country nationals ' rights , this has just been submitted .
However , we look forward to being able to commence work on this directive as well .
I also mentioned earlier in the debate that the Belgian Presidency will focus on immigration policy and arrange a seminar on migration in October 2001 .
Spain , too , has announced a ministerial conference in respect of flows of migration from Asia in advance of its presidency .
We are working patiently , step-by-step , so as to be able to realise the scoreboard that has been proposed with a view to implementing the conclusions of the Council ' s summit in Tampere .
The implementation work is still in its initial stages , but we are moving forward and naturally we want to make decisions as quickly as possible .
Mr President , criminality is becoming increasingly international .
The only way in which we can fight this tendency is for the police and the prosecuting authorities to also work more at an international level and to cooperate .
All police work involves violating the integrity of those who are suspected of a crime .
This is true both at national and at international level .
It applies to people who are sought by the authorities .
In order to be able to conduct a debate on the matter , it is important that we have the right basis .
This applies , for example , to that which Mr Gahrton mentioned - namely the SIS system , which is there for wanted persons .
Mr Gahrton said that the international SIS system charts people ' s sexual orientation .
This is incorrect !
There is no such or similar sensitive information in the system .
It contains information on persons who are wanted , whether they are armed , their descriptions and other things such as information on stolen vehicles .
There is thus no such sensitive information and it is an incredibly important instrument if we are to be able to combat international criminality .
There are a number of individual crimes that cannot be controlled unless we do so internationally , such as human trafficking , financial crime , IT crime or , as Mr Pirker mentioned , drugs crime .
The only people who are served by having no international cooperation are the criminals .
As regards the matter addressed by Mr Pirker - drugs criminality - I agree that it is very important to have real action , that we go further than just spouting fine words without actually doing anything .
Two incredibly important means of achieving this have been addressed today , i.e. the development of Europol and being able to establish international cooperation through Eurojust as quickly as possible .
I would also like to point to the work that is in progress for arriving at a solution in respect of synthetic drugs .
I know that Mrs Cederschiöld has fought very hard on this matter , and hopefully we can reach some kind of political agreement in May .
Mr Watson and Mrs Terón i Cusí , amongst others , have taken up the issue of how we can become more effective , which is , of course , important .
It is important for instance when the proposals are put forward by the Member States and initiatives are taken on various matters .
It is important that this is done in the right way and that we do not concentrate on short-term successes , for example at domestic level .
It is in everyone ' s interest for the cooperation to work and be effective .
Everyone stands to gain , including from the domestic point of view , if it works as it should .
The same applies to the cooperation between the Member States , the Council , the European Parliament and the Commission .
If this does not work it will create a negative impression .
Our citizens will lose confidence in us and without the confidence of our citizens the EU will have no foundation , as a result of which the EU would not work either .
Consequently it is important that this very constructive and important debate continues in the same way as it has done today .
Finally , I would like to thank you all once again for this and for allowing me to come here .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for the commitment they have shown to pursuing the very challenging and demanding agenda of Tampere , and also to testify to and praise the efforts of the Swedish Presidency to achieve concrete results during the first half of this year .
It is quite clear from the Swedish Presidency that there is a real concern to have a balanced approach to policies in this area - a balance between those initiatives dealing with the repressive aspects and those which have a pro-active aim of encouraging a positive view of asylum immigration in our societies .
Therefore , I hope that at the end of the Swedish Presidency we will have concrete and good results on the basis of which to proceed .
Very briefly , to touch upon two points : first , on the action plan for Iraq , I share the view that it is extremely difficult to implement this action plan .
The sooner we get a more detailed assessment of the concrete results of such an action plan , the better .
We also have to bear in mind that one candidate country , Turkey , is a neighbouring country of Iraq .
So we should engage Turkey more seriously in the debate on the Kurdish situation and on the effect of illegal immigration in the area .
My second point is to say to Mr Pirker that I did not touch upon the issue of drugs in my presentation , because there was no question tabled about it .
However , I would draw the attention of Parliament to the fact that we are implementing the 2000-2004 Action Plan .
There has been a very important Swedish initiative on synthetic drugs .
We had an open debate in the Council on drugs and the Commission intends to present two main instruments : one , the framework decision for harmonisation of criminal law in fighting drug trafficking , will be presented next month .
The second one is to put before the Council and Parliament what we call a follow-up table for the action plan on drugs .
In that follow-up table we will include all the actions that need to be taken by the Union , and also identify all concrete actions that should be taken by individual Member States .
So we are not neglecting the drugs issue .
We did not touch upon that point , because you did not refer to it in the formal questions , but I am glad to announce to you our programme as far as combating drugs is concerned .
My final wish and hope is that maybe next year we will have a more cheerful debate on the state of play in the area of freedom , security and justice .
Let us all work together to that end .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 16 May .
UN conference on least-developed countries
The next item is the following two oral questions :
B5-0155 / 2001 , by Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , to the Council , on the third UN conference on least-developed countries ,
B5-0156 / 2001 , by Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , to the Commission , on the third UN conference on least-developed countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the guidelines for participation in the UN ' s third conference on the least developed countries , which the Council adopted on 22 December 2000 , the European Union confirms its firm intention to do everything to ensure that the UN Action Plan for sustainable development in the least developed countries and for the progressive incorporation of these countries into the global economy contains practical and operational political guidelines and measures that are based on three factors .
Firstly , active and responsible participation by national authorities , civil society , the private sector and local players in the least developed countries .
Secondly , a worldwide partnership for the least developed countries , which means , amongst other things , mobilising the entire international community and increasing the coordination between everyone working on development issues at international , regional and national level .
Thirdly , an effective evaluation of the results of the Action Plan that was adopted in 1990 and an analysis of the needs and expectations of the least developed countries as established during the preparations for the conference .
Within the framework of the Union ' s development assistance policy a very great part of the assistance is devoted to precisely these least developed countries , particularly through the ACP / EU conventions .
I would remind you that 40 of the 49 least developed countries are also included in the group of ACP countries .
The Union feels that the elimination of poverty in these countries should be the central aim of the conference .
The Union supports the reinforced HIPC initiative and its implementation , i.e. in accordance with the terms confirmed in Cologne in 1999 , which enables more countries to get debt relief faster and increases the focus on the fight against poverty , i.e. the idea that the resources that are released by debt write-offs within HIPC are to be used to fight poverty .
The Union cannot accept the commitments and / or obligations in respect of debt write-offs that go beyond the terms that apply under the HIPC initiative .
This means that any claims for a moratorium on debt payments before the debtor countries reach the so-called end point , and / or 100 percent debt is written off at this point , cannot be accepted .
Poor countries that do not qualify for debt relief in accordance with the terms that apply to the HIPC initiative but which are having payment difficulties are instead advised to attempt to renegotiate their debt with the Paris Club , the London Club or another relevant creditor .
The resources that are released under the HIPC initiative are to be used to fight poverty in accordance with the countries ' own poverty strategies .
On 28 February 2001 the Council approved a Regulation extending exemption from duty with no restriction on quantity to include all products originating from the 49 least developed countries in the world with the exception of arms and ammunition - what is known is the ' Everything but arms ' initiative .
The Regulation became applicable on 5 March this year .
Discussion of this matter began with the Commission putting forward a proposal in October last year .
I am pleased to be able to confirm that the main principles of the Commission ' s proposal were expressly retained in the final text adopted , i.e. that the Community should take meaningful measures to improve the economic situation in the least developed countries by guaranteeing free access to its markets for all such products , even if this would mean additional costs for the Community .
In nearly all cases this access was established from 5 March this year .
Only in the matter of bananas , sugar and rice was it established that this should enter into force at a later date .
However , the crucial factor was that a particular period and timetable for full access to the market was agreed for these products .
The market for bananas will be fully liberalised from 2006 and that for sugar and rice from July 2009 and September 2009 respectively .
During this period duty on these three products will be reduced and duty-free quotas will be established for sugar and rice .
The Regulation is therefore of crucial economic significance for the least developed countries .
However , it also has an even greater political and economic significance in respect of the preparations for the next round of negotiations in the WTO .
The fact that in this regard it is , in the first instance , development priorities that have formed the basis for a decision on a trade matter has incredibly great symbolic value .
The decision shows our partners in the WTO negotiations - both developing countries and industrial countries - that the Union is serious in its commitment to incorporate development issues into these negotiations .
It shows that we will enter into the negotiations with the firm intention not just of serving our own interests , but also the interests of the most needy members of the global society , particularly the least developed countries .
It shows that the Union fully accepts a moral and economic responsibility in accordance with the Union ' s position as the world ' s biggest trading bloc .
Mr President , as the President of the Council has just pointed out , this third UN conference on LDCs will take place in Brussels in May .
The aim of this conference will be first of all to assess the results of the action programme which was launched in 1990 , to take stock of what has been done in the meantime in the way of development aid , debt reduction , investment and trade .
Another aim will be to draw up a new action programme for the next ten years , and we have agreed , in a joint agreement with the United Nations , that this conference should also give its attention to a certain number of measures having immediate effect , so that it will not yield to the temptation of taking refuge in too many generalities .
Preparations for this conference are underway .
Obviously , as joint host , the European Union has a special interest in making this conference a success : teams from the Commission and a certain number of Commissioners are working on it together .
We shall try to ensure that a programme of sound action emerges from this conference so as to give a framework of encouragement to the development efforts of these 49 or 50 countries , once again trying to make it all as specific as possible .
It is with this in mind that we have ensured - and we at the Commission would like to thank the Swedish Presidency for this - that the decisions taken on the basis of this initiative , ' Everything but arms ' , are taken in good time so that this initiative can constitute an achievement of the May conference .
That is probably , at the present time , the most visible issue and measure that this conference will have helped to raise and accelerate , and that is no mean achievement We must now try to use this conference as a lever to encourage other trading partners in the world to improve market access for exports from the least-developed countries .
Although we are so keen on this initiative , that is not because we think it is sufficient in itself .
It is clear that , without an appropriate environment and other aid efforts , the vast majority of the LDCs are incapable , on their own , of taking advantage of commercial openings .
We must therefore supplement this strong signal , this effort to which we have committed ourselves , by other measures aimed at effectively increasing the export capacity of the countries in question , and helping them to become integrated into the multilateral worldwide trading system .
We therefore intend to supplement this initiative by other measures , a certain number of which are connected with trade , by technical assistance as regards the administrative capacity of these countries , and by increasing what we do in the context of the integrated fund which links us with the IMF , the World Bank and the WTO , in a technical assistance project which deals with commercial issues in Geneva .
Having said that , there are also other trade mechanisms which we should look at , in order to satisfy ourselves that they are not holding back or unduly restricting the opening up of markets to the least developed countries .
I am thinking , in particular , of all the rules on health and plant health , or of various obstacles to trade , where we should not reduce the standards that we have set , because our own public want to keep them , but where we could ensure that our efforts to provide technical assistance are effectively targeted so that they enable those countries to comply with them .
I am thinking , in particular , of all aspects of health and plant health .
We believe that these conditions for access to the market will help to improve the volume of foreign investment in those countries , provided that they are accompanied by an effective increase in their export capacity , and we should like to take the opportunity of this conference to go further in improving the promotion of investment in those countries , in particular by better use of the existing multilateral mechanisms , perhaps by using more actively what is already available in the way of guarantees for investment in least developed countries .
This being the case , let us not hide behind speeches that are too politically correct .
We must also be clear .
It is up to these countries themselves to create an environment that is more investment-friendly , by means of internal policies which we can support , and advise on , but which are , after all , the result of internal policy decisions which are sometimes difficult to take , and we are not responsible for this difficulty in taking decisions .
From this point of view it is important that the role of each party should be clear .
We must remember that these measures that I have just spoken about , which come into effect immediately , are only part of the result .
They have to be there in order to lend a certain amount of credibility to the action programme for the next ten years .
This action programme will serve as an itinerary .
I believe that it is very important to have an itinerary in this area , and it must be one that we can control together .
In fact I believe - and my Commission colleagues share this view - that it is only by exerting stronger collective pressure that we shall be able to speed up the abolition of poverty and the promotion of sustainable development in these countries , so that one of these days perhaps we shall be able , to quote Mr Miranda ' s expression , to see the light at the end of the tunnel .
Mr President , I want to welcome Mr Miranda 's initiative in asking this question and I want to take this opportunity to congratulate Commissioner Lamy on his splendid initiative on ' Everything but arms ' , which we were associated with in Parliament , but did not have very much to do with .
It must be pointed out that the poorest and the least developed countries must be given special attention and , in the process , elimination of extreme poverty should be the primary goal .
According to UNCTAD calculations , while the gross domestic product of 49 LDCs rose by no more than 0.9 % per year in real terms between 1990 and 1998 , worldwide GDP grew by more than 2.5 % per year .
Good governance is a key issue in the LDCs .
I would like to take this opportunity to point out that there are many countries which are nominally democratic , but where , owing to their lack of an effective and fair legal system , there is no freedom for their people .
We in this Parliament should promote the rule of law as an essential criterion when we look at good governance criteria .
It is a matter of record also that the proportion of our aid budgets that goes to the LDCs has fallen while the proportion that goes to middle-ranking countries , such as Morocco and Algeria , has risen .
This is absolutely wrong .
The aid budget must concentrate on the poorest .
That is what our citizens expect and require .
Using the aid budget as some sort of underhand immigration policy is wrong .
Have an anti-immigration policy , by all means , but be honest about it .
We must not rob the poorest countries to achieve our own political ends .
Drastic reductions in the debt burden of heavily indebted poor countries are urgently needed as action taken so far under the HIPC initiative will , as a result of falling raw material prices , be completely inadequate for any sustained financial relief .
I must also stress the need to guarantee funds to be set up or topped up in order to provide incentives for greater private investment and for the implementation of measures to encourage small loan arrangements , such as those introduced by the Gramien Bank in Bangladesh .
Finally , we must do everything we can to prevent conflict .
Conflict prevention is a key to helping the LDCs grow .
Mr President , as others have already suggested , the facts speak for themselves .
Most of the 640 million people who live in the Least Developed Countries , just over one-tenth of the world 's entire population , are struggling to survive on less than two dollars a day .
Their average life expectancy is 50 years .
Half of them are illiterate and two-thirds of the world 's children , most of them little girls , are not in any kind of primary education .
LDCs have seen a severe drop in capital flows , down 45 % since 1990 ; and official development assistance continues to go down , having fallen by 30 % since 1990 .
As the President-in-Office has said , the HIPC initiative is yielding very slow results and coming in too late .
Too many LDCs have totally unsustainable debt burdens .
Many LDCs , such as Zambia for example , where I was recently , are still spending twice as much on debt servicing as they are on health and education .
This UN Conference therefore has to be about a new deal for LDCs ; one that promotes pro-poor economic growth , poverty reduction and sustainable development .
There will be , as Mr Lamy knows , a thematic session on trade , which I know he will expect to be used by the LDCs as a platform in preparation for the Qatar ministerial meeting .
I am sure they will give ample evidence of the fall in commodity prices - which have fallen by 30 % from 1998 to 1999 - and we will need to acknowledge that globalisation and liberalisation have had very mixed results .
Everything but arms represents significant progress .
I wonder whether Commissioner Lamy would be able to predict that other countries such as the US or Japan might be prepared to follow his excellent lead .
I think I see him smile , and this might present us with some difficulties .
At this point it would be interesting to hear from Commissioner Lamy which LDC countries in particular are likely to export arms , as the title of this initiative is a bit perplexing .
Finally , this Conference is about analysing what we can do that is deliverable for the least developed countries when millions of people are unable to treat pneumonia , diarrhoea , TB or AIDS ; when you have no medicines to give to your sick child or your dying wife ; when your child is at school under a tree trying to learn to write its name with a twig .
Mr President , the gap with the poorest countries is widening instead of narrowing .
Over the past decade , aid to developing countries has fallen by 24 % and that to the poorest by as much as 45 % .
This is absolutely unacceptable .
The UN Conference is pointless if it remains bogged down in fine promises and vague declarations .
The poorest countries only benefit from concrete and binding agreements .
Trade concessions on their own are not sufficient .
The rich countries must ease their burden of debt by a substantial amount .
Repayment means that in many countries , any form of development is frustrated even before it gets off the ground .
It is of the utmost importance that we should pursue a separate discharge policy for each developing country individually .
It is entirely reasonable to prescribe conditions in our debt and aid policy with regard to the fight against poverty , sound administration and sound management of public finance .
Debt relief has no meaning if debts keep mounting up .
The European Commission ' s policy should therefore be aimed at developing capacity and sensible financial management .
Only then can countries develop education and health care ; only then can investments be stimulated .
In many of the poorest developing countries , power , as well as available resources , are very badly distributed .
If political and economic power are not distinctly separated , only corruption can reign supreme .
It is hopeless to fight poverty if countries remain trapped in violent conflict .
Let us call a spade a spade : tyranny and unbounded greed on the part of irresponsible leaders are just as important in terms of causing inadequate development as is a drop in aid .
The chasm between rich and poor can only be bridged if our aid effort is stepped up considerably and if the countries are better governed .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to confine myself to a small number of questions .
How honest are we , in fact , when we claim that we mainly fight poverty in the least developed countries ?
Our fellow MEPs have illustrated this amply .
Furthermore , we find that our aid does not even reach the poorest in the poor countries - and surely that is what all this is about - for they remain in poverty .
How coherent is our own policy ?
How honest are we when we claim that we are quite willing to import everything , except weapons , from the poor countries ?
Is this not , in the first instance , an act of goodwill to include the southern countries in a new WTO round ?
I wonder about that , for I note that we remain caught up in our own incoherence .
I would like to quote the delay of imports of sugar as a case in point : that is nothing but a disgrace !
Must we really continue to support our own sugar production ?
Surely there is no reason for doing that !
Mr President , on the subject of aid to developing countries , and in particular to those known as the least-developed countries , what are the facts ?
We discovered these facts just now .
The mandate for the third UN conference covers , in particular , public development aid , debt and trade .
In that case , we must not try to evade the following conclusion , namely that the commitments made for the preceding decade have not been fulfilled .
It has often been said , but it is necessary to repeat it , that the decrease in the flow of public development aid is unacceptable .
It has dwindled by almost half during the last decade , falling to only 0.05 % of the GDP of the donor countries , far below the 0.7 % objective set by the UN .
In Europe , only the northern countries are meeting this commitment .
Moreover , the proportion of this public development aid that is spent on economic infrastructure and the production sector has also been reduced .
What does the future hold for these countries , if they cannot achieve a level of development which will enable them to make choices that are truly independent ?
There is no need to seek further afield for the reasons for the results that have been obtained .
The mere mention of the fall in life expectancy to 51 years gives an indication of the size of the disaster .
Behind the experts ' reports there are men and women who are living in extreme poverty : 614 million people , or one tenth of the world ' s population , who live on less than two dollars a day .
Worse that this , as UNCTAD reports , the least-developed countries are caught in a downward spiral and a vicious circle of economic regression , social tensions and violence , which all reinforce one another .
Thus the proportion of their GDP accounted for by the manufacturing sector has not increased , and in some cases it has even decreased .
The LDCs are still , in many cases , exporters of only one or two basic products . Production capacity has been reduced in some countries .
For example , the committee that is preparing for the third conference has even noted that very often the industries created to supply the internal market have been forced out of the market by the increasingly keen competition from imports which is the result of liberalising trade .
The third UN conference must not be just another ritual gathering , and I believe that the European Union , which is to some extent hosting the summit , should help to make sure that it does not turn into one .
Europe ' s political authority is achieved from its capacity to stand up to an all-consuming globalisation governed only by the laws of commerce and of money .
The effectiveness of its development policy is measured by practical action , and there are avenues which still need to be explored as a matter of urgency , such as debt cancellation , the need for urgent action to recognise the right of countries hit by AIDS to manufacture and sell the necessary medicines , the need for high-quality public education services to contribute to the crucial development of human capabilities , and the need to help these countries to become self-sufficient in food .
I believe that development cannot be summed up simply as the organisation of trading relations ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the question which arises is : what is preventing the developed countries from helping the poor countries more effectively ?
The percentage of the GDP dedicated by the wealthy States to the development of poor countries is increasingly small .
We know that , in many cases , these same wealthy countries flood the poor countries with toxic waste or allow shady businesses to operate in tourism as well .
Our Group has put forward a proposal for the reinsertion of students from those countries who have studied in European universities and wish to start work in their country of origin . This would prevent that brain drain which is currently holding back development to such a degree .
It might cost little to treat a sick person and even less to prevent the illness , but AIDS is continuing to spread because of a lack of political will and economic commitment .
Globalisation is proving to be a tragedy for all those who are poor and is certainly not increasing the prosperity of the wealthy .
Mr President , I really do hope that the Commission will help ensure that there is no hiding behind mere words with , as a result , resolutions being adopted that consist of non-binding statements in the form of recycled wordings to which the Member States have agreed at other international meetings .
If arrangements are to be of immediate effect , as the Commission wishes , the EU must appreciate that the HIPC agreement is quite inadequate .
There is a need for an international agreement aimed at genuinely releasing the developing countries from their debts by , for example , integrating the international objectives on poverty so that a sustainable debt is defined on the basis of the countries ' need to combat poverty .
At present , a sustainable debt is defined in the HIPC initiative on the basis of non-documented sustainability values , and most of those countries that have obtained debt relief are spending more on debt repayment than on health and education .
In short , the EU ought to promote coherence in development policy and supplement this with effective support for developing the infrastructure of the developing countries so that they can carve out a place for themselves on the world market .
There are enough tasks to get to grips with .
These are already well defined .
What we now need is not more words , but action ; and action which hopefully does not end up like the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative in which the Commission produced a fine proposal which , unfortunately , was completely destroyed by the Council which postponed the agreement on rice , sugar and bananas until the year 2009 .
It is simply scandalous and something we cannot live with here in the European Union .
Mr President , the fact that only one of the 50 poorest countries , namely Botswana , has managed to get out of the poverty trap over the last 25 years proves that the basic system is flawed .
Providing ostensibly social aid and even slashing these countries ' debts are only cosmetic measures with no long-term effects .
Multinational groups have established a system of exploitation against these countries in collaboration with former colonial powers and other industrialised countries , which is every bit as cruel as it was in the colonial era .
It is amazing that often the countries richest in raw materials have the poorest population .
Take the example of Angola .
It is obvious that this system has been implemented on purpose .
The African country richest in raw materials was once the biggest coffee exporter in the world with enough money to feed its 12 million people easily .
Mr President , the decision to grant the poorest countries access to the European market is a good start .
Let us hope that the rest of the industrialised world will follow our lead .
But we need much more than that , and the health initiative for the least developed countries - " All but AIDS " - is a case in point .
95 % of people suffering from AIDS live in developing countries .
Also , diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis claim too many victims annually .
Healthcare in the poorest countries is seriously underfunded .
It appears that the least developed countries are spending as little as USD 8 per person on healthcare .
According to the WHO , this figure should be 8 or 9 times higher .
That is why the European Union should have the courage to take unilateral initiatives at the third UN Conference in May .
I would like to list a few of these initiatives .
European aid in the field of healthcare should be discontinued , so that the poorest countries , such as India , can buy medicines against AIDS cheaply using our aid money .
Secondly , the EU should ask the Member States to abolish the export tax on medicines for poverty-associated illnesses .
Thirdly , aid for basic healthcare should be doubled in the 2001 Community budget .
Half of that amount should be earmarked for the least developed countries .
Fourthly , European legislation on orphan medicines should be tailored to the needs of the developing countries , so that the pharmaceutical industry in Europe is encouraged to also produce medicines for the poor countries , such as medicines against AIDS , malaria , etc .
Fifthly , we should openly declare our support for Brazil and South Africa as soon as charges are brought against them .
Sixthly , we should defend the position on cheap medicines and the right to parallel imports , even in international forums , and should ask the TRIPS agreement to be adapted accordingly .
My seventh , and last , suggestion would be for all EU Member States to join forces to set up an international health and poverty fund , a fund from which an international , strategic long-term approach can be financed .
Europe should also free up extra monies for this fund .
Such a coherent initiative - " All but AIDS " - would be a fantastic contribution on the part of the Commission , and would send out a clear message that we , alongside " Everything but Arms " , can take a unilateral step ourselves .
Such a unilateral step coming from Europe would have far greater impact , precisely in the new Bush era , than all kinds of general declarations .
We need tangible results .
I am convinced that the EU and Mr Lamy are extremely well placed to achieve these .
Mr President , I would like to thank the members for the important contributions that have been made to this debate .
I would also like to thank Mr Miranda in particular for giving us the opportunity through his question to discuss the important issues that are to be dealt with at the third conference on least developed countries , which will take place in Brussels next month , in a careful and penetrative way .
I hope that this conference will provide opportunity to answer the very relevant and central question put by Mrs Maes , namely how honest we actually are in our efforts to assist the least developed countries .
It is precisely this to which we hope the conference in Brussels will provide very definite answers , not just fine words .
I have great respect for Mrs Sandbæk ' s description of the ' Everything but arms ' decision , but I still see this decision as an important step along the way .
This is an opportunity to show that the Union is honest in its efforts to genuinely assist the least developed countries .
It is an important first step that has been taken and one which , as I pointed out in my introduction , shows that the Union is genuinely prepared to let development aspects control its priorities in trade matters .
I agree that it would be desirable to go even further , but do not let us diminish this first step .
In conclusion , I will simply answer Mr Deva by saying that I am pleased that he mentions the matter of conflict prevention as an important part of our continued efforts when it comes to assisting the least developed countries .
The Swedish Presidency has made conflict prevention one of its core issues .
We at the Council have also asked if we may come back to this Chamber later this spring to discuss conflict prevention .
Moreover , conflict prevention will be an important issue at the European Council ' s conference in Gothenburg in June .
I hope that this will provide an important reminder that the prevention of conflicts and efforts to help the least developed countries are very closely related .
Mr President , I would like to make three comments in response to the debate .
The first has to do with the issue the President-in-Office of the Council has just addressed .
Like most of you , I think that development results from an , at times very mysterious , alchemy , the ingredients of which are easy to name but whose mixture is difficult to achieve .
Like Mr Deva and the President-in-Office , I think that peace is probably the decisive ingredient ahead of such elements as the fight against corruption .
There are many others but I hope we can avoid giving the impression that the least-developed countries have a monopoly over such difficulties and troubles .
I think we ourselves do not always come out unscathed .
Mrs Sandbæk , the ' Everything but arms ' initiative is a concrete action for which we had to battle hard , with the complicity of our chairman and friend , Leif Pagrotski , to obtain a qualified majority .
What would you have said had we failed in our attempt ?
These concrete decisions have been taken and are now going to be implemented .
Mrs Kinnock wanted to know which LDC countries in particular are likely to export arms .
The list has not been finalised .
I think that the conference on the LDCs will enable us to exert a bit of pressure .
Chile and New Zealand have displayed positive tendencies .
We are well aware that , at least at this stage , Japan will not fall into line as regards the totality of its imports , especially because of its rice problems .
Nonetheless , as regards industrial rates , it has already taken measures which are in the right direction .
Finally , the United States will have to review its system of generalised preferences this year and , thanks to the various lobbying methods at our disposal in Congress , we will see to it that , when it does , it will have our initiative engraved in its memory .
I would like to dispel any impression that we have in some way bought the agreement of least-developed countries so as to organise a round of commercial negotiations which is in our interest but not theirs .
Such an impression is totally without foundation .
In the first place , this round is of interest to LDCs , even to the extent that , between the law of the jungle of unregulated international exchange and a round of commercial negotiations which will establish new rules , their choice seems to be made .
Secondly , it is a question of giving credence to our own position and , Mrs Maes , of showing that , within the framework of our general policy , we are capable , without any equivalent concession , of taking it upon ourselves to resolve internal political difficulties in order to move towards what we have to do .
My third and final comment has to do with access to medicines .
This point was brought up by Mr Miranda , Mrs Boudjenah and Mr van den Berg .
As I responded yesterday in this very House to a question by Mrs Carlotti on this subject , we have , within the Commission , put on the table a comprehensive action plan covering not only the problems of finance in terms of development aid and those of additional incentives for public research , but also problems relating to the commercial aspects associated with intellectual property and the availability of medicines .
This general plan is now on the table .
You are aware of it . It is available for you to read .
It will be debated in the General Affairs Council on 14 May in sufficient time for the conclusions of this Council to be presented at the conference on LDCs which will take place at the end of May .
So you see that , from this standpoint , all of us , including the presidency which , as the President-in-Office has just pointed out , is making this a priority , have tried to ensure that a certain number of Commission proposals are transformed into action after they have passed before the Council and Parliament , so that we can look ahead to this conference at least with an easy conscience .
I have received two motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B5-0163 / 2001 ) .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 1 by ( H-0248 / 01 )
Subject : Crisis in the Balkans As developments in the Balkans crisis have revealed , recognition of the borders of many countries in the region is a matter of direct or indirect contention .
A case in point is the border between the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) and Serbia , on which the two countries themselves have agreed but which Albanian groups in FYROM itself and in Kosovo refuse to accept .
What is the Council 's view of these current developments and , in particular , what is its position on the acceptance of borders as a stabilising force in the Balkans crisis ?
Question No 2 by ( H-0259 / 01 )
Subject : Uncontrolled activity of extremist organisations in southern Serbia Terrorist activity by Albanian extremists in southern Serbia and FYROM , even within the KFOR-monitored zone , is out of control .
Terrorist operations and fighting , even involving the use of heavy weaponry , are reported on an almost daily basis .
The Yugoslav peace plan for the Presevo Valley has , in principle , received a favourable response .
Does the Council agree that the above peace plan constitutes a sufficient basis for talks ?
What measures will it take to facilitate the opening of talks between the political leaders of the Albanian-speaking population of southern Serbia and the Yugoslav leadership ?
Question No 3 by ( H-0306 / 01 )
Subject : Situation in FYROM and danger of a general conflagration in the Balkans The armed and murderous attacks against FYROM by the illegal mercenary army of the UCK which has been strengthened and armed by NATO have intensified and are now threatening to further destabilise the Balkans , causing a general conflagration .
Far from promoting stability , the presence of KFOR troops in FYROM actually causes further destabilisation . This is confirmed by media reports that armed mercenaries are crossing over from the German and American sectors unimpeded .
All these attacks and developments are the result of the ' divide and rule ' policy pursued by NATO and the EU , a policy which is advanced by inciting and exploiting nationalism and splinter groups and tendencies with the aim of setting up protectorates in the region in order better to exploit its wealth and peoples .
What specific steps does the Council intend to take to implement UN Security Council Resolution 1244 / 99 , to safeguard the territorial inviolability of FYROM and to put an end to all foreign interference in the Balkans ?
The Council has repeatedly expressed its deep concern at the great tensions and extensive violence in southern Serbia and the increased number of incidents in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia particularly close to the border with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia - incidents that the Council strongly condemned in its conclusions of 26 February .
On the same occasion the Council repeated that it stands firmly by the principle that all the borders in the area are inviolable .
Since then the European Union has been actively engaged in attempting to solve the crisis in close cooperation with the authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , NATO / KFOR and the authorities in FYROM .
The Council has also stated that it is prepared to continue to give practical support to the efforts to reach a peaceful solution to the conflict with full respect for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ' s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
With a view to this the Union welcomes the High Representative Mr Solana ' s decision to station further significant numbers of observers - up to 30 - from the Union ' s observation mission in southern Serbia , this since at the Council ' s conference ( General Affairs ) on 19 March , following contact with NATO and following the signing of a cease-fire agreement between the parties , he assessed that the safety of the observers was carefully guaranteed .
In its conclusions of 19 March the Council supported the initiative by the authorities in Belgrade to find a peaceful and permanent solution to the current situation in southern Serbia .
This initiative , which was presented to the European Union Committee on Foreign Affairs and Security Policy by Serbia ' s Deputy Prime Minister , Dr Covic , and the Foreign Minister of the Yugoslav Federation , Mr Svilanovic , is considered to form a suitable basis for continued activity .
At this time the Commission announced that it would double its financial support in the Presevo Valley .
This support now amounts to nearly EUR 2 million .
The Commission is also considering what contributions can be made to Serbia in the long term in accordance with the EUR 240 million programme in 2001 .
As confirmation of the Council ' s commitment the honourable Members of Parliament should be aware of the fact that a representative of the High Representative Javier Solana actively participated - together with a representative of the Secretary-General of NATO - in the negotiations which , on 13 March 2001 , resulted in the Serbian and Albanian representatives signing the cease-fire agreement and to a dialogue being started between the Yugoslav-Serbian authorities and the Presevo Albanian representatives on 23 March .

The Council welcomed Javier Solana ' s status report , submitted on 19 March , concerning further EU measures in respect of south-east Serbia and urged him to continue his work on an EU strategy for this region in cooperation with the presidency and the Commission in order to support the process in the region and contribute to international efforts in reaching a peaceful solution .
The Council reacted quickly and clearly to the serious incidents in FYROM that took place recently .
The ministerial troika visited Skopje on 22 March and Mr Solana visited FYROM on a further two occasions , on 20 and 26-27 March .
The Council entirely rejects the tendentious and unfounded allegations in the honourable Member of Parliament ' s question No 306 concerning the role of NATO and KFOR in the crisis in FYROM .
The EU position is clearly stated in the declaration by the European Council issued in Stockholm on 23 March .
I am here on behalf of Mr Papayannakis .
I would like to thank the Council of Ministers for its answer , which I think was good in many ways .
I have a supplementary question which concerns the demands that are now being made by the Albanian minority in Macedonia for increased influence and some form of self-rule or federation within Macedonia .
Does the Council of Ministers have any viewpoint on the demands being put forward by the Albanian minority in Macedonia ?
As I said in my introduction , the basis for any solution of the conflicts that we are now seeing must be a respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty .
This was also concluded by both the Council and the European Council on several occasions .
However , it is , of course , very important to bring about an intensification of the interethnic dialogue in various ways .
One of the reasons why we have had a continual presence of Union representatives in the region in recent weeks is precisely in order to be able to promote this interethnic dialogue within the framework of the respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty .
In general terms , the Union - in the Council ' s opinion - should continue to do everything to promote this dialogue , whilst always having these fundamental principles in mind .
Mr President , I shall overlook the fact that your reply was something of a " Lord have mercy " to Javier Solana .
You mentioned his name five times and maybe it is better to leave him out of it when we are discussing the Balkans .
But to get back to the point of my question .
Your standpoint has one positive aspect - the Council ' s determination not to violate all the borders in the area .
What I should like to ask , just to clarify matters and to stop playing with words , is : do we assume and do we mean that the borders of the whole of Yugoslavia , a Yugoslavia with no more Milosevic , a Yugoslavia with Milosevic in prison , also include Kosovo ?
I raise this with all due respect for the comments made to the effect that , if this problem is not resolved , we shall have continuing instability in the area .
I do not know whether this was a hymn of praise to Mr Solana .
If it was a hymn , it was to something that I would regard as a very active policy by the Union to attempt to help solve one of the most serious conflicts on our continent .
I must say that although we are seeing a lot of human suffering in the areas in question , I still believe that the Union ' s very active work has helped limit the suffering and that now , following some very difficult weeks , we can actually see a light in an otherwise very gloomy situation .
I would therefore like to say that we in the Union - which also includes Mr Solana , who has really worked hard on this matter together with Mr Patten and the Swedish Presidency - can really be proud of what we have achieved , although it is not yet sufficient .
Mr President , may I say that I am totally dissatisfied with the Council representative ' s reply . First of all , I asked a straightforward question .
What is being done about applying Security Council Resolution 1244 ?
This resolution makes provision for Kosovo to be a province of Serbia , KLA criminals to be disarmed and the borders to be guarded by Yugoslavian forces , whereas it was the presence of KFOR , with the blessing of the European Union and ÍÁÔÏ , which facilitated both the attacks in southern Serbia , in the Presevo valley , and the invasion of KLA criminals into FYROM .
And the question here , Mr President , is who gave Robertson , the NATO secretary-general , the right to move in and pressurise the FYROM government into negotiating with these criminals ?
And Mr Solana did the same .
Is this what they mean by their determination to guard the borders ?
Tell us once and for all , is Kosovo a Serbian province or an independent state ?
And then , Mr President , I was struck by the presidency ' s statement that Presevo ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I realise that Mr Korakas is not satisfied with my answer .
On behalf of the Council I must once again reject some of the allegations in Mr Korakas ' question as tendentious .
Who is it that must ensure that the UN Security Council ' s resolutions are observed ?
Obviously it is the UN ' s Security Council , but there are many international organisations which are cooperating in order to do this within the framework of the resolutions passed by the UN Security Council .
The Union is one of the most important players in this respect and I hope and believe that the Union will continue to be active .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am worried about events spiralling out of control in the Balkans .
I would like to raise the matter of the forthcoming debate in the Bulgarian national assembly on the free passage of NATO forces without the need for prior approval by parliament , the first time this has been allowed in a non-NATO country .
There is also talk of leaving unmanned American aeroplanes on Bulgarian territory .
What I am wondering is , does ÍÁÔÏ intend to use Bulgaria against FYROM in the same way as it used FYROM against Yugoslavia ?
At the same time , people protesting in Bulgaria against the country ' s involvement with NATO are being persecuted and protestors from the new " Che Guevara " movement have been arrested and tried on charges of hooliganism .
All this indicates the risk of a crisis spreading in Bulgaria .
I should like to ask if the Council has faced up to such a possibility and thought out any action .
The honourable Member is clinging onto speculation regarding which the Council cannot comment further .
Allow me simply to express a hope that the collective efforts that the Union is making together with others to restrict the conflict and to bring about a development towards stability and democracy will produce results such that the honourable Member ' s speculation need not become reality .
I would like to assist the President-in-Office of the Council by addressing my fellow Members from Greece and asking them if they would tell us about the rumours which are doing the rounds on the application for Greece ' s accession to Yugoslavia .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 4 by ( H-0290 / 01 ) :
Subject : International Criminal Court Will the Council indicate its position on the slow ratification process of the proposed International Criminal Court , bearing in mind that it cannot be formally established until 60 countries have ratified the Rome Statute of the ICC and that , in February 2001 , Dominica became the 29th State to ratify the Statute ?
Question no 5 by ( H-0299 / 01 ) :
Subject : International Criminal Court In its answer dated 24 October 2000 to Oral Question H-0763 / 00 concerning the process for the ratification of the Statute of the International Criminal Court , the Council Presidency stated that it was also possible to envisage substantial progress being made in the near future , since eight more Member States were quietly confident that ratification would take place before the end of the year .
However , the first three months of 2001 have now elapsed , but only four more Member States have ratified the Statute .
Furthermore , the Council also stated in its answer that three other Member States had reiterated their intention to ratify ( sic ) but had noted that some procedural or constitutional problems still remained .
Can the Council indicate the type of procedural or constitutional problems to be solved by the Member States , the progress made in the ratification procedures in each of the Member States which have not yet ratified the Statute ( Denmark , Greece , Ireland , the Netherlands , Portugal , Sweden and the United Kingdom ) and its assessment of the likelihood that the ratification process will be concluded in those seven Member States by 18 July 2001 , a date which will mark the third ( ! ) anniversary of the conclusion of the Rome Conference ?
The European Union feels that a culture of immunity from prosecution cannot be tolerated , particularly where gross violations of international law such as genocide , war crimes and crimes against humanity are concerned .
Where the national courts cannot or will not act , the international community has the ultimate responsibility for guaranteeing that justice is done .
The Union therefore considers it necessary for the International Criminal Court to be set up within the near future in order to increase respect for international humanitarian rights and human rights .
By abolishing immunity from prosecution , the Court will reinforce the rule of law and justice and contribute to consolidating world peace .
The Union strongly recommends that the International Criminal Court be set up in the near future .
With this aim in mind the Union started international efforts to encourage as many states as possible to sign up to the Rome Statute before the deadline expired on 31 December 2000 .
The Union has also undertaken to encourage the countries with associate membership of the Union to sign or ratify the Statute and the Union is offering its expertise in this area to all interested countries .
Moreover , the Union is firmly resolved to give its support to the actual setting up of the Court .
The Union expects the Rome Statute to enter into force in the near future , when the 60 ratifications required have been achieved , including ratification by all the Union ' s Member States .
Italy , France , Belgium , Spain , Germany , Austria , Luxembourg and Finland have already ratified the Rome Statute .
The other Member States have all started the ratification process and in the majority of cases it should soon be completed , depending on the national procedure .
In this context it should be noted that the implementation of the Rome Statute in national legislation is a demanding task which , in a number of cases , even requires constitutional amendments .
The situation concerning the ratification of the Rome Statute in the Union is regularly taken up by the presidency at meetings of the Council ' s working group on international law .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his response and would like to give him some information of which he may not be aware .
The Irish government has stated its intention to hold a referendum on 31 May 2001 to ratify the International Criminal Court and to alter our constitution for that .
I should like to know what positive or proactive action is being taken by the presidency to ensure that not only the existing Member States within the EU , but also those countries with associate membership numbering 27 in total , which could help bring us up above the 60 countries required for formal ratification and the enforcement of this International Criminal Court , actually ratify .
Following on from that , I know it may not be his exact role within this House , but he may be able to enlighten us as regards the Swedish difficulties that may arise with regard to ratification of the International Criminal Court .
As I mentioned in my answer the Union has undertaken to help all the countries that are associated with the Union to ensure that they can sign or ratify the Statute .
In addition , we are offering technical expertise .
I am therefore convinced that with this commitment the Union will contribute not just to the fifteen Member States being able to participate fully in this important instrument as soon as possible , but also the associate countries .
The Member asked about any national difficulties in the case of my own country , Sweden .
As I said in my introduction , it is a fairly extensive process in many countries - including my own .
However , I am pleased to be able to tell the honourable Member that Sweden will be able to deposit the ratification instrument during the period for which we hold the presidency , so that we , too , can join the ranks of countries that have already ratified the Statute - and that as quickly as possible .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I somehow get the impression that we are going to have to worm information out of you .
Mr Crowley has given us the good news that the Irish government has stated its intention to ratify the International Criminal Court .
You have also just given us the good news that Sweden will do likewise by the end of the next six-month period .
Could you give us some good news about the five remaining countries , which are Portugal , Greece , Great Britain , the Netherlands and Denmark ?
You spoke of a long process , but three years is an awfully long time !
I thought the purpose of this Question Time was precisely to demand answers from the Council , which is why I am very pleased to be able to answer Mr Dupuis ' s question further .
Where Portugal is concerned , I know that the Portuguese are hoping to be able to complete the process when some essential supplements have been made to the Portuguese constitution before the summer recess .
As far as Denmark is concerned , the matter was taken up for first reading in the Danish Parliament as long ago as last autumn .
It is expected that the second and third readings will be able to take place before the summer recess .
Greece reports that it needs to amend its penal law .
It is expected that these changes will take a few months more .
They have not yet ventured to give an exact date for ratification .
In Great Britain the speed depends very much on whether parliament has sufficient time - I am sure that the honourable Member is aware of the discussions that are going on in the United Kingdom concerning a possible parliamentary election - but the British hope that they will still be able to adopt the necessary legislation during the current parliamentary session .
Finally , in the Netherlands , a two-thirds majority is needed in parliament .
However , it is hoped that the necessary legislation will be able to be adopted within a short time .
As I said in my answer - I was trying to save a bit of time , but I am very happy to elaborate on it - I am convinced that all the Member States of the Union will have carried out the necessary ratification in the not-too-distant future .
I wanted to ask the President-in-Office about Greece .
However , he has replied , so perhaps there is no point .
So I shall simply take this opportunity to say to Mr Dupuis , in connection with the previous question , you should show some respect , you really should .
One might accuse him of wanting to join Mr Le Pen ' s party - after all , they are already in the same group .
He should show some respect and not use such figures of speech .
Question No 6 by ( H-0251 / 01 ) :
Subject : Charter of Fundamental Rights The Swedish Minister of State told the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on 13 February 2001 that the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , although ' solemnly proclaimed ' was not regarded by the Council as being binding in all respects .
In order to avoid legal uncertainty and political confusion , would the President-in-Office specify which elements the Council considers binding and which not ' .
The Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights has been signed by the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
At this stage the three institutions have recognised the political value of the document within the Union ' s framework of action .
If the objective is to make existing rights more visible , however , certain of the rights that are proclaimed in the Charter are already found in international conventions or in national constitutional traditions .
The fact that these rights are set out in the Charter does not change the legal value they have irrespective of the existence of the Charter , since the basis of their observance in Union law rests on Article 6 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union .
The fact that the rights have been formulated in the Charter thus does not affect their value .
Regarding the question of whether the Charter is to be regarded as legally binding in all respects , in December 2000 - as the honourable Member knows - the Intergovernmental Conference in Nice approved a declaration concerning the future of the Union which specifies that the question of the status of the Charter is one of the issues to be taken up in conjunction with the preparatory work to be carried out before 2004 .
It was agreed that when this work has been carried out a new Intergovernmental Conference would be convened to discuss the status of the Charter , amongst other things .
The Minister will be aware that the Court of Justice is already deploying the Charter quite broadly in its jurisprudence .
My worry is that we face a situation where the Commission , Parliament and the Court think of the Charter as binding but the Council does not , creating a situation that can only result in political and legal confusion .
Will he promise that the Council will at least keep the impact of the Charter closely under scrutiny and review its status on a continuing basis ?
The Council has a duty to follow , discuss and monitor the question of the status of the Charter .
This was decided by the European Council in Nice and obviously the Council will abide by that decision .
Allow me to remind you that the various articles of the Charter are in part based on a number of rights taken from existing instruments .
A number of these rights are already " legally deployable " , i.e. they may form a suitable basis for a decision by a legal body , however , not by virtue of the fact that they are included in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , but because they are taken from other instruments .
The Charter also contains a number of articles that are rather an expression of general political aims , for example Articles 37 and 38 concerning environmental and consumer protection .
These are not designed in such a way as to be legally deployable immediately .
However , I agree with the Member that it is an important task of the Council , Parliament and the Commission to continue to monitor this question in accordance with what was said at the European Council summit in Nice .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I have listened to you very carefully , but I believe many MEPs and many European citizens have been left with a bad taste in our mouths in view of the results of the last summit , held in Nice , where the Charter of Human Rights was not approved , and I do not know why the representatives of the Member States ' governments did not want to approve it .
But the fact is that I asked a question on a concrete case of human rights , relating to the use of Euskera [ Basque ] - the so-called lingua navarrorum - in the Autonomous Community of Navarre , and the Commission replied that as language rights are a subject not in force in the Charter of Human Rights at a European level , complaints can only be made at the level of national institutions and courts .
I should like to ask you if you agree with this kind of explanation or whether we European citizens have a right to greater protection by the European institutions .
The Council is not in a position to judge the application in the particular case taken up by the Member .
Allow me to mention two things . Firstly : you stated that the Charter has not been adopted .
The answer is that it has been solemnly proclaimed .
Secondly : where minority languages are concerned , another important institution - which is also geographically close to Parliament - namely the Council of Europe , has drawn up a convention on the status of minority languages .
I regard this as also illustrating the importance of the fact that in a discussion of the Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights we also consider other important instruments in this area , e.g. the Council of Europe ' s Convention on Human Rights .
Mr President , could I ask the President-in-Office once again to restate so everybody can hear that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is a non-binding political declaration as approved by the Heads of State and Heads of Government in Nice .
If the Court of Justice or any other court in the European Union is using it to bind Member States , individuals or associations to an interpretation of that charter , then they are incorrect in law , in justice and in legal interpretation .
The only Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms which can be utilised in the Member State courts or even in the Court of Justice , as authoritative rather than binding , is the European Convention on Human Rights which is a Council of Europe document .
The Member requests repetition .
I don ' t like repeating myself , but I am at Parliament ' s service .
Allow me to explain as follows : from our viewpoint the Charter is a political declaration and is only politically binding .
However , large parts of the content of the Charter are already found in binding conventions , primarily the European Convention on Human Rights .
The Charter neither adds to nor detracts from these conventions in any way , but it is significant as clarification and as a political manifesto .
Question No 7 by ( H-0252 / 01 ) :
Subject : Letter Of Intent / Framework Agreement What progress has been made with the Letter Of Intent / Framework Agreement , signed last summer by six Member State governments , to create an internal market for the procurement of defence equipment ?
In July 1998 the defence ministers of France , Germany , Italy , Spain , Great Britain and my own country Sweden signed a Declaration Of Intent concerning measures to ease structural change in the European defence industry .
Two years later , in July 2000 , these six states signed the Framework Agreement on measures to facilitate structural change in the European defence industry and the ways in which it operates .
The honourable Member of Parliament raises the issue of what has been achieved as regards the Declaration Of Intent and the Framework Agreement .
The Council has no role to play in the cooperation that has been established between the six states and is therefore not in a position to be able to provide direct information concerning the situation and what has been achieved in this area .
I understand the technicalities and thank the Minister for that .
But would the Council be in favour of repealing Article 296 of the EC Treaty , in other words , disallowing the exemption from the single market provisions and so introducing competition into defence procurement ?
The Council has not had opportunity to discuss this matter .
Again , I am not in a position to be able to give any direct answer to the question put by the honourable Member of Parliament .
Mr President , I often receive queries from citizens wishing to carry weapons in Europe .
These people are hunters and marksmen travelling to competitions .
There are huge discrepancies in the rules here .
These are serious complaints and we are being asked why the internal market does not function in this area .
Do you intend to take any initiatives here ?
No , we do not .
Mr President , I wish to take the opportunity of the President-in-Office ' s presence in this debate to ask him whether he is aware that the Spanish public company , Santa Barbara , has just been sold to the U.S. company , General Dynamics , having refused an alternative offer from a German company , despite the fact that Santa Barbara actually has a contract to build hundreds of ' Leopard ' tanks that are patented in Germany .
The Spanish government ' s decision is in clear breach of existing agreements to develop the European defence industry , which are the subject of this question .
I should like to know whether you agree with this action by the Spanish government , which has sold a publicly owned company to a company from the United States ?
The President of the Council is not in a position to comment on the individual case brought up by the honourable Member of Parliament .
Allow me simply to state very briefly the legal position of this agreement because I happen to be a citizen of a country that is one of the signatories .
The Framework Agreement is now subject to ratification by the signatory states .
It has not yet entered into force , so in this respect , too , the question that the honourable Member is asking is not relevant .
Question No 8 by ( H-0253 / 01 ) :
Subject : Distortion of competition resulting from national compensation schemes for military purchasing On 15 December the Belgian Federation decided to discontinue the practice of linking its military purchases to economic compensation schemes for firms in Flanders and Wallonia .
The cabinet 's notification of an order for night-glasses says : ' The cabinet confirms that clauses on economic compensation will not be included in any further orders ' .
Hitherto the cabinet had endeavoured , as far as possible , to place orders involving billions of francs for the armed forces with ' Belgian ' firms .
These compensatory schemes were always shrouded in an atmosphere of protectionism and wheeling-and-dealing because the decision-making process did not reflect the market mechanism .
What initiative will the Council take in the context of the Common Foreign and Security Policy to ensure that the fifteen EU Member States follow the Belgian example and put an end to any national compensatory schemes for military purchases ?
The question that the honourable Member raises has never been put before the Council .
In any case , in the present circumstances the Council has no authority to monitor or intervene in national decisions concerning purchases of military equipment .
This is also in itself an answer to the follow-on question put by the previous Member .
I must thank the President of the Council for his very elaborate and extensive response which could , however , be summarised in two sentences flat .
I do not know whether to laugh or cry .
Whilst all of Europe is wondering how it should start to act as a united front in its defence policy , for example after the Kosovo war , you are coming up with this response .
I am really starting to question the Council ' s validity .
You were absent during the foot-and-mouth debate , as well as during the debate on the discharge .
The discharge , as granted by the Council , was an illustration of bad craftsmanship pure and simple .
I cannot understand why you are simply fobbing us off with such a response .
Indeed , Article 296 of the Treaty on European Union imposes a few restrictions on yourselves in this respect .
However , you could also start applying Article 296 ( 2 ) , and you could at least ask the Commission to ensure that you have authority to act in this field .
At a time when a Member State is finally abandoning economic compensations and moving away from dubious practices , I find the Council ' s response in this matter unacceptable .
I actually have nothing to add beyond what I stated in my initial answer .
I must distance myself from some of the groundless assertions made by the honourable Member and can only confirm that the Council has no authority either to monitor or to intervene in national decisions concerning purchases of military equipment .
It is the Council ' s task to pursue the Treaty .
That is what we do .
Question No 9 by ( H-0257 / 01 ) :
Subject : Mad cow problem and funding urgent measures to solve it Does the Council not believe that steps to solve this serious problem should not be impeded in the short term by the limits imposed on the CAP by the AGENDA 2000 financial perspective , pending the necessary reform of the CAP ?
On 12 March the Council adopted the guidelines for the 2002 budget .
In the conclusions to these the Council confirms that it will apply the institutional agreement of 6 May 1999 in full .
However , the Council emphasises that it is important to make a sufficiently large margin available under the various ceilings in the budget plan when the budget is adopted .
As regards financial repercussions of the BSE crisis , the Council would remind you that , in accordance with the conclusions of the European Council summit in Nice , both the budget plan and the Council Regulation on budgetary discipline must be observed even if new measures or supplementary measures are required .
The Council does not consider that the budget framework on which the European Council agreed in Berlin and which was confirmed in Nice is any obstacle to effective measures being taken to deal with the problems currently facing the beef market .
This framework has not prevented the Council from agreeing on important measures in respect of public health in order to restore consumer confidence .
In particular , in February the Council adopted a common position on a Regulation establishing provisions for the prevention and control of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies .
Once this has been approved by the Council and European Parliament it will provide a framework for sustainable production .
The Council is currently discussing the package of measures put forward by the Commission in February , the aim of which is to deal with the disequilibrium in the market for beef within the Union in both the short term and the long term and to raise the quality .
In the financing summary accompanying the proposal the Commission shows how the financial consequences of such measures can be met within the budget plan .
At the meeting of the Ecofin Council on 12 February in conjunction with the Council ' s adoption of the proposal for supplementary and amending budget 1 / 2001 in respect of BSE-related measures , Commissioner Schreyer said that depending on developments in the market , the Commission would consider legislative initiatives to cover the risk of further costs in the budget with a view to observing the financial frameworks of Agenda 2000 .
The Council therefore feels that the Commission should be able to implement the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy without this being affected by BSE .
Mr President , I do not think that we can allow ourselves to become paralysed by the shortcomings in the political , social and economic project that Europe needs and which Europe ' s citizens are demanding every time the European Union is called on to take an exceptional decision . This is what happened in Nice and what is happening again today with mad cow disease or foot-and-mouth .
The European Union and , above all , the Council , must therefore not avert their eyes from the fact that an issue as significant as reforming the CAP cannot wait until 2006 and that such a reform requires changes to the structure of the European budget and profound changes to the tight financial perspective of Agenda 2000 .
Is the Council really willing to adapt Agenda 2000 should this be made necessary by serious practical problems such as mad cow disease , for example , which are affecting certain countries particularly seriously , such as my own , Galicia , thereby avoiding a situation in which , to the incomprehension and confusion of Europe ' s citizens , the Union denies itself recourse to the political weapons it has at its disposal ?
I would simply like to remind the honourable Member that the decision on Agenda 2000 in March 1999 also includes what is known as a mid-term review of the Common Agricultural Policy that is to be implemented in 2002 and 2003 .
I assume that the Council will discuss the matter taken up by the Member in an appropriate way prior to this .
Question No 10 by ( H-0264 / 01 ) :
Subject : Tax on financial transactions versus Article 56 Article 56 of the EC Treaty reads :
' 1 .
Within the framework of the provisions set out in this Chapter , all restrictions on the movement of capital between Member States and between Member States and third countries shall be prohibited .
2 .
Within the framework of the provisions set out in this Chapter , all restrictions on payments between Member States and between Member States and third countries shall be prohibited . '
The Commission replied ( H-0024 / 01 ) that it was of the opinion that a tax of general application as originally conceived by Professor Tobin ( ' Tobin tax ' ) , if introduced by a Member State , was likely to be contrary to Article 56 , together with Articles 12 , 39 , 43 , 49 and the corresponding articles of the EEA Agreement and that such a tax , if introduced at Community level , was also unlikely to be possible under Article 57 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , since that article provided for restrictive measures only in a limited number of areas .
Is the Council of the opinion that a tax on financial transactions , a ' Tobin tax ' , is compatible with Article 56 of the EC Treaty ?
Has any Member State proposed that the Treaty be amended to facilitate a ' Tobin tax ' ?
The Council has not yet discussed the possibility of introducing a tax of the type once proposed by Professor Tobin .
The Commission has not yet put forward any proposal or other initiative in the matter for discussion by the Council .
As far as Mr Sjöstedt ' s second question is concerned , as far as we can recall no proposal was submitted to amend Article 56 of the Treaty at the last Intergovernmental Conference .
I have two supplementary questions for the Council of Ministers .
The first concerns whether the Council shares the Commission ' s assessment that the EU Treaty makes a transaction tax of the Tobin model impossible , i.e. that a Tobin tax would be prohibited under Article 56 of the EU Treaty .
Does the Council of Ministers share this view ?
My second question concerns the fact that many members of the Swedish government are said to take a positive view of a Tobin tax .
Does Sweden , as a Member State , have any plans to bring up this matter in the EU ' s Council of Ministers or is the positive attitude to the tax one more of principle than of practice ?
The Council cannot answer Mr Sjöstedt ' s first question because no discussion has been held in the Council concerning the assessment by the Commission to which he refers .
As Mr Sjöstedt says , it is correct that representatives of the Swedish government have stated that a Tobin tax would be an agreeable idea - wording that has been used by a trade minister known to both of us .
Before it raises a matter each presidency country should make an assessment of whether it is possible to achieve the agreement required .
The presidency assesses that at present the conditions are not in place for achieving such agreement and therefore has no plans to take up the matter for discussion .
I would like to put a question to the Council that concerns the slight tendency towards a Tobin tax that Sweden introduced between 1986 and 1991 , i.e. the turnover tax on share transactions .
What was the result of this type of transaction tax ?
I am not sure that it is the task of the President-in-Office of the Council to attempt to make an assessment on behalf of the Council of a tax that the honourable Member calls an attempt at a Tobin tax .
Firstly I do not believe that it is compatible with my role to attempt to make an assessment . Secondly , I do not agree with the description of this tax as an attempt at a Tobin tax .
Question No 11 by ( H-0265 / 01 ) :
Subject : Denmark 's JHA opt-out Title IV of the EC Treaty does not apply to Denmark .
Nonetheless , a number of the texts adopted under Title IV do apply to Denmark by virtue of international agreements .
The Danish government has , for example , indicated its willingness to be associated with the EURODAC regulation , the bankruptcy regulation , the Brussels I and II Regulations and the Regulation on the notification of documentation in civil and commercial cases .
The Danish position is based on the assumption that it enjoys freedom of choice with decisions on whether to be involved or not being taken on a case ­ by ­ case basis .
Can the Council confirm that Denmark enjoys freedom of choice about whether to be a party to decisions taken under Title IV of the EC Treaty with the result , for example , that certain parts of decisions taken in the area of asylum and immigration can - also in the future - be acceded to by Denmark , while Denmark at the same time retains special national arrangements in other areas of asylum and immigration policy ?
The Council would remind you that when the Treaty of Amsterdam was entered into the parties to the Treaty drew up a protocol concerning the position of Denmark that was appended to the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Under this protocol Denmark shall not participate in the Council ' s decisions on proposed measures in accordance with Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Neither shall any provisions , measures , international agreements that have been entered into by the Community in accordance with Title IV or decisions by the courts that involve an interpretation of such a provision or measure or any such decision be binding on Denmark .
However , Articles 4 and 5 state exemptions from these general rules on terms laid down there .
Where measures for extending the Schengen rules are concerned , for example , Denmark shall decide whether it is to transpose these measures in its national legislation within six months of the Council having made a decision on these .
The question has been raised as to whether it is conceivable that the content of certain measures decided on by the Community within the context of Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community may be made applicable in Denmark in any other way .
No such proposal has been put before the Council at present and the Council thus has not been requested to take a position on this matter .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his selective reading from the protocol on the position of Denmark .
I have an excellent knowledge of this protocol and do not need this summing up .
The question revolves around a very central issue .
The Danish debate is about Denmark ' s being able , via intergovernmental agreements , to be associated with parts of what is known as the third pillar , in other words parts of this section of the Treaty establishing the European Community , and I can tell from what the President-in-Office of the Council said that no decision has been reached .
The Council has not entered into such an agreement so far , but I am aware - and the President-in-Office can presumably confirm this - that as far as , at any rate , one particular central issue is concerned , namely the EURODAC system , negotiations between the EU institutions and Denmark are under way .
Am I to understand the answer as saying that the Council is unaware of these negotiations ?
I have little to add to my original answer .
It is not possible for the President-in-Office of the Council to assess the content of a national debate such as that to which the honourable Member refers .
I have tried to explain the legal reasons for the Council ' s action .
I am sorry if the honourable Member regards this as an unfortunate reading of the Treaty , but it is , in actual fact , the only thing the President-in-Office of the Council can say in answer to such a question .
Question No 12 by ( H-0271 / 01 ) :
Subject : Payment of Austrian investigators When the Members of the Council were preparing to end the ' sanctions ' against Austria , a special working party of three wise men was set up for this purpose .
When I asked in a written question to the Commission who was paying these people and how much , the Commission said I should ask the Council .
When I put a written question to the Council , I was told that the Council did not know .
How is it possible that the Council did not know ?
Does the presidency of the Council know which body paid and how much the payment was ?
Do the Member States of the Council have the use of some kind of secret account from which such funds can be paid without the knowledge of the whole Council ?
Last year , when answering a question , number 3304 , put by the same honourable Member , the Council already had the opportunity to inform him that it had not been involved in the activities of this working party and that no demands had been made upon the Community budget .
Austria ' s 14 partners in the European Union used their national budgets to cover all the expenses incurred in financing the task of assessing the situation in Austria .
Mr President , Minister , the Council of the European Union certainly did handle matters relating to the Austrian boycott .
It is quite amazing that the country to hold the presidency of the Council , which was also a member of the Council when these matters were being handled , is unaware of what was paid to the people given the task of ending sanctions .
I would like to ask the representative from Sweden , the country to hold the presidency , who was on the team made up of representatives from fourteen countries engaged in this work : do you mean you really do not know what these people were paid ?
If you , as a representative of the Council do not know , then perhaps you know as a representative of Sweden ?
Once again , I have to answer that I am here in the capacity of President-in-Office of the Council and , because the Council has not concerned itself with the issue , I am in no position to provide any information in response to those questions put by the honourable Member .
However , I should like to point out , as an aside in this Question Time , how much Sweden and all the other countries have contributed to this matter via their national budgets .
But , as I say , the Council has no role to play in this matter , and this is a Question Time with questions to the Council .
Question No 13 by ( H-0273 / 01 ) :
Subject : Fundamentalist hostility to women in Saudi Arabia The laws currently in force in Saudi Arabia discriminate against women .
For instance , women are stoned for committing adultery and condemned to death for apostasy .
More than 28 women having been executed since 1990 . In its contempt for women , the State discriminates against them .
They are subjected to gender apartheid , arbitrarily detained and imprisoned , and watched by the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice , also known as the al-Mutawa ' een .
In view of this situation , when and how does the Council intend to draw the Saudi government into dialogue on human rights for women ?
The Council agrees with the honourable Member that the situation regarding women ' s human rights in Saudi Arabia is far from satisfactory .
The European Union is addressing issues of human rights , including the position of women , with Saudi Arabia and other Member States of the Gulf States Cooperation Council within the framework of meetings at all levels between the EU and the GCC .
When , in 2000 , Saudi Arabia took over the presidency of the GCC , two such meetings were held at ministerial level : one in the common EU-GCC council and another in conjunction with the UN ' s General Assembly in September .
Human rights were also discussed at the meeting between the European Union and the GCC ' s regional heads in Brussels on 23 March .
The EU will continue to emphasise to GCC members the necessity of improving the human rights situation in their countries and will continue to cooperate with the UN and international human rights organisations .
The EU will also follow up the issue of a more vigorous dialogue on human rights .
The Council would nonetheless remind you that there are no agreements or any separate political dialogue between the European Union and Saudi Arabia .
The EU and the GCC are at present negotiating a free-trade agreement .
In accordance with the European Union ' s policy of incorporating the issue of human rights into agreements with third countries , respect for human rights will constitute an essential component of such an agreement .
Mr President , I should to express my thanks to the President of the Council for the precision with which he answered my question .
I should like to ask the supplementary question of whether you consider that the violation of the human rights of women that the Saudi government systematically carries out deserves to be condemned .
The answer to the honourable Member ' s question is , in principle , yes .
Allow me to quote from the speech made by the presidency on 29 March at the UN Commission for Human Rights .
The European Union took this opportunity to welcome the fact that Saudi Arabia had ratified the convention relating to discrimination against women but added that ' the EU continues to be deeply concerned about reports of torture and other inhuman treatments and punishment , the increasing use of the death penalty and amputations , discriminatory laws and prohibitions of , or restrictions on , fundamental freedoms including freedom of expression , assembly , association and religion ' .
In this way , the European Union made its views on the situation in Saudi Arabia in this area crystal clear .
Mr President , conflicts connected with religion seem to be a significant cause of human rights violations in the world .
Does the Council consider it necessary that the EU should appoint a special human rights representative who would ensure that human rights can be reconciled with other EU policies ?
The Council has not had the opportunity to discuss any special human rights function .
I would remind you of the observatory in Vienna which is one of the EU ' s tools for making sure that human rights are respected .
In particular , those issues addressed by the honourable Member are to be monitored , especially the risk of increased religious intolerance such as we are seeing in many areas of the world .
I believe the Council ' s view is that the optimum working method in this area is to support the international organisations that monitor issues such as these .
Such organisations mainly exist within the framework of the United Nations .
Question No 14 by ( H-0278 / 01 ) :
Subject : Human rights in the Netherlands Article 2 ( 1 ) ( right to life ) of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 1 ( human dignity ) and Article 2 ( right to life ) of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights solemnly declared in Nice on 18 December 2000 , as well as the position taken by the European Union on Austria 2000 when it declared itself to be a Union of Values , are basic human rights documents and political positions taken for the defence of human dignity and life .
In the light of these documents and of the political activities of the European Union , has the Council followed , been informed about and studied the consequences of the proposed law in the Netherlands concerning medically-assisted suicides which will be determined in the Dutch Senate on 10 April 2001 ?
The Community ' s responsibility in the area of public health is laid down in Article 152 of the Treaty .
Paragraph 5 , in particular , of this Article states that , ' Community action in the field of public health shall fully respect the responsibilities of the Member States for the organisation and delivery of health services and medical care . '
The Council therefore lacks competence when it comes to what is known as medically-assisted suicides .
I want to thank Mr Danielsson for that answer .
I am not in any way surprised about this clear distinction , which in itself is perfectly correct , when it comes to the EU ' s areas of competence .
I would nonetheless remind you that the new draft law in the Netherlands concerning medically assisted suicides is a source of serious concern in many countries .
History has shown the danger of such a development .
I would point out that this draft law in actual fact enables children of twelve years and over , with their parents ' permission , to be present at medically assisted suicides and also enables children of sixteen years and over to decide for themselves , without their parents ' permission , whether or not they wish to be present .
This is an issue to which we cannot close our eyes in a Europe in which the Austria debate has raised questions concerning human dignity .
I should nonetheless like to be told whether or not the issue of this law in the Netherlands in any way affects the debate on values within the European Union .
This is obviously an important issue that Mr Sacrédeus is addressing , and one affecting our values .
The Council ' s way of dealing with these issues must nonetheless be based on the Treaty and , as we see it , the Treaty is unambiguous on this point , for this is an issue which the fathers of the Treaty have clearly identified as one to which the subsidiarity principle is to apply .
That is to say , it is a national issue .
Question No 15 by ( H-0280 / 01 ) :
Subject : Northern hake fishing - discrimination inherent in the division of TACs by sea area Northern hake is found from the coast of the Basque Country to the coasts of Norway and the fishing grounds are divided up into sea areas ( ICES Division IIIa , Sub-Areas IV , VI and VII and Divisions VIIIa and b ) .
Why is it that the proposal of the Council for the management of Northern hake stocks and its final resolution have the effect of dividing the fishing rights for this species into sea areas when the hake population is considered by the ICES as one management unit for which the ICES Advisory Committee on Fishery Management provides unified scientific advice and does not recommend its being divided up by sea area ?
Does this not discriminate against fleets according to their geographical distribution and habitual fishing areas ?
Would it not be fairer for fishermen to catch fish in accordance with their respective fishing quotas in one unified zone ?
The Council assumes that the honourable Member is referring to the Total Allowable Catch and quotas adopted by the Council in December 2000 .
Against the background of the scientific opinion from the International Marine Research Council , recommending that lowest possible catches be adhered to during 2001 and that a recovery plan be implemented for the stock in question , the Council has laid down the Total Allowable Catch for hake , or what is known as the Northern stock , at 22 623 tonnes - ' and four kilos ' .
On the basis of Article 15 of the Council ' s Regulation No 3760 / 92 , the Commission is , at present , considering a series of measures to promote the recovery of the stock .
The Council would call attention to the fact that the Northern stock is a biological concept .
The Member States ' catch allocations are divided up on the basis of the International Marine Research Council ' s administrative divisions with a view to complying with the principle of relative stability laid down in the aforesaid Regulation and in the accession document of 1985 .
According to this principle , only Denmark and Sweden may fish in the area comprising the Skagerrak and the Kattegat , and only Belgium , Denmark , Germany , France , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom in those areas comprising the North Sea .
Article 161 of the 1985 accession document establishes Spain ' s share of hake from the northern stock in Divisions Vb , VI , VII and VIIIab , that is to say the western waters including the Bay of Biscay , at 30 per cent .
Spain has no rights in the divisions comprising the Skagerrak , Kattegat and North Sea .
Article 349 of the accession document restricts Portugal ' s access to the Southern stock of hake .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , right from the start , the scientific assessment of the northern hake stock has been carried out on the whole stock and there are not sufficient grounds at the moment to distinguish separate components within it .
As you have said , however , the total allowable catches and quotas for 2001 , which were set by the Council of Fisheries Ministers in December last year , have introduced something new : there has been a greater percentage reduction in allowable catches in the Bay of Biscay than in all the other northern hake fishing areas .
I should like to ask you what reason there was to justify this discrimination against the Bay of Biscay .
All assessments of quotas are based on scientific and biological advice .
Data from research vessels is constantly being assembled .
Reports from professional fishermen also have an important role to play in assessments .
It is these factors which form the basis for the International Marine Research Council ' s recommendations , which then constitute the biological advice given to our fisheries ministers .
It is therefore basic biological facts that form the basis of the proposed measures .
There is no intention to discriminate against any category of fisherman , but when a situation arises in which a stock is judged to be close to what is referred to as commercial collapse , account cannot be taken of fishing and the distribution of fisheries during a phase in which stocks are being built up again .
Question No 16 by ( H-0286 / 01 ) :
Subject : Council Directive 2000 / 78 / EC of 27 November 2000 on equal treatment in employment Pursuant to Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which lays down the principle that discrimination on the grounds of disability must be avoided , the Council consulted the European Parliament in February 2000 on the proposal for a directive on this subject .
In Article 2 thereof , the Council and Parliament agreed on the definition of direct and indirect discrimination , but those definitions seem to have been forgotten when Open Competition COM / A / 12 / 98 , the results of which are covered by the new Directive , was held .
Out of the 645 candidates entered on the reserve lists , not a single one is disabled .
Some visually impaired candidates took part in the competition , but , given the mark scheme used by the Commission , whereby twice as many marks are awarded to the written tests and to the tests involving graphics than to the reasoning and oral tests , their marks were significantly lower than those of the normally-sighted candidates .
Does not the Council see in this instance a case of indirect discrimination against this group of candidates ?
The Council would remind the honourable Member that Directive 2000 / 78 / EC is addressed to the Member States and that the date by which the Member States are to have transposed the directive into national legislation has been set at 2 December 2003 .
Moreover , the open competition to which the question relates was arranged by the Commission and did not involve the Council , which cannot therefore accept responsibility for it .
Mr President , the President-in-Office says that it is not the Council 's responsibility but that of the Member States .
But what is the Council if it is not the Member States ?
I am not certain that is really a satisfactory answer .
He also said that it does not come into operation until 2003 .
That may be so , but if we are working towards equal treatment for people with disabilities , people who are visually impaired , surely we have to start to make progress now and we cannot have an arbitrary cut-on date as opposed to a cut-off date .
I accept that what we are referring to here is the Commission , but the Council also surely has some jurisdiction over what the Commission is doing .
The Commission must have some relationship with the Council , and I would hope for a more satisfactory response .
The formal response must be the one I have just given .
I agree , however , with the honourable Member that it is very important that the Council , the Commission and Parliament do their utmost to find a variety of ways of preventing people with disabilities being discriminated against in working life .
As recently as the European Council in Stockholm , a special paragraph was introduced into the conclusions at the presidency ' s initiative , clarifying the need for the Member States and the Commission to do all they can to give people with disabilities the opportunity to participate fully in working life .
That is an urgent political request which is not legally binding , but it is a further sign that the Council takes seriously the issue of principle highlighted by the honourable Member .
Question No 17 by ( H-0288 / 01 ) :
Subject : Fisheries and the Swedish Presidency Now that the Swedish Presidency has passed its half-way mark , will the Council outline the ways in which it has promoted the interests of fishermen and the fishing industry , on-shore and off-shore , during its present term of office ?
Allow me to remind you that I had the opportunity to report on the Swedish Presidency ' s priorities where fisheries are concerned in my reply to the question put during the European Parliament ' s January part-session .
The presidency also had the privilege of appearing before Parliament ' s Committee on Fisheries on 6 February 2001 , when we gave an exhaustive presentation of our priorities within the fisheries sector .
A question concerning what the presidency has done to promote the interests of fishermen and the fishing industry is , on the one hand , very general and wide-ranging , because it does not prioritise any particular measures or policy areas .
On the other hand , it is also of limited scope because the common fisheries policy ought to include farther reaching considerations than the interests of fishermen and the fishing industry here and now .
The Swedish Presidency ' s overriding priority is , and remains , that of ensuring that the fisheries sector is accorded robust and sustainable development through re-establishing a balance between fleet capacity and fishing activity , on the one hand , and accessible fishing stocks on the other .
The Swedish ministers for agriculture and fisheries explained in detail in February how important it is to take a general view of the common fisheries policy , to have a more effective policy for the fishing fleet now that the current multiannual guidance programmes have ceased to apply , to devise a strategy for integrating environmental considerations into the common fisheries policy , to apply the precautionary principle and to have multiannual strategies for establishing Total Allowable Catches .
On 20 March , the Commission submitted its green paper on the future of the multiannual guidance programmes and , on 16 March , its communication about the integration of environmental protection requirements into the multiannual guidance programmes .
A programme of measures to promote biological diversity in the fishing industry was expected to be available from 28 March , that is to say last week .
At its meeting in December 2000 , the Council also began its debate on the Commission ' s communication concerning the application of the precautionary principle and multiannual agreements for establishing annual allowable catches .
It is the presidency ' s intention to progress as far as possible with this work at the Council ' s meetings on 25 April and 18 June 2001 .
We also hope that we shall be able to present parts of an integration strategy in anticipation of the European Council in Gothenburg in June .
Following the Council meeting in December 2000 , work has progressed on establishing recovery plans for cod and hake in Community waters .
The Commission ' s regulations on cod in the North Sea already exist , and measures regarding hake are under consideration .
Moreover , we shall soon be embarking on the second phase , in which improved technical measures will be established where these species are concerned .
The Council has adopted a regulation establishing measures to be applied during 2001 for the purpose of restoring cod stocks in the Irish Sea . It will also shortly be adopting a further amendment to the regulation concerning certain technical measures designed to conserve fish stocks .
The amendment will ensure greater selectivity in fishing , as well as the protection of young fish .
The Council has also recently adopted a mandate for the Commission to negotiate a cooperation agreement on fisheries with the Russian Federation .
Mr President , due to the time constraints imposed by you , which give my colleagues a chance of having their questions answered , can I very quickly thank the President-in-Office for his response .
Perhaps the timing was not right , maybe I should table this question again in June , so that he could outline even further what the Council should have done and account for its stewardship over a six-month period .
Of course , I would like to take the opportunity to welcome the Green Paper on the review of the common fisheries policy , which is all important , particularly to my own country .
You will realise that , President , having been an active member of the Committee on Fisheries in the past .
It is important to redress the imbalances of the past .
The quota and the TACs which the Irish , sharing their prolific fishing grounds with the larger countries , receive was a bad deal .
I hope , over the next few months , that we will have an opportunity to impress upon our colleagues in Parliament and ministers in the various Member States the importance to us .
Due to the time constraints , I will leave it at that and not ask the Minister to give me a response in view of Mr Fitzsimons ' interest .
As the author is not present , Question No 18 will be answered in writing .
Question No 19 by ( H-0294 / 01 ) :
Subject : Human-induced climate change A UN Science working party adopted a report in Shanghai last January which concluded that most of the observed warming of the last 50 years is attributable to human activities .
A second group , meeting in Geneva , concluded that current rates of human-induced climate change would have irreversible impacts such as melting ice sheets , increased river flooding in Europe and increased risk of flooding in coastal areas , and erosion .
The greatest impact would be felt by those least able to protect themselves from rising sea levels , an increase in disease , and a decrease in agricultural production in the developing countries in Asia and Africa .
What is the Council 's response to these conclusions ?
The Council is naturally fully aware of the appalling and deeply alarming consequences of climate change , as described in the Third Assessment Report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , to which the honourable Member also refers .
The European Union ' s positions on this issue are well documented , especially through media monitoring of the climate change issue , and the Council scarcely needs to remind you that the European Community and its Member States have played , and continue to play , a very active role in the international negotiations on climate change .
Our most important and repeatedly expressed aims in the on-going negotiations include preparing the way for a rapid ratification of the Kyoto Protocol , so that it can come into effect by 2002 at the latest , and bringing about genuine reductions in greenhouse gas emissions .
Practical measures are being taken within the Community too .
Of special importance in this connection is the work being done within the Commission on , for example , the European Climate Change Programme and the work based on the green paper on greenhouse gas emissions trading within the European Union .
Mr President , I want to thank the President-in-Office for his reply mentioned the Kyoto Protocol .
What is the Council 's response to the statement by President Bush that the USA has decided not to implement the Kyoto Protocol ?
What does the decision mean for the world community ?
What steps can be taken to make sure that the Kyoto Protocol remains the firm basis for future negotiations and action to reduce emissions ?
The President-in-Office of the European Council , the Swedish Prime Minister , joined with the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , in writing a letter dated 22 March 2001 to the United States President , expressing great concern about the response from the American government regarding the Kyoto Protocol .
This was then followed up by a special declaration from the European Council in Stockholm , expressing the European Council ' s same deep concern .
Moreover , the President-in-Office of the Council ( Environment ) , the Swedish Minister for the Environment , together with the Commissioner with responsibility for environmental issues , Mrs Wallström , have visited Washington during the last few days in order to express the European Union ' s concern directly to the American government and to discuss how the American government might be persuaded to resume discussions of the Kyoto Protocol .
I know that the Swedish Minister for the Environment is landing in Stockholm just about now .
I have not therefore had the opportunity of receiving an assessment of the results of the visit directly from the minister , but I can assure you that the Council will do everything to ensure that the Kyoto Protocol , which is , of course , one of the most important tools of all in our work for sustainable development in Europe , does in fact become a reality and is ratified .
That brings us to the end of Question Time to the Council .
Due to lack of time , Questions Nos 20-28 will answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.17 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Air carrier liability in the event of accidents
The next item is the report ( A5-0093 / 2001 ) by Mrs Marieke Sanders-ten Holte , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation [ COM ( 2000 ) 340 - C5-0294 / 2000 - 2000 / 0145 ( COD ) ] amending Regulation No 2027 / 97 on air carrier liability in the event of accidents .
Mr President , the liability rules with regard to international air transport have hitherto mainly been based on the Warsaw Convention dating back to 1929 .
These limits are now far too low .
The majority of international air carriers recognise this and signed a voluntary contract in 1995 in which they dissociate themselves from random liability limits .
This formed the inspiration for the original ( EC ) Regulation No 2027 / 97 .
This regulation was used to step up the pressure on the international community to sign the Montreal Convention in 1999 , as a result of which the new all-encompassing worldwide system for liability became an established fact .
Thanks to the Montreal Convention , which is being transposed into European legislation by the present regulation , a modernised and uniform framework is being set up .
This is a considerable improvement on the current international system .
I would like to highlight six points this evening .
First of all , I back the Commission ' s aim , in the framework of the development of a charter for air passengers , to protect passengers ' rights and to inform them of these rights .
The present transport conditions in the aviation industry are restrictive and overlook the statutory rights of the passengers .
Competition in this sector is fierce , but success and profitable operations must be based on more and better , not worse , customer service .
Some airline companies have complained to me about the fact that information to passengers involves a great deal of red tape .
You will understand that I do not share their views .
The cost and effort involved in informing passengers are considerably less than the efforts which the airline companies make to inform potential customers of new services they are offering .
Secondly , the Member States have agreed that the Community itself is signatory to the Montreal Convention .
I consider this a considerable step towards plugging the gap in the Union ' s common transport policy , since we are thus recognising the fact that there is joint authority in the field of international aviation matters .
Thirdly , there was some concern as to the implications of the case which IATA brought to the Supreme Court in the United Kingdom against the British government regarding the way in which it implemented Regulation No 2027 / 97 .
The court concluded that the regulation remained valid , but that it contained a number of elements which were incompatible with the obligations which Member States had entered into on account of previous pledges , in accordance with international conventions .
In my opinion , this objection is no longer well-founded since the regulation has been amended and brought completely into line with the new international system of liability .
Fourthly , upon drafting this report and the eighteen amendments which I recommended to the committee , I sought legal advice from various lawyers and legal experts in order to preclude any doubt which may arise in future in the legal sphere .
At the same time , I very much tried to retain the right of passengers to information .
The Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism adopted the amendments by general vote .
These amendments can roughly be divided into three categories .
First of all , the improvement of the committee text ; secondly a simplification of the proposal and the guarantee of complete consistency with the Montreal Convention and , thirdly , a reinforcement of the provisions with regard to information to passengers .
Our committee particularly recommends that Parliament should add an annex to the regulation , containing the text of the information notice as required pursuant to Article 6 ( 2 ) .
That is new .
In that way , airline companies will be able to offer this information in a uniform manner .
The text clearly outlines the provisions of the regulation and is devoid of any legal jargon .
Once this regulation enters into force - which I hope will be the case by the end of next year - coinciding with the expected entry into effect of the Montreal Convention - all airline companies in the European Union will then be required to make this information available to their passengers .
The text will then be drafted in an unambiguous and understandable language which is clear to the consumer .
Airline companies from non-EU countries will nonetheless be required to produce something similar covering the liability system which they operate .
Considering the matter once more , I believe that the Union has the right to ask all carriers which sell tickets in the EU to provide their passengers with information on their rights to damages , not only with a view to acquainting the passengers with their rights , but also to allowing passengers to take out additional insurance , should this appear necessary .
I have the following comment to make to the Commission with regard to Amendment No 9 to Article 3 . In the Commission proposal , reference is made to a number of articles from the Montreal Convention .
However , various relevant articles were missing .
The lawyers in the court room will love this .
The Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and I are in favour of simplifying the text , thus avoiding any risk of omission .
Furthermore , by ratifying the Montreal Convention , the Commission recognises the Union ' s authority in this matter .
Finally , I would like to recommend all eighteen amendments .
I cannot recommend Amendments Nos 19 and 20 , because they imply that third countries need not meet the obligation to inform passengers , even if they buy tickets in the European Union .
I would ask you please to be disciplined this evening .
If every speaker goes one minute over , Madam , then we shall have to work an extra 40 minutes and we shall be here until 1 a.m. rather than midnight .
Nonetheless , it was a most interesting speech .
Mr President , I should like to begin by paying tribute to the work put in by the rapporteur , Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , on what has turned out to be an extremely complex report , and for her patience and cooperation in taking on board a number of points which the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market raised in its detailed consideration of the proposals brought forward tonight .
In my remarks I would like to commend the report to the House .
I believe that it will result in an increase in protection for air passengers .
However , speaking from a personal point of view , there are one or two issues which remain unresolved to my own satisfaction .
Hence my tabling , with my colleague , Mrs Foster , of two amendments which reflect the need for these problems to be resolved .
This basically centres around the dispute which Mrs Sanders-ten Holte has alluded to , which originated in my own country , the United Kingdom , as to the validity of the original regulation to which the new proposals relate .
Until this legal dispute is satisfactorily settled it is my belief that the report should be held in abeyance .
This position is complicated by two factors .
The first is the fact that the Montreal Convention , which governs matters globally , has not yet been ratified by sufficient countries to give it binding effect .
Nor is this likely to be the situation for some years to come .
Secondly , as referred to by the rapporteur , there is the issue of extra-territoriality .
Whilst , to a certain extent , a number of the amendments which have been proposed to the report improve the situation , there are still one or two issues which need to be addressed , in my opinion .
We must avoid any regulatory imposition on airlines which , while quite rightly protecting passengers ' interests , actually achieves exactly the opposite by imposing rules which render European companies less competitive than the rest of the industry .
Unfortunately some clauses still contained in the regulation would result in just such a scenario .
I hope the House will accept the amendments as a benefit to passengers .
I commend the report to the House in its entirety .
Mr President , I too , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , fervently congratulate Mrs Sanders-ten Holte on her report , which has certainly adopted the spirit of the amendments we brought in .
Those amendments were directed to the improvement of Regulation 2027 / 97 and to the consumer rights which should be asserted .
I therefore particularly want to speak in support of Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 8 , 13 and 18 , which have that effect .
The previous speaker , from my own country - we at least carry the same passport , though we have different views - referred to the situation in the UK .
It is true that IATA brought the UK government to court in terms of the possible extension of powers beyond what the legal position allows .
Judge Jowitt ruled that conflict did indeed exist between the Regulation and the Warsaw Convention .
But I would point out to my British colleague that he agreed with the UK government that Article 234 of the Treaty did in fact render this conflict invalid .
The Regulation was therefore held to be valid .
IATA lost their challenge and no other referral has been made to the European Court of Justice on this matter .
I therefore regard this as a legal red herring and I would prefer to concentrate on the merits of Mrs Sanders-ten Holte 's proposals because they will give the consumer travelling by air rights which have been lost for a long time .
The Warsaw Convention is 70 years of age .
If you now find yourself stuck in an airport , with your baggage gone , your flight delayed , or perhaps cannibalised , you get this little piece of paper which tells you what your rights are under the Warsaw Convention .
Those rights are negligible .
What we are doing here is extending a body of practice which will allow us to protect consumers .
That is what we should be doing tonight .
Mr President , allow me first of all to thank the rapporteur for an excellent piece of work .
As shadow rapporteur , it is always a pleasure to engage in constructive dialogue with a rapporteur receptive to the proposals and points of view presented .
It is naturally important to take account of the interests of air passengers in this issue .
I therefore think that the final outcome of the report is entirely positive .
A not insignificant proportion of the amendments adopted by the Committee come from the PPE-DE Group , and these have strengthened the position of passengers .
We already have a regulation establishing the limits of air carriers ' liability to pay damages in the event of death and bodily injury .
That was a very important step in view of the level of damages which was laid down by the Warsaw Convention of 1929 and which was definitely on the low side .
The aim of the present proposal is to adapt the EU rules to the new Montreal Convention which will hopefully come into force at the end of 2002 .
When the revised Regulation comes into force , European air passengers will be given significantly better protection .
When they fly with foreign carriers , they may , however , still be confronted by the fact that such carriers have a limited liability to pay damages under the Warsaw Convention because the latter will continue to apply to those countries which have not ratified the Montreal Convention .
As a result , we are faced with the difficulty that always arises in connection with international conventions , in that we shall have two overlapping systems for a transitional period .
It is therefore of the greatest importance for our Member States to ratify the Montreal Convention as soon as is reasonably possible .
Mr President , I intervene to support the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte .
We enjoyed a highly fruitful collaboration within our parliamentary committee .
The amendments presented to the House were approved unanimously and incorporated suggestions from other Groups , and right from the beginning I could see that when Mrs Sanders-ten Holte was faced with a Member arguing about legal uncertainties it was clear to her that we should press on and avoid delaying tactics , because above all we had to consider passengers ' interests .
Parliament has pressed on without delays , and we are attempting to give shape to our part in the Montreal Convention , which generates a number of positive features for passengers and therefore deserves the support of the European Union .
We must highlight the greater number of participating countries and the new possibilities on offer , the increase in the compensation payable in the various situations considered in the Convention , the significant introduction of matters relating to baggage and delays and the provision of information for passengers .
We think that providing passengers with information is fundamental .
It is fundamental , and perhaps it is not covered in Mrs Sanders-ten Holte ' s report in as much depth as we would like , because we would like companies to reply specifically and immediately to consumers ' complaints , but it is undoubtedly a step in the right direction and it will have our support .
The recommendation it makes on the amendments will also gain our acceptance on all points , and in this way our collaboration will go right to the end .
We will support all the amendments Mrs Sanders-ten Holte has proposed and we will oppose Amendments Nos 19 and 20 .
We therefore consider that this work is a parliamentary job well done which will result in benefits for the citizens .
If , one day , citizens are compensated by airlines for their delays , we will have gained a lot of credibility .
Mr President , Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , first of all , congratulations on this revision of the regulation . In fact , I would also like to congratulate the Commission .
As I see it , this evening , we are discussing the rights of the passenger against the backdrop of a number of problems which are , in fact , related to the quality of services offered by airline companies .
I am thinking of aspects such as delays , loss , damage , etc . , not to mention accidents .
We are debating the liability in this respect and the provision of information to the consumer .
I am emphatically supporting Mrs Sanders ' liability proposals and also the proposals regarding consumer information .
However , we are unlikely to be able to address the quality of that information service in the same way .
The question is also that of whether the information service has a preventive effect , especially in the case of delays and such like .
We are now in a situation where we are covered by insurance in Europe .
You could therefore say : fly in Europe and you will be covered , but taking the high-speed link might still be a better option .
Mr President , Commissioner , various modes of transport cross many national borders .
This should not lead to the constant changing of requirements and conditions .
That is why it is desirable , for the benefit of those modes of transport , that international legislation be introduced .
Consequently , rules on the position of air passengers should ideally have a global character .
The Warsaw Convention , which is still applicable , has worldwide status , and its successor , the Montreal Convention , is also being given that status .
This means that the rapporteur ' s approach appeals to me a great deal .
Her commitment to directly link EU legislation to the Montreal Convention appears to be the best solution by far .
In addition , the reinforcement and clarification of the rights of passengers are , in the light of current practice , certainly no unnecessary luxury .
In short , we too believe that Mrs Sanders-ten Holte has drafted an excellent report , for which I would like to extend my warm thanks and congratulations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Finnish racing drivers are known as the Flying Finns , which is quite a different thing from the Flying Dutchman , but we who all fly a lot can also speak about flying from our own experience .
Although every air passenger can take out private insurance , it is nevertheless only reasonable that a certain basic level of compensation should be guaranteed to all in the event of an accident .
The provisions of the Montreal Convention on the loss , damage or destruction of luggage and loss or damage resulting from delays are contained in EU rules .
This is a good thing .
Generally speaking , though , I do not believe in regulation that goes too far , as airlines must be given sufficient leeway here .
If all airlines were forced into the same situation it would make it awkward to cater for the needs of different client groups .
Legislation that is suitably broad in scope must be used to safeguard the business opportunities of both the cheap carriers and those airlines that offer a greater range of services .
This is to the benefit of both companies and consumers , as any extra requirements are reflected in the price of the ticket .
This basic truth is something the consumer organisations do not always bear in mind in all their enthusiasm .
The important question for airlines is that of a special declaration being made at the time of check-in .
The declaration would entitle the passenger to a level of compensation that was above the normal limit .
It will be absolutely essential to avoid excessive bureaucracy in this .
In my opinion , the requirement by airlines for the declaration to be made prior to take-off is only reasonable .
The regulation lacks clarity inasmuch as the points in the Montreal Convention referred to in it are not , however , to be found in the regulation itself .
The basic premise should be intelligible legislation , and that is not quite the case at the moment .
However , the regulation is a leap forward in terms of its content , and there is reason to rejoice that the outdated Warsaw Convention is receding from view .
The most modern laws are not a guarantee of success in one day in the life of a busy passenger , however .
You understand what I mean , do you not ? Breakfast in Rome , lunch in Paris , dinner in Helsinki , and luggage in Moscow .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Sanders-ten Holte for her excellent report , which highlights the importance of rapidly implementing the Montreal Convention and of informing passengers at length about the rights it gives them .
We in the Commission fully share the tenor of the report , since it supports our intention of providing air passengers with a high level of protection in the event of an accident , it aims to modernise the rules on liability for delays and damage to baggage , and especially it aims to provide users with better information about their rights , since the greatest problem is often that the users themselves do not know what their rights are .
I am delighted to tell you that at its meeting tomorrow the Transport Council should adopt a decision to ratify the Convention and for the Community to ratify the Convention at the same time as the Member States .
Furthermore , the Community must bring Community rules on airline liability into line with those of the Montreal Convention , which is the aim of this proposal .
With regard to the amendments that have been tabled , perhaps the most important are those concerned with the information to be given to passengers on the provisions about the airlines ' liability .
In its proposal , the Commission requires the companies to provide passengers with detailed information .
The report intends to strengthen the wording of the rule to oblige Community carriers to make available an information leaflet , as given in the Annex that is proposed .
This would ensure that the airlines gave passengers the necessary information in a precise manner , something that experience shows does not always happen .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 13 and 18 .
The other two amendments , numbers 19 and 20 , would , if approved , have the result that carriers from third countries would be exempt from the obligation to inform their passengers on the rules relating to their liability , and we therefore cannot accept this discrimination and reject both amendments .
We also have a few doubts about Amendments Nos 9 and 10 , since according to them the airlines ' liabilities would be governed by the relevant provisions of the Montreal Convention without the corresponding articles being specified .
The Commission proposal , however , lays down that liability shall be governed by the provisions of seven articles of the Montreal Convention , which are explicitly numbered .
Ladies and gentlemen , changing this matter could lead to a hostile reaction by some Member States , and the subsequent debate would slow down the adoption of the regulation to the detriment of the passengers .
That is why we cannot accept Amendments Nos 9 and 10 .
We cannot accept Amendment No 11 either , since the article cannot be deleted if the text still refers to specific articles of the Montreal Convention , in line , therefore , with the previous rejection .
The Commission can , however , accept all the other amendments , which strengthen or clarify the text .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , madam rapporteur , I have summarised the Commission ' s position on this report .
I should like to thank Mrs Sander-ten Holte once again for her marvellous work and support for the swift introduction of the Montreal Convention into Community law , and she is quite right , since this new incorporation will mean passing on from the international system agreed 72 years ago - which in the end was trying to restrict the airlines ' liability - to another , more modern system which is aiming to do just the opposite : to give a high level of cover to the protection of passengers ' rights .
Thank you , Commissioner De Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Coordination of transport by rail , road and inland waterway
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0096 / 2001 ) by Mr Camisón Asensio , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation [ COM ( 2000 ) 5 - C5-0402 / 2000 - 2000 / 0023 ( COD ) ] concerning the granting of aid for the coordination of transport by rail , road and inland waterway .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , it is well known that , despite successive reforms , Article 73 of the Treaties remains in force , which means that coordination between the various modes of transport is still a Community obligation .
It should not be otherwise , since if this were not the case what would probably happen , given the current trends that we face every day , is that the roads would fill to bursting point with lorries .
Such coordination between the various transport modes was taking place under a Regulation that had been in force for thirty years and was beginning to seize up .
This gave the Commission an excellent opportunity to put forward this proposal , which will replace the old regulation just in time .
This is its intention and we applaud it .
We believe , however , that the Commission has displayed a certain degree of prudence in its proposal .
It has moved ahead , but rather too tentatively .
What is more , everything indicates that most of the political groups in this House are of the same opinion , since this is revealed by the content and the large number of amendments - 116 - tabled and debated in this Parliament ' s Committee on Transport , almost all of them with the same message : to use this opportunity to encourage the necessary and appropriate transfer of traffic onto more environmentally friendly modes of transport . This is a desirable objective which , I believe , has to a great extent been achieved , in view of the results of the exhaustive voting that took place in the Committee .
Therefore , as the rapporteur , I must congratulate the Members who tabled those amendments , since the results achieved - which today are put before this House as a joint effort by everybody - are the outcome of a broad consensus .
I take this opportunity to draw the Commission ' s attention to this fact when it accepts or rejects our amendments .
We would like there to be a reasonable degree of identification between Parliament and the Commission .
In our debates we bore in mind facts such as the following : a vital Kyoto commitment is to cut our polluting gas emissions by 8 % by 2010 , whereas , if there is no change in the relative shares of the various transport modes , it has been predicted that in the transport sector there will be a 40 % increase in these emissions over this period .
It has also been calculated that moving goods by rail needs four times less energy than by road .
Something similar could be said for transport by inland waterway .
Trains can use a greater proportion of renewable energy .
If action is not taken in time , road traffic will double between now and 2010 .
Does all this mean that we have to gradually give up using roads ?
Not at all .
There may be some conflict of opposing interests between the different transport modes - that is to be expected - but the strikingly obvious consequence of all this is that coordination between the various transport modes is still essential .
This is precisely the aim of the proposal we are debating today , and through it the respective shares of each transport mode may tend to be redistributed in more rational proportions .
In view of this intermodal conflict it must be recognised that the Commission has acted in a reasonably balanced manner in its proposal .
For our part , without ever losing sight of that coveted balance , we have moved ahead but only ever opening the throttle in what I would call emergencies , that is , in those objectives that should not wait any longer .
For instance , accepting that in practice transhipment between land and maritime transport , and also coastal traffic , has a significant land component and therefore should not be ignored in this directive .
Emphasising real , sustained progress , and also research and development .
Enhancing combined transport , the de minimis concept for avoiding bureaucracy , and the contractual relationship for ensuring the transfer of traffic from one mode to another that is more beneficial .
To end with , what can be said about external costs ?
It is a fact that there are highly competent consultants who have argued , for instance , that external costs , including traffic congestion , are shooting up to account for 10 % of the gross domestic product of Europe , a figure which may be debatable but which is astounding all the same .
In view of this we believe that the Commission should tackle this problem now .
We urge the Commission to prepare a proposal taking into account the value of such external costs so that they can then be internalised , and then we will have taken a giant step forwards in this matter .
. ( NL ) Mr President , I will take the floor on behalf of the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Mr Blokland .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has assessed the Commission proposal in terms of competitive aspects and competitive neutrality .
The point of departure is that a shift towards more sustainable transport should , first of all , occur by providing an honest account of the cost per mode of transport .
However , the external effects and specific infrastructural costs are not yet included in the price for the consumer .
That is why the Member States must be able to offer compensation to the competing modes of transport .
This opportunity , in the shape of compensation , is offered in the present proposal for a regulation .
In its recommendation , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has made a strong case for honest competition .
For this purpose , it has asked for the definitions of specific infrastructural costs and external effects to be worded more accurately .
Additionally , the description of the term " common interest " deserves attention .
After all , the Commission will grant support insofar as it does not contravene the common interest .
Clear definitions should prevent ambiguity in the interpretation and , consequently , should secure honest competition .
The report contains the economically sensitive subject of support which goes beyond compensation for effects which have not yet been included .
Competitive neutrality can therefore be jeopardised .
In order to establish a level playing field for the different modes of transport , and for companies , in particular , transparency is crucial in this case .
The draftsman of the opinion would have liked to have seen more weight accorded to this in the draft report , because this draft report calls for active support which goes beyond compensation .
In this connection , simply granting terminals for combined transport exemption from notification is not a reasonable measure to take .
The draft regulation may seem difficult to understand at first , but it applies honest competition as the appropriate tool for achieving sustainable transport .
More precise definitions contribute to the clarity of the Commission ' s position with regard to equal conditions and transparency .
This adds the necessary predictability in the assessment of support schemes by the Commission .
After all , indeterminate support and inequality among businesses should not form barriers to sustainable transport .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , first allow me to thank my fellow member , Felipe Camisón Asensio , for his report on behalf of my Group .
He has drafted it very carefully .
He did not succumb to the temptation to open the door to subsidies still wider ; on the contrary , he kept it where the vice-president suggested .
The vice-president and Mr Camisón Asensio were streets ahead of the European Council .
We may , nonetheless , quote the European Council .
The European Council stated in Stockholm that we need to reduce the scope of state aid in the European Union and to make the aid system more transparent .
And that is precisely the objective here .
I think that , in replacing the old Regulation No 1107 / 70 with the new regulation , we have indeed made the system more transparent .
As regards the use to which it is put , I believe that aid only compensates so-called unpaid costs in connection with the development and use of transport infrastructures .
This poses a problem , because it is not clear exactly what external costs are .
Let me give you an example : the theory that it is always better , for the purpose of environmental protection , to shift freight from the road to the railway does not automatically apply .
We are debating noise in the vicinity of airports , we are in the process of banning night flights .
Just think about when you hear a good old freight train in the middle of the night ; it is loud , it stinks and the brakes squeal .
What I mean is that , when it comes to questions such as " What are external costs ? How can they be scientifically defined ?
And how can they be apportioned ? " , we still have our work cut out .
I am delighted that the report says as much .
It is work which the Commission has yet to do and I am keeping my fingers crossed that the Commissioner will be able to do it soon .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I should like to thank the rapporteur on behalf of my Group .
He was most cooperative while drafting his report .
Basically , the rule of the internal market is that aid distorts competition and is therefore inadmissible .
The previous speaker pointed this out .
There must be special grounds for exceptions to this rule .
In this regulation , the special grounds are : the coordination of inland transport .
The prime purpose of aid in this sector is to allow fair competition between road , rail and inland waterway transport .
This is the only way of optimising the overall European transport system in the long term , especially in the freight sector .
This is the only way we shall ever bring about the much-vaunted intermodal transport chains .
In order to make these transport chains as flexible as possible , we want to extend the scope of the regulation to short sea shipping .
Government funding for building , maintaining and operating transport infrastructure does not come under the ban on aid , provided that it is available to all users on a non-discriminatory basis .
This should apply irrespective of the legal form of the infrastructure operator .
This is the only way of ensuring that railways and ports are treated on a equal footing with roads .
Now to aid for use of the infrastructure .
Aid for using transport infrastructure should reflect the widely varied costs incurred by society from the choice of mode of transport .
In other words , both the infrastructure and the external costs must be included when calculating aid .
Equality of competition between the modes of transport is safeguarded by paying the difference between the unpaid costs of two carriers to the social and more environmentally-friendly carrier in the form of aid in order to make it cheaper and more attractive to use .
Unfortunately - and this has also already been addressed - there is no politically legitimate model for calculating these costs at European level , which is why I have agreed , after a great deal of discussion and careful thought , to the supplementary model , which provides for contracts to shift transport from the roads to the railways and inland waterways .
This is introduced in proposed Amendment No 48 and I call on the House to support it .
However , this model should only be allowed for a transitional period because , the best intentions notwithstanding , it contradicts the basic approach of the regulation in targeting equality of competition .
Now to notification : aid needs to be notified , but bureaucratic costs should be kept to a minimum .
We therefore suggest exemptions for terminals which are provided for in a national or European development plan or which belong to the trans-European freight traffic network .
We are also in favour of a de minimis rule of EUR 100 000 over three years .
As far as aid for the use of transport infrastructure is concerned , we are calling for five-year aid with the possibility of renewal .
On balance , the regulation will help to bring about a clearer structure for the granting of aid for the coordination of inland transport and to dismantle distortions of competition - including between Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Camisón Asensio , for dealing competently with such a complex subject and , on behalf of my Group , I would like to express my support for the basic line taken by the regulation .
It is precisely because we think we should push forward with and put pressure on the processes of the liberalisation of the markets and transport services that we feel that there is room for the States to retain , in a limited number of cases , their right and duty to intervene to ensure that urban development objectives are pursued and that social and environmental requirements are met .
Amongst these matters , there is no doubt that the incentive for sustainable mobility is an historic objective that must be pursued now ; from this standpoint , therefore , the aid for use of infrastructure by companies , which is intended to compensate for incremental unpaid infrastructure and external costs of competing modes of transport , must also be accepted .
We are forced to this point because the forecast contained in Article 4 of the regulation is dictated solely by the absence of a general Community legislation on the definition , assessment and charging of the costs of using the infrastructure , whether they are internal or external .
This is a subject upon which Parliament has already expressed its opinion in a report which I had the honour to present on its behalf .
This is why , just until the Commission produces its proposal - and I am less sceptical on this point than Mr Jarzembowski because I hope , or rather , I am sure , that the Commission will succeed in producing measures and technical forms that will resolve many of the theoretical problems which are still being raised - I feel that the possibility laid down in Amendments Nos 26 , 40 and 48 of an explicit link between State aid and objectives of the effective transfer of freight volumes towards more sustainable modes of transport must be supported .
In conclusion , I feel that the " contract " which we envisage establishing temporarily with those who genuinely undertake to uphold sustainable mobility is something which can be employed until more general rules are introduced .
Mr President , Commissioner , the regulation proposed by the Commission simplifies matters remarkably , compared with the previous rules .
Exceptions to aid rules are important , in fact they are absolutely indispensable because , first , additional assistance is needed in order to develop , operate , maintain and / or complete transport infrastructures and , secondly , freight sent by rail , internal waterway or combined transport should receive compensation for the unpaid costs of competing road transport , so that specific requirements , such as environmental friendliness and regional potential , can be incorporated into transport policy .
An approach which only aims to prevent potential distortions of competition and fails to include environmental , social or regional aspects is unacceptable .
The rapporteur , who deserves our thanks for his excellent work , and the Committee have set more far-reaching , important premises , which my group supports , such as including aid for short sea shipping , including combined transport operations at sea ports , granting aid irrespective of whether the company is a public or private company , minimising administrative costs by introducing thresholds below which no checking by or notification to the Commission is required , extending the period of aid and providing the possibility of extending the aid regulation .
Once this regulation has been implemented , there will be further opportunity to shift more traffic to more environmentally-friendly carriers .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , I too should like to thank the rapporteur for his report .
The numerous proposed amendments are proof of the interest which this report has generated .
An aid regulation for transport infrastructure and use is important , because it will increase transparency . And apart from this , we may expect this directive to improve efficiency and bring about environmentally-friendly and safe transport , even if only one small step at a time .
Although no one particular type of transport is given special attention in this directive , we expect traffic on the roads to be relieved .
But this will not happen if there is false competition between the various modes of transport .
As far as I am concerned , this regulation shifts the emphasis , with the Committee making provision for various amendments which go in two directions .
First - as Mr Jarzembowski has already explained - we think it is important to provide a more accurate definition of the concept of external costs .
They cannot be interpreted differently from one country to another or from one region to another , because that really will cause distortion .
Secondly , we also assume that distortions of competition will be avoided by treating carriers identically .
If a state invests in transport infrastructure which is to be equally accessible to all users , then no distinction should be made between these carriers .
Irrespective of whether this aid is intended for the railways , the roads or an inland port , the aid must be measured against the criterion of accessibility of the infrastructure to users , so as to guarantee fair competition .
Then we also fail to see - and some proposed amendments also relate to this - why , according to this philosophy , multimodal platforms or inland ports should be burdened with a de facto notification requirement .
We expect simpler administrative procedures and , hence , equal treatment of all carriers .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his report and I go along with the gist of what Mr Costa said .
However , there is one point with which I , like other members of the Dutch People ' s Party for Freedom and Democracy , am struggling , namely the following .
Recital No 14 and Article 4 provide for the possibility of government aid being granted for the purpose of the use of infrastructure .
This is possible pursuant to the amendments .
In our opinion , this exemption from the ban of government aid is undesirable .
First of all because the starting premise is wrong , for transport by road already pays the lion ' s share of external costs .
Secondly , it is not judicious to grant extra support for the use of the railways , because costs do not constitute the most important reason why transporters do not opt for rail .
We need an increase in quality and reliability , and market discipline is in that case the best incentive .
I fear that this incentive for a modal shift , of which we are , of course , in favour , is counterproductive , brings about distortion of competition and undermines the work that has been done in the framework of the rail infrastructure package .
We will therefore be voting against Recital No 14 and Article 4 .
They do not belong here .
Mr President , in a context marked by the rail accidents in Great Britain which serve to illustrate the price paid by society to quench the thirst for profit of rail companies , the European institutions are thinking of authorising Member States to grant aid to improve their infrastructures .
The European Union , which is ostensibly opposed to national state aid capable of distorting competition , is preparing , in the proposed report , to renege on its own proposals so as to be able to continue its policy of privatising public services .
As a result , rail companies , which pocket the receipts from the lines conceded to them without bothering to lay out the minimum expenditure to maintain and renew tracks and other rail equipment , have not only been given absolution but will be entitled to additional subsidies to meet investment obligations which should be their responsibility .
We restate our opposition to the privatisation of public services as well as to the introduction of any idea of profitability for services which are crucial to the entire population .
Management according to the law of private profit is just as catastrophic for the economy as a whole as it is for the rail industry .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , the regulation on the granting of aid for the coordination of transport by rail , road and inland waterway endeavours to do some good , to help , with a new aid scheme , to make something out of the set phrases spouted by soap-box speakers on the subject of transport , by shifting traffic , especially freight traffic , on to more environmentally-friendly modes of transport , mainly from the roads to the railways , inland waterways etc .
That is , as I say , all well and good .
And the detailed work produced by our rapporteur on this proposal is also good , including what the Committee has added in a whole series of proposed amendments , including short sea shipping , including combined transport procedures , disregarding whether the carrier is a public or private company , not to mention a de minimis rule intended to keep excessive administrative costs within prescribed limits .
Regretfully , we must also point out what this regulation cannot achieve .
Mr Camisón Asensio himself has addressed this .
We still have to live with transport policy specifications from the last century , admittedly from the middle and the second half of the 20th century , but hardly forward-looking models for the 21st century .
If we really want to stem the tide of traffic on the roads in the future , we must do more than change a few aid rules for the benefit of the railways and shipping .
And if we do more , then we should do it consistently .
The Commission has just submitted a proposal to abolish - without replacing - the quantitative ceiling of 108 % in the agreement on transit traffic through Austria .
Whether this is in keeping with the spirit of the Camisón Asensio report I somehow doubt .
The forthcoming discussion on this new proposal will give us an opportunity to clarify this question .
Mr President , first of all I want to express my gratitude to the rapporteur , Mr Camisón , for his magnificent work and to Parliament for the effort it has made to improve this proposal , as shown by the various amendments presented by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and also those tabled and argued today during this sitting .
This proposal for a Regulation concerning state aid for the inland transport sector implements Article 73 of the Treaty , according to which aids for the coordination of transport are compatible with Community law .
Our intention , therefore , is to create a transparent , coherent and clear framework so that there will not be distortions in the market .
It is also important that the same standards should be applied to different inland transport modes that compete with one another .
The Commission proposal , therefore , establishes common criteria for the granting of exemptions which apply equally to all types of inland transport .
Roughly half of the amendments agree with the Commission ' s position and can therefore be accepted .
Some of them , however , run in a very different direction and hence we cannot accept them .
I shall refer to some of them .
First , the concept of state aid is the cornerstone of the Union ' s competition policy .
According to this concept , any public aid to a company performing an economic activity , whatever its legal status , is an example of state aid to which the rules of the Treaty apply .
Neither Amendment Nos 21 or 37 can change this fundamental principle of Community law .
The aim of several amendments is to encourage rail and combined transport through the granting of public subsidies in detriment to other transport modes .
We cannot share the approaches proposed , although we agree with the concern and need to boost the railways .
But , ladies and gentlemen , we shall achieve this if the railways are able to give good quality service and are thus competitive , and to this end I believe the measures we are setting in motion are the best .
A key element of the proposal is to create conditions of equality , so that there can be fair competition between companies based on the user-pays principal , which takes into account external and infrastructure costs .
As a consequence , state aid should confine itself to compensating for certain external costs , all within a framework of fair competition .
Uncontrolled aid in excess of these costs does not give these companies adequate incentive to improve efficiency and competitiveness .
Other amendments propose that aid to transhipment installations , with combined transport terminals , should be exempt from any notification procedure , but since the terminals are often operated by private companies and compete with other terminals to attract traffic flows , there is an obvious risk that there may be a distortion of competition .
We therefore cannot accept that they should not be communicated .
It has also been proposed that companies that provide passenger transport services may opt for aid to compensate for external and infrastructure costs .
Aid for passenger services , however , under Article 73 , is regulated in the Commission regulation on public services , which proposes a complete and appropriate framework on the manner in which the public authorities can support the provision of internal passenger transport services .
Therefore the aim of these amendments is ultimately to change this regulation , and the Commission cannot therefore accept them .
One amendment also asks for criteria to be established regarding systems for compensating for external effects and infrastructure costs .
The assessment of external effects is a subject under constant debate , as Mr Jarzembowski has indicated .
Today there are methods applicable to that kind of assessment , but despite the Commission ' s efforts the Member States have proved very resistant to agreeing on common formulae .
The Commission is by no means giving up the idea of submitting a proposal of this kind in the future , and I should again like to thank Mr Costa for the work he put into his own report on this .
But what we can never do is subordinate the need to assess concrete plans for public aid to an agreement by the European institutions on common standards .
On the basis of a pragmatic approach and in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , and until we have these standards accepted jointly by everyone , the Commission leaves the choice of the method for assessing these costs in each specific case to the Member States .
In view of all these arguments , the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 13 , 16 , 18 ( second part ) , 19 , 20 , 24 , 27 , 33 , 36 , 40 , 44 , 45 and 51 .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 18 ( first part ) , 21 , 22 , 23 , 25 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 34 , 35 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 42 , 43 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 and 52 .
My compliments to the interpreters on keeping up with the speaker !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Sea ports , inland ports and intermodal terminals
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0111 / 2001 ) by Mr Piecyk , on behalf of the delegation of the European Parliament to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a decision by the European Parliament and the Council [ C5-0050 / 2001 - 1997 / 0358 ( COD ) ] amending Decision No 1692 / 96 / EC as regards seaports and inland ports as well as Project No 8 in Annex III .

Mr President , I must admit , it is a wonderful feeling to be able to speak at this hour to such a large audience and it will perhaps be even more wonderful tomorrow , when a report is finally adopted , because it has been a long haul .
In 1996 , at the end of the conciliation procedure , we had the Commission communication on improving ports in the trans-European networks .
Then a proposal was submitted at a very late stage and in March 1999 we had the first reading , which is when we should really have discussed the review of the TEN .
Then the Council took its time .
In October 2000 , we had the second reading and it was only under the pressure of the conciliation procedure that we held a proper discussion and moved any closer to the Council ' s standpoint .
It could all have been much quicker and simpler and , in the meantime , it is now 2001 .
Nonetheless , I think the end is in sight .
We now have a reasonable classification of ports as international - Community - ports and regional ports , with acceptable categories for tonnage and passenger volumes .
The same applies to inland ports with a volume of 500 000 tonnes of freight , which I think is a proper order of magnitude .
We have mainly included ports and inland ports as nodes in the trans-European networks , i.e. they act as nodal points for the rest of the trans-European connections .
We have included intermodal terminals in the text , so that , as a carrier , combined transport supports the railways and inland waterways and underlines their particular importance .
After lengthy discussion , we also have a perfectly proper and reasonable definition as to what constitutes infrastructure and what can and cannot be aided in ports and inland ports .
At the same time , we have amended Project No 8 , one of the major projects of the Essen Council ' s 14 projects , which was later confirmed in Dublin , in close harmony in the codecision procedure , which was very difficult at the time .
I am particularly pleased that the Commission has promised to include the Elbe-Lübeck Canal in its proposal at the next revision .
I am also grateful , Commissioner , to your comrades-in-arms at the Commission , who were extremely helpful in the closing stage , coming forward with one new proposal after another , so that , in the end , we did not need to go right through with the conciliation procedure and were able to reach an agreement before then .
If I may add a comment : in my view , we overestimated the TEN somewhat right from the outset .
We said both in Committee and in Parliament : let us set our sights a little lower !
These errors should not be repeated during the revision .
The Commission tabled some excellent proposals on the trans-European networks in the initial stages of the consultation and we should revert to them .
That means not just stringing and stitching together what the Member States provide you with ; it also means that the Commission should set its own priorities .
As we spend so much time here talking about special dossiers , about rail and water , I hope , Commissioner , that the priority of rail and water in the TEN will be reflected in the Commission proposal .
I think that , on balance - even if it has taken a long time - we have done a good job .
I should like to thank everyone who was involved , my fellow members in Parliament , the Commission and the French Presidency of the Council for bringing it all to a successful conclusion .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , first I should like to thank the rapporteur .
He has seen this difficult dossier , which involved an extremely difficult fight in the Council , through two institutions and the Conciliation Committee , and that is most important .
Rapporteurs simply need to have the courage to stand their ground .
He has demonstrated that courage and has been successful as a result .
I join him in thanking the French Presidency of the Council , which endeavoured to find a compromise at the eleventh hour .
I should like to thank the Vice-President and her officials for helping us to negotiate that compromise .
So , in this respect , my warmest thanks to the Commission .
I , too , shall endeavour to be brief on this lovely evening , hence just three points .
First : we had to set ports , inland ports , sea ports and intermodal terminals in the right context within a text on trans-European networks , which is why we said they must be ports and inland ports which are connected to the hinterland , which form part of a network , and not individual ports , which may be very nice but which have no trans-European significance .
I think that the classification which we have found together with the Council is a very good one .
Secondly , we had to draw a dividing line between infrastructure and superstructure .
To non-specialists that all sounds very complicated , but it is fundamental to the question of equality of competition between ports or to the question of inadmissible distortions of competition .
First , it was important to clarify what we mean by infrastructure .
So what must the state do and pay , without intervention on the part of the Community , without any notification requirements ?
A typical question might be : does dredging a harbour mouth have to be notified or not ?
This gave rise to a whole series of difficulties between the Member States and the Commission .
But what was important was to clarify that superstructure is defined by reverting to infrastructure , in order to ensure that there is no competition-distorting aid .
I think this was achieved very well .
And a third point , if I may .
Madam Vice-President , please bear in mind that this is the first time that Parliament has been able to codecide on priority projects in the codecision procedure .
Because the wise Heads of State or Government said after Essen and Dublin that they would decide what priority projects are !
What is Parliament here for ?
In this case , we have managed , with the rapporteur ' s help , to ensure that the Council and Parliament decide jointly on priority projects and we should bear this in mind when it comes to the revision .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as on every other occasion when a long procedure comes to a successful conclusion , now too we have reason to be satisfied , especially as the conciliation procedure achieved a result for sea ports , inland shipping and intermodal terminals .
As MEPs , we should be even more satisfied because the final text incorporates most of the basic amendments made by Parliament at previous readings .
Thus , with a view to creating equal conditions - which was the whole point - for all ports in the Union , as regards eligible investments and the application of stricter criteria and requirements for classifying sea ports in the European network and supporting inland ports , the following classification terms have finally been adopted :
for international sea ports : 1.5 million tonnes of freight or 2 million passengers a year , provided that they have intermodal terminals with the rest of the network ,
for Community ports : 500 000 tonnes or 100-200 000 passengers per year and
for inland ports : 500 000 tonnes of freight .
My basic belief - and this has also been catered to - is that ports which do not meet the above criteria but which are in island , outlying or remote areas should also be classified ; this was a demand which we insisted on , we felt rightly , because it means that objective dimensions are covered .
We also note that the Commission needs to correct the maps attached to the text sent out as certain ports are missing , despite the fact that they meet the requirements which I have mentioned .
Finally , I should like to thank and congratulate all my fellow members who were involved in the procedure , the senior officials of the French Presidency and the Commission and , of course - and above all - our fellow member , Mr Piecyk .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , among the most important infrastructures in island regions are the ports .
If , in addition , these regions are remote , this importance becomes strategic .
We are therefore interested to see the Council proposal on the change to this decision , approved in 1996 .
Since then , common positions have been reached between the initial Council proposal and the European Parliament , with the classification of seaports within the trans-European transport networks according to the criteria of annual freight traffic or passenger numbers transported .
Throughout this revision process , consensus solutions have been reached which , in the case of the outermost regions of the European Union , may paradoxically have strange consequences - as Mr Mastorakis has mentioned - because there is a risk that certain seaports situated in island capitals , at least in the case of the Canaries , will be included in a category other than that of tourist port because of the use of out-of-date freight figures or through considering domestic passenger traffic .
Therefore , every possible precaution must be taken to prevent dysfunctions in specifying the types of project that the ports can have access to as a result of this classification , which I regard as provisional until up-to-date data are available , not forgetting , of course , other possible requirements such as connection to trans-European network land routes or the installation of a number of facilities .
Nevertheless , I believe the most important thing is that these ports are included in the trans-European transport networks , with the positive consequences that will bring .
I close by congratulating the rapporteur on his work .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I should like to congratulate Mr Piecyk because , two years after the first reading of this document , today he can see the culmination of his work .
I regret that the Council is still examining at state level what intermodal terminals should be included in the European combined transport network , and I am delighted by the change to the specific Project No 8 of the Annex relating to the ' Lisbon-Valladolid motorway ' , as it was formerly known , with its new name ' the Portugal / Spain multimodal link with the rest of Europe ' , for the management of rail , road , sea and air connections in the three Iberian corridors between Galicia and Portugal , between Portugal and Seville / Andalusia , and between Irún ( in the Basque Country ) and Portugal , which I hope will include the TGV high-speed train , and I also hope that financial aid will reach the so-called Basque ' Y ' , which , like any other railway line , generates not only economic advantages but also great environmental benefits .
Mr President , a very good evening to you .
At this late hour we are discussing an important matter for the coasts of Europe .
It has taken several readings and a conciliation procedure , but all ' s well that ends well .
First may I thank my honourable fellow member , Willy Piecyk , for his convincing work .
He has worked for our ports and for that he deserves our thanks .
I said all ' s well that ends well .
Forgive me if I include in this happy ending the fact that my home port of Cuxhaven has been given a category A classification .
I must admit that I am not completely happy with the 1.5 million tonnes minimum volume required for category A classification . What still worries me is that this will particularly disadvantage areas at the edge of the Union , which I should like to see granted the same international status as Rotterdam or Hamburg .
Mind you , I am not talking here about ports for pedalos , I am talking about ports with an annual volume in excess of 1 million tonnes of freight .
I think it is also important to see small ports in an international context .
What is the point of talking about globalisation if we then classify our ports according to the principle of " You may play the game at an international level , but you may not " ?
On the contrary , we should be pleased that we have so many nodes with international connections in the EU .
Trans-European networks and the concomitant investments only make sense if we cover Europe with a real network of ports which includes rather than excludes .
European ports have modernised considerably over recent years in order to be able to meet the demands of maritime transport and maritime technologies .
I believe in the future of our European ports in all their diversity and hope that my fellow members will support me here in the future .
Mr President , I also add my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , for his excellent work .
I am very pleased that he has actually ensured that the final piece of the TENs jigsaw has been put in its rightful place .
Particularly given the fact that most world trade is by sea , it was always a great omission that the TENs ports were never part of the TENs decision .
That is now being put right .
It is even more pleasurable because the maritime sector is probably the most environmentally sustainable part of the TENs network .
It is a pity it has taken so long .
The lesson for Parliament , the Commission and the Council on transport matters is that in future we should be doing less , but doing it better .
I hope that is the message we can endorse here tonight .
It will be a welcome boost for ports across the European Union .
In my region , for example , the port of Dover will be encouraged to switch more goods from roads to railways .
Ports such as Newhaven will be given the welcome boost that they so badly need to try and secure a role in the future .
We will all benefit from this decision but we must look to the future .
Very soon we will be faced with the proposal to revise the TENs network in its entirety .
I hope that we can ensure that those TENs revisions properly incorporate the ports , ensure that there are fewer studies , more rail projects , more maritime projects and fewer roads .
I conclude by again thanking the rapporteur .
I hope that we can now ensure that these projects are implemented across the EU and play their part in ensuring the maritime sector reaches its full potential .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Piecyk , I should first of all like to congratulate you on the revision of the decision .
In a situation such as the one before us , we can look ahead or back .
I have heard a few people make some very valid comments already .
We are talking about networks , water networks , and intermodal networks .
The environmental interests are obvious , as are the efficiency interests , but what is still lacking is some kind of driving force .
What we are now laying down in fixed numbers , which are better than what the Council is proposing , will need to be tackled differently .
If we talk about revising TEN directives , we will need to consider goods flows , shifting goods flows and the way in which , in consultation with the Member States , we can exert pressure on the investments which ought to take place .
I am therefore keen to find out what our next step will be .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I first want to congratulate Mr Piecyk and all of you who have taken part in this debate , and also the Council for having concluded this conciliation , which we have all wanted to come to an end as soon as possible .
These have been three years of effort to adopt this proposal for the inclusion of nodes in the trans-European networks .
The Commission is more than satisfied to be able to say that with this modification the trans-European transport network is at last complete , and at last something essential for a genuine trans-European intermodal network has been included : the ports ; the inclusion of the idea of the nodes as such means recognising the new concept of transport as a multimodal system .
At seaports and at inland ports it is decided how to get products to the citizens of Europe : by rail , by road or by inland waterway .
The nodes , well equipped with transhipment facilities , which can turn the required development of the trans-European transport network formulated in Community guidelines into a reality , will enable each transport mode to be used according to the advantages it can offer , and thus it will facilitate multimodality in practice and especially the use of alternatives to simply roads .
The incorporation of the ports into the trans-European networks is an absolutely essential factor in general , and is especially relevant to the outermost regions of the European Union .
The fact that in Madeira Porto Santo or Porto Funchal can be included , in the Azores Punta Delgada , in the Canaries Santa Cruz de Tenerife , Cristianos , Santa Cruz de la Palma , San Sebastián de la Gomera , Las Palmas or Arrecife , in Réunion Pointe des Galets , in Guadeloupe Pointe-à-Pitre , or in Martinique Fort de France and Basse-Terre , clearly shows how important it is for these archipelagos that their ports can be incorporated once and for all as essential elements within the trans-European networks , bringing these outermost regions closer to the rest of the European Union .
In addition Annex No 3 is modified and the name is changed from Lisbon-Valladolid motorway , which was a totally reductionist definition with a single transport mode , to become the Portugal / Spain multimodal link with the rest of Europe .
I believe this formula is much better suited to the need for the Iberian Peninsula to be integrated with the rest of the continent of Europe .
The Transport Council will decide on this matter tomorrow and I hope it will be finally closed in a satisfactory manner .
Furthermore , the Commission will continue working both in the field of revising the trans-European networks and in fostering intermodal and coastal trade programmes .
I believe these advances will also be helped by our proposals to introduce more competition into seaports and more safety in the maritime sector ( remember all last year ' s work on the Erika I and Erika II packages ) , simplifying administrative procedures , and a series of other future measures aimed at facilitating coastal or maritime transport in general , as well as inland waterway transport .
Many thanks once again to the rapporteur . Congratulations !
And many thanks to all of you for your contributions , which were wholly constructive .
Thank you , Commissioner De Palacio .
You have been here for ages .
Now you are free to go and do whatever you please .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Money laundering
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0090 / 2001 ) by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Common Position adopted by the Council [ 12469 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0678 / 2000 - 1999 / 0152 ( COD ) ] with a view to the adoption of a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 91 / 308 / EEC on prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to welcome you this evening to the House .
We have an important item on our agenda today .
It is about fighting money laundering and there is a close connection between money laundering and international crime .
International crime - especially organised crime - is not worth the trouble if the money cannot be laundered , which is why waging an intensive war against money laundering has been the House ' s concern from the outset .
I recall that , in 1995 , - when I first reported to the House on this matter - we called in our report on the Commission report on the application of the first money laundering directive for the Commission to table a new proposal for a second money laundering directive , because the first one was inadequate and only set a minimum standard .
We confirmed this once again a few years later in Mr Newman ' s report - at that time I was acting as shadow rapporteur for my Group .
We therefore thank the Commission for initiating this legislative procedure .
We have tried , as requested at the Tampere Summit , to complete this legislative procedure as quickly as possible .
Parliament made a huge effort , as did I in my capacity as rapporteur , to get the directive finally adopted in a single reading using the procedure provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This proved to be impossible because the Council was unable to decide on exactly what it wanted until the summer of last year .
We then concluded our first reading at the Council ' s request and negotiations continued .
Unfortunately , it was impossible to reconcile Parliament ' s and the Council ' s positions up to the Council ' s common position .
That was mainly because the discussion in the Council was being chaired not by the ministers of justice and internal affairs , but by the finance ministers , who failed to approach a whole series of fundamental questions with the required degree of sensitivity .
As a result , we have to retable 27 proposed amendments from the first reading at second reading because , to all intents and purposes , the Council has taken no notice of Parliament ' s views .
It is therefore an utter mockery to state , as the Council does in its explanatory statement , that Parliament ' s arguments and positions have basically been incorporated .
What are the core problems ?
The core problem is not the question of banning money laundering .
That was decided long ago .
All the Member States introduced legislation many , many years ago banning money laundering , be it by criminals , lawyers , bankers , whoever .
It is the reporting obligations which are at issue here .
Obviously , when we include new groups of professionals in the scope of money laundering , we sometimes encounter problems because these groups of professionals are obliged to take certain measures .
For example , lawyers have a duty of professional secrecy as regards the information entrusted to them by their clients .
This is a fundamental right of the clients , a fundamental right which is also set out in the Charter of European Fundamental Rights which was solemnly proclaimed in Nice recently .
For this reason , all I can say is that , what has been decided here by the finance ministers is far too much and goes far beyond what can be reconciled with fundamental rights .
The Committee on Fundamental Freedoms therefore had no choice but to ensure that the relevant amendments were tabled to plenary at second reading .
I would point out that the provisions of the current version of Article 6 ( 3 ) , which relate to an evaluation of the legal situation , have been interpreted very differently by the individual Council delegations and by the Commission and need urgent clarification .
The identification obligations contained in this directive , as it stands following the common position , are overly bureaucratic and unusable .
For example , it makes provision for complex identification obligations even in cases of little consequence and even where the lawyer and client are hundreds of miles apart .
All Parliament is concerned with is preventing money laundering and all that is needed therefore is to trigger identification obligations above a specific threshold as and when financial transactions are involved .
One last point on the question of equal treatment .
We have a situation in which the common position treats the various liberal professions completely differently , despite the fact that there are Member States in which they may sometimes work in partnership .
It is unthinkable to have to apply rule X to certain members of a firm and a stricter rule Y to other members of the same firm .
This sort of arrangement would not work and corrections are therefore needed in this area .
The European Parliament will endeavour to adopt this directive quickly .
But we expect cooperation from the Council at long last , not obstruction by finance ministers at conciliation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we know from estimates by Europol that approximately 30 % of all crime can already be attributed to organised crime .
We also know that , in the meantime , organised crime has earned billions of euros in various sectors .
For example - and these too are figures from confirmed sources - human traffickers alone launder some EUR 1.1 billion from their work , namely getting illegal immigrants over the border , and some EUR 51 billion are laundered in the European Union from drug dealing in eastern Europe every year .
All this money - and this is the worrying thing - gets into legal circulation .
Once it does so , it damages the legal economy and undermines our whole social system .
Organised crime does all this by using the instruments of money laundering .
New methods have been introduced , because the old ones do not work any more .
New professions are being used , or rather abused and involved in all cases .
As a result , the situation is now such that we need to create a new instrument , because we can no longer manage with the old 1991 directive .
Hence the proposal for this new directive , where the list of offences no longer refers to drug-related crime and has been extended to all forms of organised crime , taking account , of course , of all professions and branches of the economy which run the risk of becoming involved in the business of money laundering .
But , in creating this new directive , we must bear one thing in mind : the objective is to fight organised crime and the instruments which we create must be practicable , which is why I emphatically support what Mr Lehne has done in his report , because he is pursuing precisely these objectives , unlike the Council , which has left certain aspects out of consideration ; at any rate , it appears to have lost sight of the practicability factor .
The Lehne proposal - as Mr Lehne himself has pointed out - is a proposal which does not affect normal citizens looking for an apartment somewhere ; on the contrary , it gets to the crux of the matter : only when a transaction is completed need identification be requested .
It refers to orders of magnitude which are relevant to the money laundering business and which do not affect the man in the street when he pops into a bank somewhere .
It includes all professions which use services such as banks .
In other words , it is a practicable proposal .
I therefore hope that it will receive Parliament ' s full and broad support because it will allow us to create an efficient instrument in the fight against organised crime .
Mr President , money laundering means concealing the origin of the proceeds of crime so that they can be presented as the income of a legitimate company .
Anyone who can hinder , interfere with or prevent money laundering hits organised crime - I agree here with the previous speaker - right where it hurts , i.e. in its quest for profit .
The European Community adopted a directive to fight money laundering very early on and this triggered laws in the Member States , which previously had no such legislation .
At the time , this was a good law ; now it needs renovating , like any old building , because nothing is as inventive as the criminal mind .
If the directive is adopted as Mr Lehne and the Committee have drafted it , we shall have the best , most modern and strictest anti-money laundering law in the world , the implementation of which in fact only gives rise to two problems .
The first problem is a degree of uncertainty in the House as to how to deal with the special relationship between lawyers and their clients , because we are calling for a reporting obligation if money laundering is suspected .
The proposal developed by Mr Lehne and the Committee is a good proposal .
It is a simpler and more manageable proposal .
It basically runs as follows : if a lawyer is giving legal advice , then the confidential relationship between the lawyer and the client continues to be protected .
If he is somehow involved in the transfer of money - buying , investing or whatever - then he no longer enjoys this protection and has a full reporting obligation .
This both protects the confidential relationship and meets the demands of the fight against crime .
The second problem is the Council and , at present , there is no solution to it .
The Council has rejected fundamental proposals .
The reason may be - as Mr Lehne indicated - that the finance ministers are responsible and have too little experience in legislating under the codecision procedure and absolutely no experience in fighting crime .
The only way left open to Parliament is as suggested , namely to maintain the amendments proposed at first reading .
We shall have a conciliation procedure .
As Council representatives are here , I say to you : dress warmly for this conciliation .
We have no intention of allowing an excellent bill to be ruined for the sake of an amateur law in the fight against crime !
Mr President , I am afraid I am going to break the consensus so far .
The rapporteur has worked hard and I am therefore particularly sorry to say that my Liberal Group cannot unfortunately support most of his amendments .
It is time to match the rhetoric about fighting money laundering with tough action .
As someone who represents London , including the City of London , I am naturally supportive of financial services liberalisation .
However , freedom of capital movements must not be exploited for undesirable purposes .
Criminal money could give liberalisation a bad name .
This means financial firms have an interest in making the safeguards work but so do other professionals such as accountants and lawyers who are vulnerable to being used as inadvertent conduits for dirty money .
The European Parliament has itself made a strong call for the extension of a ten-year-old existing directive to cover non-financial activities and professions .
As the money laundering defences of banks have strengthened , criminals have sought new ways of hiding their money .
Therefore it is reasonable to call for other professionals to identify their clients properly and report suspicious transactions without narrowing too much the scope of the relevant activities .
We cannot therefore follow Mr Lehne in his amendments on accountants and auditors .
Turning to lawyers , they rightly get special treatment .
The obligations of the directive would only apply in respect of certain financial and company law activities . My Group believes that the safeguards for the lawyer-client relationship , which is absolutely crucial , is adequate in the Council common position .
The lobbying of lawyers ' organisations against this common position has been somewhat exaggerated .
Therefore we , in the ELDR Group , will not be supporting the Lehne amendments because we are extremely keen not to weaken the rules .
There are some of Mr Lehne 's amendments which are entirely sensible and we will support them but , I am afraid , not the majority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lehne report , which is being supported by our Group , is asking for a bold comment .
The Council does not seem to realise that the fight against money laundering practices must , first and foremost , be aimed at fighting organised crime as a matter of urgency .
National sovereignty has to be suspended in this connection .
After all , criminals do not operate with national borders in mind , and without a strong , united front , Europe does not only condone organised crime , it even encourages such practices .
The advent of the euro is also an absolute godsend for crime .
Europe is also clever enough to issue notes of EUR 500 .
Money laundering becomes so much simpler because there is no longer any need to change the money into dollars .
It will soon all be possible in euros .
In the words of a journalist , Geoffrey Robinson : if organised crime were to be granted a wish from a fairy , it would wish for Europe .
Europe will witness an enormous increase in international criminal activity in the next couple of years .
Europe is only at the start of the process .
It is virgin territory waiting to be explored .
Organised crime is a multi-headed monster whose financial heart and lungs need to be ripped out .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , between the first and second readings , the Council has changed its position slightly , but not sufficiently .
If the European Parliament remains firm over the basic issue , I think that the Council will ultimately change to the extent we require .
The persistent breach of the professional secrecy of lawyers and those in similar professions is unacceptable . The authorities have no right to touch this type of secrecy .
Furthermore , the Council , which is crippled by this obsession with entering the private area of professional secrecy , is continuing to move away from what must be the fundamental basis for revising the directive , which is to prioritise the fight against international organised crime . This issue is not being paid the attention it deserves .
The professional secrecy of lawyers and those in similar professions is not a secondary issue . It is a basic question of culture and civilisation .
It is quite unacceptable under any rule of law that is worthy of the name that lawyers should be forced by the law to become informers .
It is surprising that the Council , at a time when so many fundamental rights abound , is vacillating on this issue and dares to attack one of European citizens ' basic guarantees .
The new proposal is not as bad as the previous one , but it is still not good enough .
Professional secrecy is untouchable , not just in the context of trials in process but also in the context of legal consultation .
There is no question of giving any privileges to lawyers , who can and must be prosecuted if they are directly involved in criminal activities or are suspected of being so .
What cannot be allowed to happen is for lawyers to be prosecuted because of clients that hire them and much less become , in turn , the persecutors of clients who hire them .
As a matter of fact , the proposal also contains other little traps , such as the open door to Member States to extend the type of information supplied by lawyers to other areas , which makes the Council ' s text particularly dangerous and perverse .
What the directive must do is to guarantee to protect professional secrecy , which is not a guarantee for lawyers but for society , for the rule of law and for Europe ' s citizens .
The directive must also distinguish between what is advocacy in the true sense of the word , including legal consultation and other types of activity in which the lawyer can act but in which , materially , the activity is not one of advocacy in the true sense of the word .
In one , secrecy is inviolable , and in the other the lawyer can always be prosecuted for withholding information , like any other citizen .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the members of the liberal professions - tax accountants , lawyers and notaries - are aware of the risk which money laundering poses to the social , financial and economic stability of a country and condemn any professional colleague who wittingly takes part in his client ' s criminal activities .
And yet , they are all opposed to the Council ' s proposal and welcome Parliament ' s proposal .
Our task , and here I mean tax accountants , and this includes me , is not to spy on our clients and , where necessary , to report them ; on the contrary , our task is to advise our clients on the basis of the law and provide up-front explanations which will stop them from breaking the law .
However , we shall be stripped of this explanatory function if the Council proposal is accepted and clients have to worry that , in future , we shall report information given in confidence .
The citizens ' right to confidential advice is one of the fundamental principles of the rule of law and must remain sacrosanct .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lehne 's proposal for a directive is genuinely relevant and well-structured , but I would like attention to be paid to three points of the directive : the extension of the definition of alleged money laundering offences , remote identification of clients and the confidentiality of information received .
With regard to the first point , the joint document puts forward a text that defines organised crime , including in the definition of alleged money laundering offences those related to organised crime .
I fully support this extension .
However , I cannot support the further extension to other offences - fraud and corruption , at least serious - as the existence of seriousness is made clear insofar as these offences affect the financial interests of the European Union , if , therefore , they are covered by the provisions of Article 1 ( e ) of the Second Protocol to the Convention on the protection of the European Communities ' financial interests .
The reference to ascertaining the seriousness of the offence is , indeed , not very clear .
Secondly : the text proposes , once again , a procedure for the remote identification of clients , now that the provisions introducing a complex procedure which is difficult to implement have been appropriately removed from the text of the previous common position .
The new wording appears exaggerated , while the issue of standards to be related to the different practices in use should be the responsibility of the individual countries .
On this point , the concern is that specific , binding European standards might be issued , requiring the application of rigid procedures which are difficult to implement .
Thirdly : the confidentiality of information received .
All too often , the information provided on suspect operations is not treated as sufficiently confidential , which is clearly dangerous for the person who has provided it .
Therefore , stringent confidentiality rules on information on suspect operations need to be issued .
In this connection , excessive passing on of data for information purposes , for example , in banks to intermediary bodies , or in the professional categories to auditors , is eliminated .
Mr President , this is a very important report and it approaches a difficult subject .
Despite the best efforts of the rapporteur , there will still be those who will seek to get around it and to look at every way to carry on with their dirty dealings .
Baroness Ludford spoke quite rightly about the effects of this on the City of London and the legal profession .
She is a lawyer or barrister by profession and perhaps she should have declared an interest .
She will know that all of these professions and their associated professions - accountants and auditors - will look at any possibility to help their clients .
Those clients may be involved in all sorts of dodgy transactions .
They should be covered .
Only by concerted effort by all those parties concerned internationally will we be able to tackle the industry of money laundering .
I would like to tackle money lending as well , but that is another issue .
I have been seriously lobbied by the British banks about Amendment No 17 , which they do not like because it tries to prevent people they do not know from paying in huge amounts of cash .
This is just the sort of thing we have to tackle if money laundering is to be challenged properly .
If it affects Internet banking , as they suggest , then there must be other ways that they can verify the credentials of people who are applying for accounts .
Money laundering is linked to organised crime .
We know that .
It is linked to drug smuggling , terrorism and forgery of bank notes .
I agree with Mrs Sörensen .
Those who are developing the euro plan to bring in a EUR 500 note - approximately GBP 300 , well over ten times the face value of the largest note in common usage in Britain .
We have a GBP 50 note which is worth about EUR 80 , but that is very rare .
So if I were a forger I would start out now forging EUR 500 notes and have a field day for the next few months until people come to terms with it .
There are loopholes in this system .
We must do everything we can to counter them .
Mr President , the rules of professional conduct of European Community lawyers state that it is in the very nature of a lawyer ' s work to be entrusted with clients ' secrets and to receive other confidential information .
If there is no guarantee of confidentiality , there can be no trust .
For this reason , professional secrecy is both a fundamental right and a fundamental duty of lawyers .
This fundamental duty , which applies , mutatis mutandis , to all members of the legal profession , is also a fundamental right of anybody in need of advice , i.e. potentially every single one of us .
We shall not stand for any further dismantling of fundamental rights , even if justified by the alleged need to combat organised crime , which is why we agree on this text with Mr Lehne and shall be voting in favour of the proposed amendments .

Mr President , this subject rightly commands a lot of attention , both in this Parliament and elsewhere .
I should like to assure Members that these proceedings attract a lot of attention in institutions outside this Parliament which are engaged in fighting money laundering .
Perhaps the money launderers themselves are also following these proceedings with a great deal of interest since it would be a happy outcome of our discussions if their life were to be made more difficult .
Apart from that , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , and also the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , for their sustained efforts to achieve a rapid adoption of this important but highly sensitive proposal .
The fight against money laundering , as several Members have stressed , is a top political priority and is now an integral part of the campaign against serious and organised crime .
International pressure is increasing on third countries and on offshore financial centres considered insufficiently cooperative in this area .
At the same time , the European Union , which has always been at the forefront of international efforts to fight criminal money , must continue to show the way by developing and refining its internal anti-money laundering defences .
That was the reasoning behind the clear calls from this Parliament and the Member States for a proposal to update and extend the 1991 anti-money laundering directive .
The Commission believes that the common position adopted unanimously last November represents a reasonable compromise on the question of the criminal activity covered - the matter of the so-called predicate offences - and also on the safeguards for the inclusion of the profession , in particular lawyers , within the scope of the directive .
In response to concerns in Parliament about cases where the lawyer is defending or representing a client in legal proceedings or helping the client to determine his legal position , I should like to stress that there is no question of any obligation to report suspicions of money laundering .
It seems to me that the fundamental human rights mentioned are protected .
They will not come into play when this proposal becomes reality .
I agree with Baroness Ludford when she says that in this respect the proposal is a good compromise between protecting fundamental rights when lawyers defend their clients in court or help the clients to determine their legal position , but not when they are participating in preparations leading up to an activity covered by this directive .
I would also like to recall that our work is the subject of considerable international attention , for example within G7 or the Financial Action Taskforce ( FATF ) .
The international community is looking to the European Union to find solutions to those difficult questions .
I would now like to turn to the individual amendments in the draft second reading recommendation .
Amendments Nos 1 and 10 deal with predicate offences and would mark a major step back from the ambitious common position .
The decision was made to move gradually to the coverage of all serious crime .
Having agreed on this wide coverage , the Commission cannot accept these amendments .
Numbers 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 12 , 13 and 22 deal essentially with the treatment of the professions .
The Commission is regrettably unable to accept the amendments as worded .
In its view , the legal profession constitutes a special case and requires special treatment .
The Commission , therefore , does not accept the principle of giving all the professions exactly the same treatment as that envisaged for the lawyers and notaries .
This relates , for example , to the activities which bring the professions within the scope of this directive .
The Commission is also reluctant to envisage a Member State option to allow all the professions the possibility of reporting their suspicions to a professional body , but it firmly backs this possibility for the legal professions .
On the difficult question of advice , the Commission continues to believe that financial investment and corporate advice should fall within the scope of the directive as long as it is unrelated to current or potential legal proceedings or to the wish of the client to establish his position under the law .
Of course , the Commission concedes that drawing this line may not always be easy .
Nevertheless it also insists on this point .
I ask Members of this Parliament what they would think if a lawyer had a suspicion that his client was preparing some money laundering activity ?
What would Members think if that lawyer decided not to report his suspicions , for example , to the bar association of his country ?
That has nothing to do with human rights ; it has everything to do with an efficient campaign against money laundering activities , which is a serious matter .
I would like Members to keep that in mind .
Amendments Nos 7 and 11 relate to the role of the competent authorities .
The Commission believes that the text of the common position is clear and satisfactory and so , cannot accept those two amendments .
Amendment No 9 would extend the definition of financial institutions to include certain market authorities .
The Commission does not believe that such an inclusion would be appropriate .
Amendment No 14 would change the coverage of non-financial activities in a way that is unacceptable to the Commission .
Amendments Nos 15 and 16 deal with client identification .
Some remarks were made earlier this evening to the effect that client identification might be unduly cumbersome and bureaucratic .
I should like to read out Article 3 of the proposal where it says that : " Member States shall ensure that the institutions and persons subject to this directive require identification of their customers by means of supporting evidence when entering into business relations " .
This is not about a client ringing up for a prospectus or something like that : this is entering into business relations .
Can anyone here imagine that a bank or some other financial institution would enter into business relations without ascertaining the identity of his client ?
I cannot .
If I were to enter into business relations I would want to make very certain that I knew who I was dealing with , where they lived , their nationality and so on .
I cannot see at all why that is unduly bureaucratic or cumbersome .
The Commission therefore believes that the common position in this regard provides the necessary scope for flexibility .
Amendments Nos 17 and 28 - the latter of which reached us today - are concerned with identification where there is no face-to-face contact .
The Commission is afraid that Amendment No 17 would make the text too inflexible with possible negative repercussions for e-commerce .
Amendment No 28 retains the flexibility sought by the Commission , but the precise wording still poses certain problems .
Therefore the amendment , as it has now been put forward , is regrettably unacceptable .
Amendment No 18 seeks to amend the exemptions from client identification for certain insurance contracts .
In the Commission 's view , a detailed technical examination of this question would be necessary before these amounts could be revised .
Amendments Nos 19 and 20 deal with identification requirements for casino customers .
The Commission considers that these amendments do not improve the common position .
In the Commission 's view , Amendments Nos 21 and 24 breach the basic anti-money laundering rule that the customer about whom a report is made should not be warned .
The Commission could not accept this breach .
Amendments Nos 23 and 25 amend the provisions of the 1991 Directive on suspicious transaction reporting , which have not given rise to any problems in the past and , in the Commission 's view , do not need to be changed .
Finally , Amendments Nos 26 and 27 refer to OLAF .
In deleting all reference to OLAF in the common position , the Council invited the Commission to make a separate proposal under Article 280 .
The Commission is currently preparing this proposal .
The Commission considers , therefore , these amendments unnecessary .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Community programmes / Judicial network
Mr President , I shall do my best .
This report is on the proposal for a Council decision on four programmes to do with cooperation and exchange in the area of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
To recap : GROTIUS is a programme of cooperation between legal practitioners with a budget of EUR 8.8 million .
OISIN is a programme of cooperation between law enforcement authorities with a budget of EUR 8 million .
STOP is a programme to coordinate action to combat the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children with a budget of EUR 6.5 million and HIPPOCRATES is a new programme concerned mainly with training for the prevention of crime and is to be allocated a budget of EUR 2 million .
Including HIPPOCRATES is a good idea insofar as fundamental aspects of the programme , such as its duration , access and funding rules , tally with the proposals in the other programmes .
The Commission has proposed extending the GROTIUS , OISIN and STOP multi-annual programmes by a further two years .
In principle , we should vote in favour of extending these programmes because they have proven to be conducive - even though not all the Member States take part in them - to effective cooperation in combating and preventing crime , thereby helping to implement the Tampere conclusions .
The Commission ' s implementation reports confirm that the programme objectives have been achieved .
However , an external study has highlighted persistent weaknesses in the implementation of the three programmes , for example in connection with the management and dissemination of the project results .
There is also some doubt as to whether the mobilisation of project agencies has been improved by reducing the cofinancing limit from 80 % to 70 % .
I am in favour of including candidate countries in these programmes at the earliest possible opportunity , simply because the reform of the police and judiciary in these countries leaves a great deal to be desired . I should therefore like them involved at the earliest possible opportunity .
The only real exception which I take to the Commission proposal concerns the time scale .
I would have liked a single framework programme to have been submitted now .
I am positive that , with greater commitment on the Commission ' s part , this would have been feasible .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs would have liked a more comprehensive and ambitious programme from the Commission .
There are reasons against continuing various funding programmes separately from one another . It is difficult to allocate a project to a specific funding programme if it relates to a general subject , such as the Charter of Fundamental Rights , or to several technical areas at once or involves both Member States and candidate countries .
Running individual programmes in parallel increases the probability of conflicting aims and makes it difficult to carry out a financial evaluation and check the coherence of individual programmes with the general objectives of the Union .
It is also difficult for Parliament to keep track of the programmes .
The fact that most funding is for third party projects begs the question of whether the institutions have no priorities of their own which require funding .
I am thinking here , for example , of asylum seekers , of victims of crime or projects to improve infrastructure .
In addition , a separate budget has been proposed for pilot projects .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs therefore proposes that plenary support the Commission proposals but , at the same time , calls on the Commission to present a proposal well before the end of 2001 , consolidating all the initiatives designed to create an area of freedom , security and justice on the basis of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union and Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community , in order to strengthen citizens ' rights and fundamental rights .
So much for this aspect .
Now to the European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters .
It was decided to set up a judicial network in criminal matters back in 1998 .
This network operates via national contact points which advise and support local authorities .
Following teething troubles of a mainly technical and linguistic nature , the network now helps considerably in simplifying cross-border investigations into criminal offences .
The Commission proposal suggests extending the method of cooperation between national contact points to civil and commercial matters , a measure long overdue in my view .
I welcome this project as an opportunity to simplify judicial cooperation between Member States and , more importantly , to facilitate cross-border legal procedures .
The activities of the network should , in the final analysis , benefit the citizens ; improving judicial cooperation is merely a half-way objective , the final objective being to create an area of justice for our citizens , which is why the Committee ' s proposed amendments specify that citizens should be able to take recourse to the courts and authorities in any Member State as easily as they can in their own , thereby incorporating in the proposal the objective formulated by the European Council in the Tampere milestones .
The basic objective should be to guarantee proper access to the law and fast , reliable procedures .
I also see this network as an accompanying instrument for the purpose of implementing the Brussels II Convention .
In order to learn from the experience of the judicial network in criminal matters , the new network needs to cooperate closely with the contact points of the judicial network in criminal matters .
It would also be a good idea if the secure electronic information exchange system to be set up were based on the current administrative electronic data exchange programme .
Here again , I would stress that candidate countries should be included at the earliest possible opportunity .
A central , electronic EU index of legal cases and a data bank containing a register of judgments would be invaluable to courts and persons taking recourse to the law .
A detailed proposal on this has already been submitted .
I am grateful for the amendments proposed by Mrs Wallis , which helped to clarify the text , and I am grateful for the support for my amendments in committee .
I cannot support Amendment No 8 limiting the number of participants and agree with the Commission here .
Nor was anyone able to convince me of the merit of Amendment No 13 on a pilot project within this network .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is quarter past midnight , the time when dark figures emerge from the shadows .
In Strasbourg , Brussels , throughout Europe , throughout the world , across borders , crimes will be committed tonight , people will be injured , property will be damaged .
In this respect , it is the right time to be talking about the GROTIUS programme .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Keßler , for her thorough preparation of the analysis of the GROTIUS programme .
I think that this programme , Mr Vitorino , is one of the main elements in a European area of freedom , security and justice .
I should like to make a point here , on behalf of my Group , of acknowledging the fact that the Commission has committed itself in this programme to what is , in fact , a relatively new area , given its original remit .
The GROTIUS programme will create islands of competence in the application of the law which we can extend one by one and gradually increase , because we can adopt as many directives , regulations and agreements as we want ; if they are not applied , all our efforts are in vain .
The area of money laundering , which we have just debated , is precisely one such area in which good progress has been made in establishing the legal preconditions needed in order to fight it , including at European level .
At the end of the day , however , too little use is made of these instruments .
The GROTIUS programme will help to ensure that European law is not just law in the books , but law in action .
I can therefore say , on behalf of my Group , that we are unreservedly in favour of continuing the GROTIUS programme and I should also like to say that it is European money extremely well spent .
We welcome the basic structure of the programme because it is fully and completely in keeping with requirements regarding the application of the law .
Training measures , exchange programmes , studies , seminars , publications , are exactly what allow our legal practitioners to make use of European law and European possibilities .
However , I must also point out that the requirements of legal practice are very varied .
That is because training systems differ , the degree to which people are affected varies widely in the various regions of the European Union and , of course , the national judicial systems have very different definitions of what they expect from individual professional groups , be they judges , public prosecutors , lawyers etc .
This was also the unanimous view of the Committee on Legal Affairs , which I am also speaking on behalf of here today .
The Committee on Legal Affairs numbers a great many legal practitioners .
Allow me to illustrate this with a very specific example .
In cities such as Frankfurt , London or Paris , training in European money laundering legislation may be crucial , while in regions on the border between Germany and France or Italy and France , it is a relatively minor problem , which is why - and this is the point which particularly concerns me - the flexibility of the GROTIUS programme is crucial to its success .
Although one measure or another perhaps meets all the requirements in one Member State , it may completely bypass them in another region , which is why we wondered during our discussions if it made sense for the Commission to set focal points for training etc. in annual programmes .
We feel that it makes more sense to create a flexible , pragmatic , practicable framework within which those who wish to receive further training in European law can determine the subject matter themselves and tailor the various measures accordingly .
We support the programme and hope that it will continue to bear fruit for legal practice in the European Union .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market specifically on the European judicial network proposal .
Today in this House we held the annual debate on the European area of freedom , security and justice .
Oddly , this theme of our citizens ' access to justice in civil and commercial matters was not mentioned .
This is very strange in an internal market where we actively encourage our citizens and enterprises to travel and conduct their commerce across borders .
There is therefore a heavy responsibility on us to provide access to justice when things go wrong .
This proposal states that its aim is to create a European judicial area which will bring tangible benefits to every citizen .
I hope it will not disappoint .
It is a proposal on two levels .
First , a network of judicial authorities and personnel to ease cross-border procedures in civil and commercial matters .
But it is the second level that interests me : to give information to our citizens on how to pursue cross-border litigation .
This is difficult and not to be contemplated without competent and specialised legal advice .
Our citizens are increasingly finding themselves involved in complex cross-border problems : road traffic accidents , buying property or a timeshare , actual problems that face our citizens .
Whilst we move towards extrajudicial remedies , we must also ensure that judicial remedies are accessible .
That is why my Group will support the amendment that was supported by the Legal Affairs Committee to secure a pilot programme of access to specialised legal advice .
This should be central to this network - a network of judicial personnel is one thing , but a network that really provides cross-border access to justice would be the best way to recognise progress towards a real area of justice in Europe for our citizens , and this on the day of the annual debate on that subject .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been said , with this initiative we are extending the experience we have gained through the Judicial Network in criminal matters to the civil and commercial spheres .
First and foremost , we have focused on the importance of cooperation and exchanges of information between the Member States ' judicial authorities , with a view to creating an area of freedom , security and justice .
The report by Mrs Keßler , whom I wish to congratulate for the quality of her work , warrants our support , particularly because it makes judicious suggestions , specifically on cooperation between this new network and the already existing network in criminal matters , on the participation of countries that have applied for membership of the Union and on the desirable and necessary transparency in the way the network operates . Above all , however , the report warrants our support because of its suggestion for improving information for the general public .
It is worth bearing in mind that the ultimate aim is to ensure that European citizens can seek justice in the courts and authorities of any Member State as easily as they can in their own country .
In order to achieve this objective , a public information system must also be in place which can inform Europe ' s citizens of their rights .
I believe that there is a lack of information and clarification in this area and this is another reason for welcoming the new competences granted to Commissioner Vitorino as the person responsible for generating improved communication and information strategies within the Commission .
I hope that the qualities he has always demonstrated will enable improvements , which we can all see are urgent and much needed , to be brought to this thorny and delicate subject .
Lastly , I wish to say a few words about the programmes that are also under discussion .
With regard to their importance , we all agree with the rapporteur ' s suggestion that it makes sense to finance the various programmes under one framework programme : dispersion does not bring advantages , and I think that , in this way , we would be able to make gains in terms of synergies and clarity .
I should also like to hear Commissioner Vitorino ' s opinion on this matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first and foremost like to congratulate Mrs Keßler on her two reports .
I would like to quote a few excerpts from a recent interview which was published recently in a Dutch magazine .
International organised crime is more successful , more powerful and more dangerous than ever .
The judiciary is meanwhile losing virtually all of its grip on major , transnational crime across the world .
Whilst drugs dealers , human traffickers and arms dealers enjoy the full benefits of globalisation , the judiciary remains hopelessly caught behind its own national boundaries .
This will be the golden era for international crime .
Today ' s international crime syndicates are global business corporations .
They are applying the principles of what global business corporations should do , as taught at the Harvard School of Business : think international , form joint ventures and forge strategic alliances .
The European Union , Europe , will become one huge Disneyland for organised crime .
It is , therefore , crucial that a European judicial network is set up promptly .
Not only for criminal affairs , but just as much for civil and trade affairs .
It is both urgent and necessary for Europe , especially in terms of judicial matters , to organise itself professionally .
We should , in this respect , perhaps follow the lead given by organised crime .
Our Group supports both reports submitted by Mrs Keßler .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the chairman and members of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and the rapporteur , Mrs Keßler , for their support for the Commission proposals as well as for the information they have given on the strategy to reorganise the programmes , which was nevertheless clear from the explanatory statement of the proposals the Commission itself presented .
The Commission ' s intention is to pursue the action of the existing programmes for two years and to launch Hippocrates at the same time and for the same period . Essentially , the aim is not to interrupt sources of financing and to avoid any discontinuity in its action which would only serve to weaken the projects and the objectives that have been set .
The de facto situation is that these programmes came to an end in 2000 .
It is imperative that they be renewed as quickly as possible .
As to the new Hippocrates programme for the prevention of criminality , which is one of the most important aspects of the fight against crime , it takes its name from the celebrated Greek physician , for whom prevention was better than cure , and is based on the experience gained by the Commission in other programmes under Title VI of the Treaty on European Union .
Bringing the legal base and the ways of managing the new Hippocrates programme into line with the other programmes will , I am sure , simplify the management and utilisation of financing programmes which are now running smoothly after five years of experience on the ground .
In Mrs Keßler ' s draft report , the merger of the different programmes is clearly indicated within a timeframe which , in fact , coincides with that put forward by the Commission .
This method will , moreover , enable the Commission to rationalise the management of the programmes and to integrate them into a general framework which corresponds to the area of freedom , security and justice called for by the Treaties , by the Vienna action plan and by the conclusions of the Tampere European Council .
The Commission ' s objective is to integrate all the programmes into a coherent block . This may lead to the presentation of framework programmes under Title VI of the Treaty on European Union and Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community and of another in the context of asylum and immigration which , in my opinion , merits a different type of treatment to the other objectives .
This strategy to merge the programmes will , I am sure , strengthen the effectiveness of management and transparency and will help to better inform the European Parliament about what will follow .
The Commission is therefore absolutely on the same wavelength as the European Parliament and I can only welcome this . But our main concern , naturally , is to prepare this coordination in the correct manner .
That is why the Commission will pursue the debate which is already under way and will make the most of the time available to it to extract the essential elements .
We will present our proposals for consolidating the programmes along the lines indicated in Mrs Keßler ' s report by the end of 2001 .
We are counting on constructive dialogue with , and the support of , the European Parliament to make this operation a success .
I would now like to turn to the Commission proposal for a Council decision establishing a European judicial network in civil and commercial matters .
As you are aware , Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union states that the aim of the European Union is to maintain and develop an area of freedom , security and justice .
The Vienna action plan and the conclusions of the Tampere Summit recognised that citizens could only enjoy freedom in an area of justice in which they could gain access to the courts and to the authorities of all Member States as easily as in their own countries .
In an amendment you propose , quite rightly , spelling this out in the text of the decision we are debating today .
The Vienna action plan and the Tampere Summit were very precise as regards the domain we are dealing with . They called upon us to study the possibility of extending the principle of a judicial network to the civil domain and to establish an information system which citizens could access easily and which would be supported by a network of national authorities .
It is therefore in this context , which was sketched out by the Treaty on European Union , the Vienna action plan and the Tampere Summit , that the proposal for a decision we are debating today is enshrined .
Above all , we are seeking tangible benefits for all our citizens .
We want them to be able to turn to the courts of any Member State just as easily as they can to those in their own country , so that individuals and companies alike can exercise their rights .
And we want to achieve this by putting in place a bipartite mechanism , to both parts of which , I hasten to add , we attach the same importance .
The first part is about establishing a flexible , non-bureaucratic structure which will ease the flow of judicial cooperation between Member States . This is already the case in the criminal domain , from our experience with which we have learned a great deal .
The second part , which is just as important , is about going beyond what is currently being done in the criminal domain and putting in place a system to provide all citizens with easily comprehensible and accessible information which will help them to overcome their reluctance to defend their rights in a Member State other than their own and will thus ease their access to justice in this Member State .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Keßler , as well as the draftspersons of the opinion of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , Mrs Wallis and Mrs Wenzel-Perillo , for the support they have given to our initiative .
As regards the proposals for amendments contained in the legislative proposal , first of all I can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 and 9 .
I would like to point out however that , in connection with Amendment No 3 , we do not see an obstacle to future instruments being able to provide specific cooperation mechanisms .
Concerning Amendment No 9 , on the other hand , it is fitting to allow a certain margin of flexibility in its operation .
As regards Amendment No 4 , the Commission has its doubts .
However , this does not mean that the Commission rejects the idea of developing databases in the field of judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters .
On the contrary , we would like to be able to develop such databases in this field provided , for example , they can be of significant assistance for monitoring the implementation of adopted or future instruments .
We also believe the network may be very useful for this purpose .
That is why , although we are unable to accept the amendment as it stands , in response to the wishes expressed by Parliament , I would like to clearly point out in the recitals that the network may collaborate in the development of specific , precisely targeted projects in this field , for which priorities will be duly established in the light of the immediate actions of the civil judicial network .
Another amendment that the Commission cannot accept as it stands but whose essence will be written into the text of the decision is Amendment No 7 .
The Commission would , in fact , like the network to be able to use the services offered by the IDA programme as far as possible .
The Commission is also able to accept part of Amendments Nos 10 and 11 and stresses that the prescribed 3-year period will start once the network is actually up and running .
Nonetheless , I have to admit that the presentation of annual statistical reports seems to us to be an excessive burden on the network .
However , the Commission is unable to accept Amendment No 8 and has its doubts about Amendment No 6 concerning collaboration with the judicial network in criminal matters .
We will do everything within our power to ensure that this collaboration is put into practice .
Nonetheless , given the differing legal basis and pillar between civil judicial cooperation and criminal judicial cooperation , it does not seem appropriate to incorporate into the text what , in any case , will be done in practice .
To conclude , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , through this proposal we hope to put in place an effective instrument which will enable us to achieve our ultimate goal : to bring about a European area of freedom , security and justice in civil and commercial matters . This is something which affects not only the will and the everyday lives of our citizens but also the proper functioning of the single market .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Support system for producers of arable crops
In accordance with the agenda , there now follows the debate of Mrs Auroi ' s report ( A5-0117 / 2001 ) on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , concerning the proposal for a Council regulation on the amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1251 / 1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops .
Mr President , Commissioner , to ensure that the first harvest can be gathered after 15 August 2001 , against the difficult background of the BSE crisis and as a matter of urgency , the Commission has been prompted to propose amendments to the Council Regulation establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops .
This proposal is one of the measures in the seven-point plan being submitted to Parliament by the Commission which would enable certain land which is currently set aside to be put back into cultivation for crops such as clover .
This decision to amend the Regulation as a matter of urgency will be seen by producers as a sign of hope .
Europe is not abandoning them and does not want them to carry the can for a situation of which they are very often the victims .
Aside from its urgency , this measure follows on directly from the White Paper on food safety which included in its proposals the incorporation of problems associated with the production of animal feed .
The proposal also addresses the problem of the production of vegetable protein needed to ensure suitable feedingstuffs for bovine animals .
There is a deficit in such production in Europe as a result , inter alia , of the Blair House agreements .
The set-aside arrangements laid down resulted in arable land lying fallow while , at the same time , livestock were being fed on animal protein , including some from animal meal .
In order to enable all livestock to be once again fed with more wholesome feedingstuffs , and in order to overcome the BSE crisis , it is essential that the set-aside arrangements be amended so as to encourage production of fodder crops .
Your proposal , Commissioner , admittedly constitutes a step in the right direction , although the change proposed is only marginal in relation to the Regulation as a whole .
The change is of simply symbolic value but we in this House could go further and use it as the trigger for a debate leading to the eventual reform of Agenda 2000 .
The aim of the measures proposed is to move , initially , from set aside towards arrangements which are designed to increase crop rotation , but only in the organic farming sector .
The effect of such arrangements would be to enhance the use of certain set-aside land by the planting of crops such as broad beans , kidney beans , lentils , chick peas , lupin , vetch , alfalfa , fenugreek , sweet clover , clover , white clover , field beans , peas and others .
This would have a positive effect in terms of promoting a more natural approach to livestock rearing because it would be associated with the production of fodder .
In addition , it would have a positive impact on the environment , since we now know that set aside is often harmful to the environment .
Rather than encouraging mass production of protein and oleaginous crops and promoting rotation through payments linked to area or to volumes , this adjustment to the rules will allow the partial lifting of the set-aside requirement in order to grow fodder legumes not for human consumption .
It represents a step in the direction of reform of the CAP along the lines of high-quality livestock farming and extensive production which we would all like to see .
The question is whether this should be limited to boosting organic farming on the basis of Regulation ( EEC ) No 2092 / 91 or whether it is possible to go further .
In the latter case , conventional farm holdings should be allowed to benefit from the same possibilities if they are willing to restrict themselves to planting only fodder crops on their set-aside land .
The obligation to complement the growing of cereals with legumes and fodder crops in order to receive subsidies can thus contribute towards establishing ecological cycles and improving the soil .
Such a commitment , associated with good farming practice , would permit the restoration of good rotation of crops , such as is found in organic farming .
However , if we confine ourselves to lifting the set-aside requirement only for organic farming , we shall be making no more than cosmetic changes .
The Commission made this proposal too restrictive by limiting set-aside production to organic farming , not through any admiration for organic farmers , but because it did not want to chip away at the WTO agreements by adopting a measure which would favour all EU producers .
In fact , however , depending on the state of the crisis in health safety , under the WTO agreements , an amendment of the rules by Member States does not constitute a violation of its agreements , which the Economic and Social Committee also pointed out .
Furthermore , if the health of consumers and the survival of farmers are at stake , it will be necessary to have the courage to review these agreements .
George W. Bush had no qualms when he rejected the Kyoto Protocol on climate change .
The crucial thing now is to take a quick initial decision to enable farmers to sow their crops as soon as possible .
The best solution would have been to allow conventional farmers to sow set-aside land with protein crops before 15 August 2001 , but the Commission did not accept this .
Commissioner , a compromise has been put to you by the entire Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for 2001 which , in addition to organic farming , concerns all agricultural holdings which take part in an agri-environment programme .
Then , from 2002 , this measure could be opened up to the conventional sector .
This isolated proposal should be but a first step towards a more complete reform of the common agricultural policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the present proposal for the amendment of the Regulation establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops , the Commission is pursuing the aim of encouraging environmental agriculture by means of the cultivation of fodder legumes on land set aside .
This , however , is only to be possible for holdings which , with their production , are taking part in Regulation ( EEC ) No 2092 / 91 and which , in effect , are organic holdings .
This is where our criticism begins , and for the most part the Council also sees it the same way .
I want to emphasise this at this point .
We are calling for not only organic holdings to be permitted to cultivate legumes on land set aside , but , against the background of BSE and foot-and-mouth , all livestock holdings .
In this way , the many livestock holdings could receive a small compensation for the sometimes truly dramatic financial losses caused by BSE and foot-and-mouth .
At least , however , in addition to the organic holdings , holdings should be considered which are participating in the agri-environment programmes , that is to say holdings which , within the framework of Regulation 1257 / 99 , are participating in national environment programmes approved by the committee .
The argument put forward by the committee in this connection , that the instrument of set aside would be given up with our amendments , is surely incomprehensible .
It is clear to every farmer affected by BSE and foot-and-mouth and who is participating in these support measures that the EU is giving no new cause for celebration here .
Rather , he will be grateful for it as a very clever interpretation of the little room to manoeuvre which remains to us in the present miserable situation for livestock holdings .
Secondly , the committee itself reports that the desired restoration of the soil ' s fertility will be achieved by the cultivation of fodder legumes .
It is incomprehensible why only organically farmed holdings should profit from this recycling .
After the animal meal fodder ban , it just makes sense to encourage the cultivation of highly protein-rich legumes .
We will need far more of them than we are at present producing .
The introduction of soya may pay off .
If , however , we are taking sustainable agriculture seriously , we must take a step forwards here .
Mr President , compared with a draft Regulation which is extremely minimalist , the virtue of the report by Mrs Auroi is that it opens up the way to start , albeit very modestly , to reduce our enormous deficit in protein and oleaginous plants .
Whilst the majority of agricultural holdings are mixed , the Commission proposes to limit the possibility to grow fodder crops on their set-aside land , in other words , on less than 10 % of the surface area designated for cereals , protein and oleaginous crops , to holdings which are 100 % organic , which accounts for barely 2 % of the cultivated area in the European Union .
Mrs Auroi is proposing extending this possibility to conventional farm holdings , especially to livestock farms , and she is right .
But even if it is revised in this way , the proposal is clearly not in line with the extent of the problem we have to solve .
Our deficit in protein and oleaginous crops , which was made considerably worse by the Blair House constraints , exceeded 35 million tonnes before the ban on animal meal for monogastric animals even came into force .
At least 300 000 tons of additional imports a month must be added to that .
So only an ambitious ' protein ' plan will redress the balance and satisfy consumers ' demands for traceability .
In this regard , I am appalled at the Commission ' s spirit of renunciation , which it demonstrated in its communication of 16 March , in which short-term free trade took the place of policy .
I will come back to this in tomorrow ' s debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to express my most heartfelt thanks to you , Mrs Auroi .
Equally , I would like to thank the Members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for the rapid and thorough examination of the proposal on the use of land set aside for organic holdings , which I had already submitted in the plenary part-session within the framework of the seven-point plan .
I would like to express clearly , though , that the proposed measure is not aimed at replacing the animal meal at present banned in fodder .
Tomorrow morning we will have the opportunity to discuss this aspect .
Our aim - the aim of the Commission - is quite a different one , namely to create an additional encouragement of environmental agriculture , since organic farmers are dependent on the cultivation of fodder legumes like clover and lucerne to a greater degree than conventional agriculture .
I am therefore of the opinion that the possibility proposed by the committee will be of great use to organic farmers .
We should also not forget , however , that there are good reasons for the restriction to organic holdings .
Firstly , it should be guaranteed that the land set aside remains an effective instrument for the control of production , in order to keep our aquaculture subsidies in the Blue Box .
Secondly , a certain preference for organic holdings is therefore appropriate here , since otherwise it would be much harder for these to be able to fulfil their production conditions .
It would be advisable to bear these arguments in mind when the relationship between supply and demand in protein-rich crops is discussed tomorrow .
That is why I must reject the amendments which are aimed at a use of land set aside for the cultivation of all types of fodder legumes and protein-rich crops and for an extension to other types of agricultural holdings besides organic holdings : Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 are aimed at the relationship between supply and demand in protein-rich crops .
This question was examined and settled by my services , after the Council had engaged the Commission to do so in December and within the framework of the Nice Summit .
Tomorrow morning , I will make a statement about this here in plenary .
For this reason , I would prefer not to discuss this further today .
In conclusion , one final obvious comment on the proposal discussed today : only if the Council can decide quickly will the organic farmers be able to profit from the opportunity offered , since our proposal would already also take into account the set-aside period from 15 January 2001 and apply from then on .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Now , the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has asked for a brief word .
Mr Chairman , you have the floor .
Mr President , I wanted to refer to Rule 122 . It concerns personal statements .
It states that these personal statements may be made , if , in the course of the debate , remarks were made about one ' s person .
What I now find fault with is that absolutely no remarks were made about my person .
Perhaps I may then , nevertheless , make a personal remark .
Namely , I would have liked to have heard if anyone had said that what the committee has here proposed and what we have gone on to examine more thoroughly and make more detailed proposals about fills the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture with great satisfaction .
No one has said that we - and I in particular - have now been occupied with this work for years , that we are very happy that Commissioner Fischler has now made this proposal and that - even if we do not adopt all the proposals - we are nevertheless embarking upon this use of land set aside and upon the environmental revaluation of crop rotation .
I wanted to say that as a personal remark .
Many thanks , Mr President , for giving me the opportunity .
Even in his new capacity as chairman , the honourable Member has not forgotten which tricks can be used in order to still have the chance to speak .
But what you said was interesting Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
I thank all of you who have held out for so long , particularly the members of the Commission and its officials !
( The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m. )
Address by Mr Rau , President of the Federal Republic of Germany
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to offer my sincere thanks , Madam President , for your invitation and the opportunity to present my thoughts on the future configuration of Europe to this esteemed House .
Europe is becoming an increasingly concrete , increasingly tangible concept to its citizens , because it directly affects them .
In 271 days , the citizens of twelve European countries will have a single currency in their wallets .
We can travel freely through Europe , from Nordkap to Gibraltar .
But do we perceive ourselves as Europeans ?
To my mind , it is , as a major European journalist , the Italian Luigi Barzini , once said : " ... despite our incontestable diversity and differences , basically all men are built in the same mould ... "
We have a rich stock of common traditions , to which Winston Churchill referred in his famous Zurich speech in September 1946 .
For him , the common European heritage consisted of the Christian faith and Christian ethics , culture , art , philosophy and science , from antiquity to modern times .
We have all seen quite specific examples of our common interests in Europe .
Surely globalisation is forcing us , as Europeans , to realise that we must not let the diversity of our cultural wealth become the plaything of , or fall victim to , worldwide dumbing down by global media powers , that the challenge to our values by fundamentalists and ethnic cleansing in Europe calls for a common response on our part and that the market should not have free reign but should be harnessed for social and ecological purposes ?

Today , we can see just how great an appeal the European Union has in numerous countries .
There are clearly perfectly practical reasons for this and the European Union is , without doubt , becoming more and more useful to all its Member States .
But it is much more than a merely functional community .
Europe stands for a specific concept of human existence and human coexistence .
That is what we are constantly striving for , to strike a balance between the freedom of the individual and his responsibility towards society and the community .
Even the greatest visionaries of the 50s could never have imagined the exact configuration of European unification or just how many areas it would encompass .
The successes of the common market should encourage us to set ourselves new objectives .
However , if we are to be perfectly honest , we must admit that , alongside a broad consensus among many of our citizens , there is also scepticism , mistrust or even total rejection of the European unification project .
I think it is important not to allow doubt and criticism to target individual measures and their impact .
Most of us know how important it is to live in peace after centuries of enmity , how well we have pulled together to increase our prosperity , how many advantages the internal market offers our companies , how much better we can work together in Europe on research and that progress means being able to establish in another European country without any great difficulty or having more and more educational qualifications recognised throughout Europe .
What the people of Europe worry about is how the unfathomable unification process is organised and the minimal influence which they appear to have on it .
Many of our citizens rightly ask who is driving the European unification train ? What speed limit must it keep to ?
What traffic regulations apply to it ?
How and where are the points set ?
What coaches are being coupled to or removed from it ? And where does the journey end ?
These are not academic questions .
They are the questions being asked by the sovereign power , i.e. the people , in every country in Europe .
And there can be no doubt that all these questions must be decided by the sovereign power in each of our European democracies , i.e. by the people and only the people .
Now I sometimes hear it said that a democratic process in the traditional sense is no longer possible in Europe because there is no single European nation .
It is true that there is no European nation and no European public in the same way as there is in the individual Member States of the European Union .
But that should not prevent us from strengthening the principles of democracy at European level .
Democracy , rightly understood , means quite simply that people who want to act together for a specific purpose create the rules and procedures needed in order to do so .
This is in no way contradicted by the fact that , in all other cases , these people have quite different interests and want to be sure that these differences are safeguarded .
That is precisely what Europe is doing .
We want to pursue certain common objectives and interests , while preserving the variety of European countries and nations which form the basis of the European Union and make it so special .
And this will , and should not , change in the future .
So the question we need to answer is : how can we organise the European Union so that its citizens can make more sense of it ?
What must we do so that decisions taken by the European Union are more broadly justified at European level ?
At the end of the day , what should the organisational framework look like ?
And I am firmly convinced that the only answer is : we need a European constitution .
( Applause )
A European constitution must become the cornerstone , not the keystone .
A European constitution should stipulate that Europe will not turn into a centralistic superstate and that we are building a " federation of nation states " .
I am well aware of the fact that the terms " constitution " and " federation " appear highly suspect to many people in Europe .
But surely this is just a semantic argument ?
I am positive that we shall find it easier to agree on what we mean in substance than on the definitions .
We need to discuss the content instead of wrangling over definitions .
( Applause )
A European constitution must be the outcome of a broad debate in every country .
Sceptical and critical voices will be raised in the debate .
There are many weighty objections which I take seriously , even though I personally take a different view .
I should like to discuss some of these today and explain my vision of a European constitution and the road leading to it .
One frequent argument against a constitution is that every additional step in the unification process is yet another step towards a European " superstate " and towards the abolition of the nation states .
But anyone who , like me , is in favour of a federation of nation states , wants exactly the opposite !
If we want a European Union which is a federation of nation states , it is because it improves the democratic credentials of community action , while guaranteeing the nation states the powers which they want to and should retain .
New powers can only then be transferred to Europe if all members of the federation so agree under a transparent and democratically controlled procedure .
Preserving what has been acquired , preventing what is undesirable and remaining receptive to what is new - that is the basis for a constitution for a federation of nation states and that is what I should like to talk about .
No one wants to sideline the nation states and their sovereignty - on the contrary : we shall need them - and all their differences - to guarantee the diversity of Europe for a long time to come .
The implicit or explicit response to the idea of a federation of nation states is that Europe will , in fact , be predicated on the model of the Federal Republic of Germany .
But if you take a closer look , you will see that the idea of a federation is justified for quite different reasons .
The state structures in our European countries have evolved historically ; in other words , they are different but equally valid democratic responses to specific historical developments .
And it is precisely because Europe is not moving and should not move towards a centralised state that we need to find an arrangement which reflects this will , which safeguards our various traditions and which , at the same time , is up-to-date .
A federation meets all these requirements .
( DE ) The point of a federation is that each Member State has sovereign powers to decide on its type of constitution and state structure .
Just as I am loath to let Europe decide on internal arrangements for the Federal Republic of Germany , I am equally loath to dictate how others should organise their own country .
The last thing I want is to impose a federal solution on , say , the Kingdom of Denmark , the Hellenic Republic or the Kingdom of Spain or , one day , the Republic of Hungary , which is not wanted .
It is precisely because we do not want a centralised state that we need a constitution .
What is the function of a constitution in a political community ?
A " grammar of freedom " and , especially for us in Europe - a " grammar of solidarity " .
In it the sovereign power , i.e. the people , set out the values to which they are committed , the areas in which they delegate their powers , and to whom , and how they wish to organise and limit these powers .
Finally , a constitution regulates who is responsible for what .
The principles of a constitution for a European federation of nation states are the same .
It should consist of three sections .
The first section should contain the Charter of Fundamental Rights proclaimed at the Nice Summit .
( Applause )
It should govern action taken by the European institutions and be binding on the Member States as regards the implementation of European law .
This will not affect the Member States ' catalogue of fundamental rights or the European Human Rights Convention .
The second part of a European constitution must set a clear dividing line between the powers of the Member States and the powers of the European Union , thereby defining the fundamental relationship between the Member States and the federation .
In so doing , an effort should be made to give the principle of subsidiarity a broader base .
Only matters which are not better dealt with in the Member States should be decided at European level .
That must be the guideline .
In other words , everything not specifically allocated to Europe should remain the responsibility of the nation states .
In order to counter the fear of creeping centralisation in Europe , I think we should also consider expressly stipulating the powers reserved for the Member States .
I should just like to mention two examples here .
The Member States must be able , even within the framework of a European social policy , to decide on their own old-age pension arrangements or to promote renewable sources of energy within the framework of an environmental policy .
( Applause )
Of course , I know that even the most perfect definition of powers will not spare us conflict in the future .
I agree with Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker and numerous other Europeans that we should not stipulate what the EU will never be allowed to do .
The constitution must allow for powers to be regulated differently by unanimous decision of the members of the federation .
In addition to including the Charter of Fundamental Rights and regulating powers , the constitution should comprise a third section on the future institutional structure of Europe .
I spoke at the beginning of the uneasiness of many of our citizens , who experience or feel that they have too little influence on how quickly , in which direction and towards what destination the European unification train is travelling .
They see their democratic rights violated , which is why the question of Europe ' s democratic credentials must take centre stage in this debate .
( Applause )
Parliament and the Council of Ministers should - in my view - be developed into a proper two-chamber parliament .
( Loud applause )
The Council of Ministers should become a chamber of state , in which each country votes and is represented by its government .
This chamber would safeguard the sovereignty of the nation states .
The European Parliament - you , honourable Members - should become the citizens ' chamber .
Both chambers should have equal decision-making powers in all legislative areas .
( Loud applause )
A great deal of criticism about Europe sticks to the Commission , and often rightly so .
But often the Commission is used as a scapegoat and the hunt for scapegoats is everyone ' s favourite pastime !
( Laughter , applause )
I recognise the tendency of almost all national governments to brand decisions which they themselves have taken at European level as the monstrous invention of European regulatory mania ...
( Loud applause ) ... when they come up against opposition in their own country , as I am sure you are aware .
However , that does nothing to mitigate justified criticism that , given its importance , the Commission lacks democratic credentials for its work and we must change this .
As you know , there are two models for this : either the people directly elect the Commission president or the Commission president is elected by the two chambers of Parliament .
( Loud applause )
I prefer the parliamentary model , whereby the Commission can count on a parliamentary majority .
( Loud applause )
But irrespective of which route is taken towards a constitution , a stronger parliament with two chambers and a Commission with better democratic credentials can give new , decisive momentum to the European idea .
The citizens of Europe will be more interested in what is going on in Brussels , Strasbourg and Luxembourg , they will identify more closely with it , even if they disagree with certain decisions .
A stronger parliament would , I am sure , also help the parties to be European parties in fact and not just in name .
( Applause )
The reform of the European institutions would also help to bring about broader publicity at European level , which we sorely need .
There are already issues which concern people all over Europe .
Just think of the euro , its internal stability and its external value .
Just think of peace in our corner of the world , the desire for healthy food or the rules governing transfers of football players within Europe .
We must ensure during the constitutional debate that the Commission continues to represent the Community ' s interests .
( Applause )
This mainstay of the European unification process , the Commission ' s right of initiative , must stay .
( Applause )
Debates over recent months have shown that the intergovernmental method has reached the end of its useful life .
( Loud applause )
And we are still only a Europe of the Fifteen !
We all know that politics are a question not just of the right objectives but of how they can best be achieved .
So how should the route towards a European constitution be constructed , what shape should the " process for the future of Europe " , as it is so aptly called , take ?
The debate on the future of Europe should be broader than the debate held in a classic type of Intergovernmental Conference .
( Applause )
When the convention to prepare the European Charter of Fundamental Rights was set up in 1999 , there were a lot of sceptics .
As I am sure you agree , rarely has a European committee worked as well as this convention in recent years .
( Applause )
I think it was exemplary .
We should therefore discuss the future of Europe in a broadly composed committee in which government representatives , members of national parliaments and , of course , the European Parliament , all play an important role .
( Applause )
This is where the decisions needed should be prepared as comprehensively as possible .
We should be extremely careful and make every effort to ensure that the debate on the future of Europe is not just held in expert circles .
We must involve all interested citizens .
I agree with my Italian colleague , President Ciampi , and many other people that we must also involve the citizens of the candidate countries in this debate .
( Applause )
The future European constitution will also be their future order .
Ladies and gentlemen , exercise your rights as freely elected members of Parliament .
Make use of the opportunity which you have to take Europe forward .
You have more influence than many would have you believe .
Help to make Europe real for the citizens of our countries .
You have already done so much .
Keep up the good work .
I am with you all the way !
( Long , loud standing ovation )
When I paid my first official visit to Germany a few months ago and met you , Mr President , you were eager to accept the invitation I extended to you to come to the European Parliament . I recall you telling me that you had a few ideas on the future of Europe that you wanted to share with us .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the speech you have just given .
Mr President , your speech was that of a great European and visionary , and we have a cruel shortage of visionaries .
( Applause ) Mr President , I am sure you have noticed to what extent the convictions you expressed are in line with those of the vast majority of the Members of the European Parliament .
You have , very accurately , in a highly talented way and , once again , with vision , sketched the outlines of the European Constitution to which we all aspire .
You have laid great stress on democratic legitimacy .
You have also sketched the outlines of this Federation of Nation States with infinite courage and conviction .
This morning you have made a substantial contribution to this debate .
Once again , Mr President , I thank you from the bottom of my heart .
( Applause )
( The formal sitting was adjourned at 12.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
The President wishes to communicate that the Bureau has a comment . The Spanish version of the Folias resolution on granting discharge for the other institutions has not been corrected , as was requested during voting time .
The services will therefore now correct the text of paragraph 19 of the resolution to bring it into line with the original Greek text .
( The Minutes were approved )
Animal feedingstuffs / Vegetable proteins
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0079 / 2001 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 79 / 373 / EEC on the circulation of compound feedingstuffs and repealing Commission Directive 91 / 357 / EEC [ 13292 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0002 / 2001 - 2000 / 0015 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf ) and
Commission statement on incentives for vegetable protein production .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has the floor .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , this is a lesson in political evolution .
An open declaration - I do not need to go into the details - means in the eyes of Parliament that the contents of the declaration must be laid out clearly and unambiguously on the table , so to speak .
In 1979 it was turned into a disguised declaration and , since that time , the argument has run and run .
It is running in Member States and has long been running here in Parliament and in the Commission .
Right up to the time the Commission presented its proposal , the Commission services tried to make it clear to us that this was an open declaration . This assessment was finally reaffirmed in its own proposal .
Parliament then approved this fine proposal after making a few improvements , calling for a positive list for example .
Then it went to the Council , where a bit of wheeling and dealing went on , which resulted in a half-open declaration .
That was only to be expected from the Council .
What disappointed us was the fact that the Commission adapted its proposal , which was reasonable and urgently called for an open declaration , to suit the Council .
In the meantime , I had been in contact with all the associations which were involved in this area : the cooperatives , especially the Association of the Compound Feedingstuffs Industry and the Rural Credit Association of Germany .
All of them tried their hardest to explain that this open declaration would not in fact be permissible or implementable .
This continued in the Council when the associations were unsuccessful in Parliament .
The Council and , as has already been said , the Commission reacted to this .
Now we have a situation where we have a disguised half-open declaration .
Interestingly , the then Federal Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany worked on this .
He did not , however , issue a protocol stating that he , in fact , wanted the open declaration .
When the BSE crisis hit , this Minister wrote to me saying that , as rapporteur and chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I should make sure the open declaration was implemented with no ifs or buts .
And that was the very Minister who had been in favour of the half-open declaration .
A real lesson in political culture .
Now we are faced with a different situation in Member States , especially in Germany , and once again we have a wave of excitement over BSE .
Now , all those who before had their foot on the brakes are coming and telling us to implement the open declaration .
This is now our task .
My suggestion is that we stick with the original Commission proposal and our amendments .
We , in this Parliament , will implement the open declaration .
We will enter into negotiations with the Council and , if necessary , we will frustrate them in Parliament and put the blame on the Council if political groups do not get what they want .
Commissioners - those of you who are involved in this - I guess you will just have to get used to the fact that this Parliament will endorse my recommendation .
I hope we have you on our side and that , in your role as mediator , which you have to assume , you will support our position in the negotiations which must get under way with the Council , as we are now at the codecision procedure stage .
We are on the right track .
We want the open declaration with no ifs or buts and we also want the positive list .
Mr Byrne , in our proposal for an amendment , we are giving the Commission a goal to aim for .
Not immediately , we know this is not possible , but by the end of the year , we want at least a Commission proposal which will signal to us what direction it could go in .
You see , we are prepared to make compromises here too .
Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to go into what Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has just said as David Byrne will make a statement on this at the end of the debate .
I would like to clarify the issue of so-called protein deficits .
On 4 December last year , the Commission was invited by the Agriculture Council to analyse the situation of the market for protein-rich plants and to draw the appropriate conclusions from this analysis .
At the time the invitation was extended , it was made clear that all Commission proposals had to move within the framework of the financial forecast agreed in Berlin .
A few days later , the European Council in Nice defined the Commission obligation more precisely and called for a detailed analysis of supply and demand for oleaginous and protein crops to be carried out under strict compliance with the financial parameters agreed in Berlin .
The Commission was happy to accept this invitation . It made a detailed investigation of the issues that had been raised and summarised its findings in a working document and in a Council communication to Parliament .
What were these findings ?
In 2000 , approximately 3 million tonnes of animal meal were produced in the European Union .
Some 2 million tonnes were exported to third countries and a further half a million tonnes were used in the production of pet food .
The remaining 2 million tonnes or so were used as pig swill and poultry feed .
With the Council Decision of 4 December last year , the use of such feedingstuffs and such animal protein was banned for all agricultural livestock .
As you know , until then they had only been banned for ruminants .
The key issue here is to determine whether replacing the shortfall in animal meal by vegetable crops is a problem and , if not , how this should best be brought about .
To be able to assess the changed demand for feedingstuffs we must first take a look at the development of meat consumption and meat production .
The analysis contained in the working document is based on the assumption that the per-capita consumption of beef in the wake of the BSE crisis of 1996 will start to recover in the coming three to five years .
This should mean an increase in both the consumption and production of pork and poultry meat .
There are also two factors which determine the demand for feedingstuffs in pig and poultry production , firstly , the lack of animal meal and , secondly , the expected rise in production .
To replace animal meal in feedingstuffs for pigs and poultry , primary consideration will be given to soya meal , then rapeseed and sunflower meal , peas , beans and sweet lupins . Cereals are also taken into account even though the protein content of cereals is relatively low .
In practice the composition of feedingstuffs will be determined by the price and availability of raw materials and technical constraints .
The combined effect of all these variables is difficult to predict and it is even more difficult to isolate the changes brought about by the ban from normal market adjustments or the consequences of political measures .
The current price ratio between cereals and soya will trigger three main reactions in the feedingstuffs industry and among farmers .
Firstly , as prices for oilseed meal are relatively high in comparison with cereals , the proportion of protein-rich feedingstuff ingredients will be reduced to the physiologically requisite minimum .
As a result , in comparison with previous years , especially 1998 and 1999 when soya prices were extremely low , the total quantity of raw protein in animal feed has fallen .
Secondly , the proportion of cereals in animal feed should increase .
Cereals are admittedly suppliers of energy rather than protein , but with an average protein content of 10 % to 12 % , the 5 million extra tonnes of cereals which will be fed to animals this year will supply half a million tonnes of raw protein .
Thirdly , the remaining gaps will be filled by additional imports of soya meal .
In view of the slight drop in the total quantity used and the additional quantity resulting from cereals , there is expected to be a soya requirement in the order of one to one and a half million tonnes .
What options have we examined to close these expected gaps ?
Firstly , we have looked into the possibility of increasing the aid quotient to EUR 74 per tonne , rather then keeping it at the same level as cereals , namely at a level of EUR 63 per tonne , as was decided in Agenda 2000 .
The disadvantage of this option is that it would re-introduce crop-specific aid for oilseeds and production would be subject to the upper ceiling set out in the Blair House agreement .
Furthermore , if this option were chosen , around EUR 1 270 per tonne of soya meal equivalent more would have to be spent on additional subsidies , which is 6 times more in additional subsidies than soya currently costs .
The budget costs for this option would amount to some EUR 475 million a year .
The second option we have examined is to increase the aid quotient for peas , beans and sweet lupins by EUR 6 .
We opted for EUR 6 because such an increase would be covered by the peace clause in the WTO .
Simulations have shown that , with the current price ratio between protein crops and cereals , this increase would only lead to a very small increase in cultivated areas . This would lead to extra expenditure , which would be higher than the price of any additionally imported soya , since the entire crop has to be paid for out of this increased subsidy .
Thirdly , we have assessed the consequences the planting of protein-rich crops would have on set-aside land .
If crops are sown on set-aside land which are then in competition on the market with cereals and oilseeds , this would result in the blue-box eligibility of land premiums in cereal production being called into question , quite apart from the fact that such a step would trigger severe international criticism .
Finally , we have examined the possibility of increasing the guaranteed maximum quantity for green meal and dried feedingstuffs together with a reduction in per-tonne guaranteed aid .
As you all know , dried feedingstuffs are primarily used for ruminants and not for pigs and poultry , and our problem is primarily the keeping of pigs and poultry .
Furthermore , it is doubtful whether increasing the guaranteed maximum quantity by 10 % would in fact lead to an increase in produced quantities , if we already have an estimated dried feedingstuffs surplus of 12 % in the 2000 / 2001 financial year .
The increase in guaranteed maximum quantities would most likely be used to cover existing surpluses .
Against this backdrop , from an economic standpoint , there are no convincing reasons for introducing new support measures for protein production or for extending the scope of existing support measures .
The availability of soya meal on the world market is not a problem . Quite the opposite , the extra quantities needed will increase current imports by just 3 % to 5 % .
The expansion of soya production in South America and the USA will bring more soya meal onto the market than the European Union can use .
What is more , the current budgetary plan does not allow for any leeway to implement the options we have assessed .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , regarding protein deficits Commissioner Fischler mentioned a few options which are available in the European Union .
But , Commissioner , I think , and I am sure you know , that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development wanted to give a clear signal with the Auroi report that promoting the planting of protein crops on set-aside lands would be given more support .
I am convinced that Parliament will take this line .
Back , however , to the first issue .
The chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Herr Graefe zu Baringdorf , said that how the production of mixed feedingstuffs had evolved over the years had been an eye-opener .
How different positions have been put forward at different times here in Parliament has also been an eye-opener .
The path has not always been smooth , it has had its rough edges and there has been a lot of to-ing and fro-ing .
I think , however , we are now on the right path towards showing even greater transparency and not only promoting it but implementing it as well .
There have been hostilities and demands from industry against which Parliament and representatives in Parliament , with a clear majority , have always stood their ground .
From the outset , Parliament has followed a clear line for more transparency .
Cards are being shuffled in the production of compound feedingstuffs and wherever cards are shuffled we need to be especially careful about whether we are actually dealing with a game of cards or the production of feedingstuffs .
We have been careful to implement transparency more visibly than in the past , which is only right and proper .
You are smiling , Commissioner Fischler . Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf talked about a half-open declaration , which has been something special in recent years .
I would like to say that it would have been more correct not to talk of a disguised but a half-disguised declaration .
That may have brought about more movement in the direction we now want to go in .
Transparency and the positive list are necessary and would be a further improvement to the Commission proposal .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take an example from another area of the food industry , and that is the purity regulations for beer .
The purity regulations were introduced and became law in Bavaria in 1516 , which was right and proper .
A positive list was introduced then and a positive list should be introduced now .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , in its common position , the Council did not adopt a complete and open statement but simply a meagre compromise which merely calls for a declaration according to brackets of percentages by weight .
This does not tally with the notion of comprehensive transparency in the production of feedingstuffs , which we have called for on numerous occasions .
Farmers do not yet know what and how many primary products are contained in feedingstuffs .
That is why the Group of the Party of European Socialists supports the recommendation of the rapporteur , who systematically integrated the open declaration of feed materials in the text of the draft directive .
He also repeated the demand for a legally binding positive list of permissible feed materials for feedingstuffs .
The Commission has been requested to put forward a legislative proposal by the end of 2001 .
This too has our full support .
Surely it cannot be so very difficult to draw up a list of permissible feed materials for feedingstuffs .
At least we know what the various feedingstuffs should as a rule contain , or perhaps , after what has been said , we do not .
The eight months proposed by the rapporteur seem to me to be a reasonable and adequate time within which to draw up such a list .
This list is urgent , since we cannot do without industrially produced feedingstuffs in the future .
Just like people , animals need balanced nutrition .
If they are only fed water , hay and cereals , which was called for in the past , this would not satisfy current conditions for agricultural production and is , in my opinion , a far cry from reality .
Given that feedingstuffs are the most important part of meat production we must ensure that these feedingstuffs are safe .
How else can we restore consumer confidence in meat .
All in all , the Council would be well advised to accept Parliament ' s proposals without amending them and to demonstrate that it has learnt from past mistakes .
We cannot wait until it is too late and then tinker about with the symptoms .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the general debate I often hear that it was the farmers who fed their cows other , dead cows .
It was unfortunate that they did that but , at that time and with the system we have in place , farmers were in no position to know exactly what they were giving their animals .
Now that we are discussing the food and feedingstuffs chain , we must ensure that the whole chain , from A to Z , is imbued with a number of concepts - transparency , information and public access to documents .
We have inherited a chain with many links and with large gaps between each link and the next .
That also applies to feedingstuffs .
Whether their farms be large or small , ordinary farmers buying feedingstuffs cannot at present be reasonably expected to know what these contain .
They have no laboratories available to them and , given the way feedingstuffs look nowadays , they can glean no information about the content from either the appearance , smell or taste .
Farmers therefore need significantly more transparency and significantly more precise information .
I think that this proposal is too complicated and that , in the long term , we ought to be able to find common principles for food and feedingstuffs which are somewhat simpler and somewhat more comprehensible both to the farmer and the final consumer of the food , for example a declaration of contents in descending order of volume and precise information upon request .
As the situation at present stands and in view of the fact that we are now at the beginning of this food safety process , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party will nonetheless be voting in favour of this report .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf and also express the support of my whole Group for his proposals .
Commissioner , we think that , although recently timid proposals have been made regarding the possibility of developing vegetable proteins , the Commission tends to insist that this is problematic on the basis of two arguments : the cost and agreements with the United States .
It is worth pointing out the close links between cereals and protein crops .
The budgetary impact of protein crops is derisory in comparison with that of cereals and , although the United States set out requirements for protein crops , this was in exchange for accepting the high level of support for export refunds on Community cereals .
That is to say , protein crops also suffer from the consequences of balances of the CAP , and their cultivation could develop more if support for respective production was balanced out .
Also , there should be due evaluation of the benefits of pulses for biological diversity and reducing the use of nitrogenous fertilisers , and their positive effects on soil preservation .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , there are important reasons that we need to take into account : we are currently dependent on imports for 75 % of our vegetable protein needs .
This is an unacceptable strategic weakness and means that we must accept genetically modified organisms in our food .
Ladies and gentlemen , we think that the Commission should begin the work of revising the Blair House agreements .
Mr President , I will say immediately that the Commission 's position is unacceptable , from the point of view both of protecting farmers ' incomes and of protecting consumers ' health .
Clearly there is no wish to call into question the Blair House agreements , which reduce the amount of Community land available .
We are in an odd situation , on the one hand , the ban on the use of animal meal to feed production animals too has increased the requirement for plant protein ; on the other hand , as of the next growing year , there is to be a sharp reduction in the amount of protein crops being grown .
We feel that these crop productions must be guaranteed to protect the farmers and oilseed producers .
The Commission needs to present a comprehensive report on the effect of the Agenda 2000 decisions on the management of the land dedicated to oilseed crops in the different production areas of the Community , and a proposal regulating the labelling of feedingstuffs containing GMOs .
We feel that sufficient incentives must be provided for the production of plant proteins in the interests of the environment , of the meat consumer , who has to be able to trust the Community production chain , and of the oilseed production chain , which has made specialised investments and which is in danger of a sharp fall in employment .
It is worrying that the Commission says it considers that it makes more economic sense to increase imports of soya meal .
In this case , the economy is in open conflict with the interests of the Community agricultural sector and , in particular , with safeguarding the health and confidence of the citizen , which is not economically quantifiable .
Yesterday , Parliament adopted an amendment which reads : " Health should not be considered as a commodity , which can be the subject of political or financial compromises " .
Today , the Commission has told us that this is not so .
Mr President , Commissioners , the European Parliament this week is not a million miles removed from the government of Rameses II , the pharaoh who , in antiquity , refused to let the Jewish people leave Egypt .
I can imagine that , in the cabinet of that pharaoh , the plagues affecting the country were discussed on a daily basis , much like here in Strasbourg this week , where first foot-and-mouth disease was discussed , and now the effects of BSE are on this morning ' s agenda .
Of course , Europe is not holding a people against its will , but we cannot simply skim over the plagues which are hitting our agriculture .
We need to take stock of our agricultural policy and reconsider the standards on which the policy is based .
I have stated in the foot-and-mouth debate that animals , as God ' s creatures , are more than production units .
I repeat this statement in the light of the fact that we have fed herbivores , in other words plant eaters , their own species .
We have turned them into cannibals .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf was right to comment in his report that farmers are entitled to accurate information on the ingredients in cattle feed .
The Council wants to leave the labelling to the feedingstuffs industry .
Meanwhile , he suggests that farmers , upon request , are entitled to comprehensive information from the industry .
That is completely ambiguous , if the farmer is entitled to comprehensive feedingstuffs information , it is only logical that this information should reach him without any obstacles .
' From stable to table ' is translated freely into Dutch as ' from farmer to plate ' .
In that translation , the liability for the food process is emphatically placed with the farmer .
In order to be able to bear that liability , the farmer must be able to avail himself - without any beating about the bush - of information on the cattle feed which he feeds his animals .
The ban on the use of meat meal in cattle feed , which has been in place since December 2000 , leads to a shortage in the protein supply in cattle feed .
Alternatives for animal protein include soybean and other oilseed crops rich in protein .
In the findings of research into alternatives , which Commissioner Fischler outlined here this morning , the recommendation is made that soybean should be imported from the global market .
Other alternatives are being described as too expensive and leading to distortion .
A real problem with the import of soybean is the fact that we have no insight into the production method .
I very much doubt whether we are really better off if we feed our animals genetically modified soybean instead of meat meal .
The BSE crisis poses new dilemmas .
The excuse that the European Union should not extend its acreage of oilseed crops due to WTO agreements is untenable .
All the more reason for abandoning these WTO rules .
I regret the ease with which the Commission rejects the growing of oilseed and protein-rich crops on fallow agricultural land .
It is clear that the reason for leaving land untilled is in order to reduce the production of cereals , among other things .
Less clear , however , is why the production of protein has to be reduced too in the light of an increase in demand on the European market .
Mr President , the Union ' s vegetable protein deficit has been growing over the years , to reach 35 million tonnes in 2000 .
In the last few months , with the BSE crisis and the ban on animal meal , it has been increasing at 300 000 tonnes a month .
So what does the Commission propose in the face of this ?
It proposes to take no particular initiative but to go to the great world supermarket for agricultural surpluses and buy the proteins we need as cheaply as possible .
Well , I can see at least three reasons for rejecting such a spirit of resignation and surrender .
The first is that it puts food safety at risk .
It is vital to strive for self-sufficiency in such an important product .
The second lies in the environmental advantages of oil- and protein-rich plants : bio-diversity , crop rotation , nitrogen balance .
The third is the need to respond to consumer demand for more traceability and visibility .
And we have the means : support for bio-fuels , the safety net for oil-rich crops , supplementary aid for protein-rich crops , intensification of the public research effort and agri-environmental aid for farms which include leguminous fodder in their rotation .
Mr President , those are the committed and responsible attitudes I would like to see the Commission taking , instead of restricting itself to recommending imports of cracked soya from America or Argentina on very short term commercial grounds .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , European agriculture is in a state of crisis as a result of BSE and foot-and-mouth disease .
That we need measures to overcome this crisis as quickly as possible is nothing new .
Opinion is divided only on the question of which measures to take .
The starting point is the ban on meat and bone meal in feedingstuffs .
This ban is necessary as we have a crisis of confidence on our hands .
Mind you , we are not only dealing with a systemic crisis in the sector but with the need for confidence-building measures in favour of consumers .
The ban on meat and bone meal in feedingstuffs is a measure which will restore consumer confidence .
There must also be a European protein plan to wean Europe off imports from third countries because these imports contain genetically modified soya .
We must find a model which enables European farmers to react to these new requirements .
I also feel this complex problem is connected with the WTO .
The Commission proposal , however , to allow organic farmers only to plant legumes does not go anywhere near far enough .
I therefore support the line taken by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that planting can also be permitted on set-aside land of farmers who adopt environmental measures on the basis of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1257 / 00 .
If we talk of confidence-building measures , then we must stand up for an open declaration and for a positive list of permissible feed materials for feedingstuffs .
I believe that being honest with consumers can get us out of this crisis and take account of the dramatic situation of farmers and the threat to very many livelihoods .
I am also hoping for support from the feedingstuffs industry to make an open declaration of feed materials . If such a statement truly reflects what is in feed materials , surely this cannot be a problem for the industry .
Thank you , Mrs Schierhuber .
I am going to give the floor to Mrs Rodríguez Ramos .
I am glad to see her back here with us and congratulate her on behalf of Parliament on recently becoming a mother .
Mr President , Commissioner , with regard to the communication on vegetable protein production , I join in what has been said by my colleagues in this House .
The Commission ' s study is disappointing , as it is not very ambitious and is based on exclusively economic criteria .
The European Union ' s situation with regard to its deficit of vegetable proteins , due to the Blair House agreements , in which we agreed to a reduction in our vegetable protein production while in the mean time we were feeding our livestock on meat meal from dead animals , required that the Commission take a more ambitious and broader approach to this study .
It does not take into account , as has already been said , the strategic significance for European livestock breeding of being dependent on imports from third countries for the supply of vegetable proteins , and of the fact that those imports consist almost exclusively of genetically modified food .
Nor does it take into account what it would mean to increase these crops that are rich in vegetable proteins in order to re-establish the balance and capacity to supply of the whole of the European Union , which would undoubtedly be very beneficial for achieving more extensive and better quality livestock .
In short , the study does not take into account any of the elements on which our agricultural policy should be based : food quality , protection and development of the environment and sustainable development , because neither is there any element in the study that tells us what an increase in these crops would mean in terms of creating another economic activity in agriculture , and in terms of the farmers themselves using them and processing them into food for their livestock , which would also mean a considerable increase in income in the rural economy .
In any event , what the Commission is telling us about it being better to continue importing and depending on third countries because it is cheaper is not correct .
We have experience of the cheapest thing not being the best thing .
Mr President , members of the Commission , the European Parliament in the second reading is revising its amendment regarding the declaration of the materials in compound feedingstuffs in terms of percentage by weight , while the common position proposes a declaration within certain brackets .
From the point of view of producers , Parliament ' s objective is to be supported .
The more precise information there is on the content of feed the better .
We must remember that this practice of declaration is not in itself important for the security of feedingstuffs .
It is more important that all feed materials in compound feedingstuffs should be named in the declaration and that the feed materials meet with the requirements under the legislation on animal feedingstuffs .
I think we should achieve a rational result quickly , as the new legislation is necessary .
We must therefore move forward flexibly in the legislative conciliation process , bearing in mind that the second stage will be monitoring the legislation .
It will be expensive and in some ways impossible to start asking feedingstuffs manufacturers to ensure that each sack of feed should exactly correspond to the amount written on the declaration regarding percentages or that this should be monitored by the authorities .
The most important aspect of this legislation is that we should invest in monitoring to a greater extent than is the case now .
Safety will only be guaranteed if the acts are complied with .
As for the idea in Amendment No 4 of a positive list , there too it has to be borne in mind that it would be a very arduous task of administration if all feed materials used in EU countries had to be compiled in one list .
There is already a list of prohibited materials in EC legislation and , in addition , there are general quality requirements for feed products .
In my opinion the matter should be discussed , but its benefits and drawbacks must be considered in precise detail .
Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report although I personally find it quite difficult to support in full .
My view is that the common position by the Commission is excellent .
Let me just go back to what Mr Pesälä has just said : what is the real problem facing the food industry today ?
It is usually fraud .
If we look back over the recent food scares , if we look at the problem of foot-and-mouth , it was a misuse of swill feeding ; if we look at the problems of dioxin , there are sufficient measures there to prevent it .
It was the illegal use of an oil in a mixture .
Then there was sewage sludge which we had in one other Member State , and BSE which was all to do with changing temperatures .
But the legislation is present .
The first and primary position of this House is to guarantee that the Commission does everything it possibly can to ensure that the present legislation and the common position are put in place and enforced .
Therefore , I call upon the Commission , first of all , to promise us that the present legislation is enforced .
Turning now to the protein situation , Commissioner Fischler would not be surprised to hear that I would slightly disagree with his position on whether or not we grow our own proteins or import them .
But could he actually give me a guarantee : I understand that the European Union has regulations in place at the moment about the volume of GM crops allowed in and the percentage at present is - and I stand to be corrected on this - about 1 % maximum of GM crops .
Could the Commission now guarantee that none of the soya entering the Union in current and future imports will exceed the 1 % maximum ?
The US has strict measures and regulations on imports .
We in the European Union must follow these regulations and ensure that we follow the same patterns .
. Mr President , Members of Parliament , today we have an opportunity to discuss another important food safety issue which is the labelling of compound feedingstuffs .
I appreciate the work which has been done by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf who is very committed to this issue .
The proposal in question has its origins in the legitimate expectations and demands of both the farming community and consumers .
This includes full transparency in giving livestock farmers details of the composition of compound feedingstuffs that they buy for their animals .
One of the lessons of the dioxin crisis was that there was often a lack of such information .
This is clearly not satisfactory .
This information should be available , not only to ensure transparency but also to assist in the traceability of products .
The labelling of compound feedingstuffs must be sufficiently accurate to allow the stock farmer to make an informed choice as to which feed to use and many of you have already made that point in your contributions .
I am satisfied that this objective is met in the Council 's common position .
While it falls short of the Commission 's original proposal of full and precise listing of the quantities of all ingredients , it nonetheless strikes an acceptable compromise .
In my opinion we have an excellent instrument for improving the existing labelling rules for animal feed .
The common position provides for all ingredients to be precisely named and for the quantities to be expressed in five percentage bands .
It also requires operators to notify the exact composition of the compound feedingstuff on the request of the stock farmer or any operator .
I would also like to remind you that , from the very beginning , there were difficulties in the Council in reaching an agreement .
A majority of Member States were opposed to the obligation to indicate on the label the precise composition of a given compound feedingstuff .
For this reason , the Commission accepted the French presidency 's compromise which had the unanimous support of all the Member States .
I also consider that the common position provides us with a level of safety equivalent to that set out in the Commission 's initial proposal .
The most important fact is the presence of an ingredient in the compound feedingstuff and not necessarily its exact quantity .
These exact quantities have a commercial value but they are not linked to health protection and that is the important issue in this consideration .
I would ask Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf to reconsider seriously what he said earlier in his contribution that if there is not a change in the Council position in relation to this , he will be happy to see his entire proposal fall rather than compromise on this particular issue .
I believe I am correct in saying that the issue of public health and food safety is related to the presence rather than the quantity of what is contained in the compound feedingstuff .
We should focus on that and not lose the benefit of this important piece of legislation .
We risk pursuing a particular point to a degree of accuracy that is unnecessary and thus cutting off one 's nose to spite one 's face .
I am afraid that if the amendments which the Commission cannot accept are adopted , we will embark on a long and difficult conciliation procedure which will postpone the improvement .
I would also underline that the amendments adopted by the European Parliament at first reading have been accepted in the common position except for the proposal that the Commission present a positive list of feed materials that may be used in animal feed .
This is inappropriate in the context of the labelling directive .
If you want a positive list , the first issue to be discussed is how to establish the criteria by which the positive list will be managed .
I therefore intend to launch a feasibility study on the criteria which could be used for managing the positive list and the resources which this would involve .
We can then report back to you , possibly with the proposal for legislation .
I do not expect this to be possible within the timetable mentioned in the amendment .
Unfortunately our resources and other priorities do not allow the Commission to set a more ambitious timetable .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to amend slightly an answer I gave to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf on the question of foot-and-mouth disease the other day and correct the record .
The point he made was that the Commission had delayed in its response to the issues arising from the foot-and-mouth disease issue .
I responded by saying that the Commission had been notified on 20 February of the outbreak in the United Kingdom and that we had put forward proposals to the Commission the following day and that in my view that indicated a prompt rather than a delayed response .
There is one further piece of information that I should have added to this in fairness to the official working in my Directorate-General who by implication was criticised by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
Mr van Goethem was told at 9.30 p.m. on 20 February and by 10.30 p.m. that night he had sent a fax to every single relevant minister in the Member States of the European Union .
I want to add that particular piece of information to the answer I gave the other day which included the fact that , on the following day , the issue was brought before the Commission promptly .
It may be an opportunity for Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf to correct the suggestion he made about the delay , not for my sake but for the sake of the officials who work hard in my Directorate-General and who did an excellent job in this instance .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Your clarification will be noted in the Minutes .
Do you wish to speak again , Mr Fischler ?
Commission . ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am going to make this brief because I said what I had to say at the start of the debate .
I would like to thank you all very much for your committed contributions but I must also remind you that the task the Commission took on was to investigate the impact the ban on bone and animal meal in feedingstuffs would have on supply and demand .
It was not to examine the policy of oilseed production in the European Union .
These are two separate issues .
We must therefore separate the current additional protein deficit from the situation we already had in the Community .
It is a fact that approximately 30 million tonnes of soya and soya equivalents are imported every year .
It is not possible to make up for this deficit , at least using currently available options .
There is one thing we must not forget : soya beans cannot be planted throughout the Community , but only in regions with a favourable climate .
We cannot compensate for this on the basis of a policy of subsidies .
Secondly , I must remind you that the implementation of this policy is subject to the precondition that no distinction is made between promoting protein crops , cereals or other crops .
This is simply not possible , unless we offer appropriate compensation .
But what argument can we use to persuade the Americans to renounce the Blair House agreement if we have nothing to offer in return ?
Please tell me what we can offer to make the Americans agree to our introducing a specific subsidy for protein crops to enable us to produce more proteins .
This brings me back to the current protein deficit .
The Commission is criticised for looking at things purely from an economic angle .
I must ask Parliament whether it is justifiable to pay six times as much in additional subsidies for a kilo of extra soya production than a kilo of soya would cost on the market .
There is no way round this issue , as we also have a responsibility to the taxpayer .
By way of conclusion , I would like to point out that the comments I have made here have nothing to do with the report we discussed yesterday evening .
Naturally , the Commission will continue to ensure that organic farmers will still be able to plant clover and clover grass and other protein crops on their set-aside land as we proposed .
I only mentioned that this morning because clover and clover grass have only been introduced to a limited extent in pigswill and poultry feed and are used primarily in feedingstuffs for ruminants .
. ( DE ) Mr President , I could refer to Article 122 but I would rather save time .
Mr Byrne , thank you for your comment and your answer .
Once again let me make myself clear .
It was not my intention to criticise you personally or Mr van Goethem , whom I respect for his good work .
What is at issue is whether the Commission worked out a disease plan in consultation with the Member States which made clear what had to happen if the disease broke out .
My view is that not enough preparation was made .
My comment was not aimed at individuals but rather at the Commission , as an institution , and at the Council , which did not do any preparatory work at all . This mess , which we had to go through in the public gaze , was scandalous .
My criticism was also levelled at the culling strategy , which had not been properly thought out , and the fact that vaccination and vaccination plus assessment had not been incorporated into the strategy . This has now been conceded by the Commission , which is a step in the right direction .
Commissioner Fischler , I would like to put another question to you . Assuming , hypothetically speaking , that we did not have this agreement with the Americans and that you were to calculate the cost of planting beans , peas , lupins and so on on set-aside land , would the economic calculation be entirely different ?
Am I right in thinking that it would ?
Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , I do not want to prolong the discussion . I would simply like to make the following point clear .
If we are dealing exclusively with planting protein crops on set-aside land , then I have to point out that this is not covered by the Blair House agreement but comes under the WTO provisions . Accordingly , for a measure to come under the blue box arrangement , appropriate supply reduction measures would have to be adopted .
Our supply reduction measure is set aside .
So it has nothing to do with the Blair House agreement .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Deadlock in negotiations on the EU / Morocco Fisheries Agreement
The next item is the Commission statement on the deadlock in negotiations on the fishing agreement between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco .
Mr Fischler has the floor .
Commission . ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the issue of the Morocco Fisheries Agreement , I have been very committed from the outset , that is , since I assumed responsibility for the fisheries sector .
Before the previous agreement came to an end , I made contact with Morocco with a view to concluding a new fisheries agreement .
However , that was roundly rejected by Morocco for many months . Concrete talks of a new agreement only became possible following a meeting with King Mohammed VI in Casablanca in October last year .
Since then , seven political rounds of talks and thirteen technical rounds of talks have taken place .
From the very beginning , the European Union was at pains to show the greatest possible flexibility so as to comply with Moroccan wishes and interests .
Following my visit to Rabat in February this year , I had to conclude that the gulf between the two positions could not be bridged , in particular , because of the compensation demands by Morocco for the catch facilities that were being offered .
As regards fishing facilities , especially under the technical framework conditions of the fisheries sector , in other words , in which zones , at what times , and in what vessels , fishing could take place in Morocco , there were , in some cases , major differences of opinion .
Following my return in February , I immediately apprised the Council of the situation so as to sound out alternatives with the Fisheries Ministers .
The Council requested me to make a final attempt to reach an agreement on the basis of the existing negotiation mandate .
On that basis , on 26 March , I met Minister Chbaatou in Brussels .
Unfortunately , however , this meeting too was a total failure .
During the course of the negotiations , the Commission put forward a number of proposals to promote the development of the Moroccan fisheries sector , for example , to provide resources to develop the port infrastructure and services sector in Morocco , to promote and develop coastal fisheries , to promote training and research and to develop aquaculture .
We would have accepted very extensive landing obligations in Moroccan ports , which would have meant a radical change in the traditional fishing activities of many Spanish and Portuguese fishermen , but would also have contributed to the development of the Moroccan sector .
Moreover , we agreed to increase the proportion of Moroccan crewmembers on board vessels so as to improve the employment situation and the level of training in the Moroccan fishing sector .
In addition , we would have accepted further extensive reductions in catches in order to maintain resources in Moroccan waters .
For example , in the first year we would have accepted a drastic reduction in the presence of the European Union in Moroccan waters compared with under the previous agreement . The following two years would have seen a phasing out of cephalopod and shrimp fishing .
We would also have accepted new technical conditions which would have been less advantageous for the Community fleet and would have reduced fishing costs .
Despite this raft of concessions and despite the progress the Moroccan side has made following the negotiations , the following basic differences of opinion remain .
Firstly , the fishing conditions proposed by Morocco would have meant that the economic benefit for our fishermen would have been lost as we would have had to fish with considerably fewer ships in fewer fishing zones , and we would have had to accept longer periods in which fishing was banned .
Secondly , the European Union is of the view that financial compensation must be reasonably proportionate to the offered catch facilities .
Not only is this our general political guideline , it is also stated in the negotiation mandate of October 1999 .
In any case , we evaluated the financial part not only in purely economic terms ; we also took political considerations into account , such as the need to have good political relations with Morocco .
In return for our proposal for a fisheries agreement we offered Morocco compensation of EUR 70 million for the first year , 60 million for the second year and 40 million for the third year .
This offer was very advantageous to Morocco for a number of reasons . Firstly , we calculated our financial compensation package on the basis of the fishing facilities in the final year of the previous agreement and not on the basis of the average of the last agreement .
That alone means a price advantage of 15 % for Morocco .
Secondly , in our calculation we made no distinction between types of fish , even though we would have accepted greater reductions in the case of more expensive and , for the European Union , more interesting types of fish such as cephalopods and shrimp .
This also gives a price advantage for Morocco .
Thirdly , we did not take the landing obligations in Morocco into account in our calculation .
Fourthly , in the end I increased the compensation resulting from the calculation by 20 % in order to demonstrate that we understood Morocco ' s concerns about the development of its own sector .
On top of all that , at the last meeting with the Moroccan Fisheries Minister , Mr Chbaatou , I once again made it clear that our offer , which I have described above , was a more than fair price for the catch facility . I also told him that we were once again prepared to fork out EUR 5 million a year to prove our good intention for the conclusion of an agreement .
However , the Moroccan Minister stressed that Morocco had no room for manoeuvre .
Given the stance taken by Morocco , I do not see any possibility of concluding an agreement on the basis of our mandate .
That is the message I will be taking to the Fisheries Council on 25 April .
But the question of what will happen to the affected ship owners and fishermen , who have now been condemned to idleness for more than a year , is becoming increasingly pressing .
As you know , since 1 December 1999 , we have made compensation payments to ship owners and fishermen out of the Fisheries Fund .
We have made all our preparations in line with the conclusions of the Nice Summit .
There is currently a Commission proposal with Parliament and also with the Council , whereby compensation payments will be extended to 30 June of this year .
We have also proposed leaving the 4 % limit out of consideration for compensation payments .
We estimate that , so far , a total of approximately EUR 80 million have been paid out to affected fishermen and ship owners , 20 million of which were raised by the Member States themselves .
This equates to a Community share of EUR 60 million , some 51 million of which have gone to Spain and 9 million to Portugal .
One thing is clear , however , additional measures and funds are necessary to secure the future of the Spanish and Portuguese fishing sectors .
In my view , we must act in three key areas .
Firstly , we should try to find alternative fishing facilities in other third countries , at least to a certain extent .
Secondly , we must help to develop alternative employment opportunities for the affected populations , perhaps in aquaculture , or in tourism , or in the service sector , or wherever an opportunity arises .
Thirdly , as we do in other cases , we must also support the breaking up of vessels for which no alternative use can be found .
To this end we will exploit all the room for negotiation at the disposal of the Commission .
However , we will have to approach the budgetary authority in this connection regarding the 2002 budget .
The next step must be for us to report back to the Fisheries Council .
Finally , I would like to stress that I very much regret the unbending stance adopted by Morocco , which has made an agreement which is advantageous to both sides impossible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Fischler , we know that you have done everything you can .
Others left you a veritable time bomb preventing you from reaching another agreement : the promise and the agreement in the previous one not to renew it .
We all knew that it was difficult for you .
Even so , after seventeen months , thirteen technical meetings , your personal involvement on seven occasions and that of the President of the Commission himself on one occasion , which is unprecedented , Morocco was persuaded to sit down and negotiate .
It was little more than that , however .
Morocco never wanted the agreement and showed it by imposing its intransigence and its unfair and unacceptable conditions , which the sector itself rejected as uneconomical and impossible to take on .
We always said that we would prefer no agreement to a bad agreement ; and this is what Morocco is proposing , despite the generous , reasonable offers from the European Union , which are beneficial to both parties .
Morocco is within its rights but , having got to this point , should we carry on ?
I think that if Morocco wants an agreement with the European Union , it knows perfectly well what it has to offer .
However , if it has not been reached in seventeen months , I think it unlikely that it will be reached now .
Therefore , Mr Fischler , you should take note of this and inform the College of Commissioners of Morocco ' s intransigence in co-operating with the European Union .
We will be watching the development of bilateral relations between the European Union and Morocco very carefully , both in political terms , as you mentioned , and in economic , financial and trade terms .
Why is Morocco rejecting more than EUR 200 million in three years , investment from European ship owners , the possible creation of joint ventures to develop its sector , the wealth that the catches could generate in its ports ?
Why is it rejecting a gradual reduction of the European fleet over three years , while in private it authorises private Asian companies to use its fishing grounds ?
This is quite legitimate , but can the European Union not guarantee better than anyone that its resources will be rationally preserved and fished responsibly ?
Who in Morocco is really going to benefit from the lack of an agreement ?
These are the key points .
I stress , Mr Fischler , that you should take careful note of all this but , following this upset with Morocco , I think that we must look to the future .
The situation is of course difficult , serious , and unprecedented .
It is not impossible to solve , however .
I therefore ask everyone for generosity and solidarity , employers and fishermen , unions and political parties .
And we need to ask the European Union to make a special effort .
The Nice European Council , incidentally at the request of the Spanish Government and José María Aznar , agreed - another unprecedented thing - to support the demands and , if they failed , the negotiations and , if these did not succeed either , asked the Commission for a specific action programme , as set out in No 59 of the Nice conclusions .
I ask you , Mr Fischler , for your commitment and understanding .
Fishing in the European Union asks for it now more than ever .
I ask for your personal political commitment to get involved in the pending fishing negotiations with third countries , Senegal and Mauritania first of all , and to open up new negotiations and explore new fishing grounds .
This is the future for redeploying the fleet , which is the priority aim ; and at the same time , with the funds not used for Morocco , I ask you to support a broad social programme for fishermen and for the most affected areas , with alternative economic projects to restart their economies .
Your experience with the CAP should be useful to us so that , for the first time , programmes of this type can be adopted in fisheries .
I will conclude by saying that Morocco dealt a hard blow to the European fisheries sector and therefore to the European Union .
Now , however , we have to adopt a realistic , constructive and responsible attitude .
It has the support of Parliament , which will actively defend the sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think that the time bomb is the one that we have here , now , as we are talking about an unprecedented failure of negotiations , which is not your failure , Mr Fischler , but that of many people , which leaves 4 400 Community fishermen and 415 vessels unemployed .
Those affected in my country feel that they have been deceived by their political leaders , who have always denied the problems in the negotiations , and the fact that there were deadlines for concluding them .
This is not the case for you , Mr Fischler .
How are they are going to believe in relocation to other fishing grounds if we all know that increasing the fishing effort would put resources at risk or would make the activity unprofitable ?
Why did the negotiations fail ?
Despite your efforts as Commissioner , which I recognise , a common strategy was lacking , not on your part , but on the part of the Commission , and above all , the Council .
You reminded me of the responsibility of ministers , whom you said were informed at all times and had taken part in the most recent rounds of negotiations .
Although the formal responsibility for negotiating lies with the Commission , the governments can and should prepare the way for agreement .
You said that what the European Union was offering was not bad ; the attitude of the Moroccan Government was not that of a loyal partner .
We think , however , that the framework for negotiation was the association agreement with Morocco .
Maybe eleven months ago it was not right to mix fisheries and agriculture , but we have to remember that Morocco is still benefiting from agricultural concessions obtained in parallel with the fishery negotiations in 1992 and 1995 , and that the European Union is the main importer of Moroccan fisheries , agricultural and industrial products .
You said to me at the time that no good would come of such a mix and that it was better to trust our partners .
We have trusted them and we have seen that on the same day that the negotiations broke down , Morocco was signing a fishing co-operation agreement with Japan , and while it was giving us the reasons of preserving resources , it was granting licences to Community and other vessels and fleets .
The sector and the public want to know what measures the Commission is going to take following the collapse of these negotiations .
In your speech you talked again about another mandate .
Is another mandate possible ?
Do you think that we would change anything with another mandate ?
Do you think that the negotiations have finished for good , or is it possible to restart them with a new mandate ?
Mr President , today more than ever , I wish to speak on behalf of the fishermen and ship owners of Andalusia , the Canary Islands , Galicia , Barbanza , Morrazo , of La Guardia , and of the people of Spain and Portugal who need and who continue to call for a fisheries agreement to be signed between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco .
They are calling for fair agreements which will be of mutual benefit , in line with the whole range of economic , social , political and human relations established in 1995 , defining the neighbourly relationship between our countries and the Maghreb State .
They are calling for an agreement on appropriate terms , which has been repeatedly approved by this Parliament and they do not accept the negotiations undertaken without faith or conviction by the Commission over the last 16 months to be valid or fitting . Nor do they accept the failure that has been announced .
For the same reason , I cannot accept the dismantling of the European fleet in Canary-Saharan waters and nor is it feasible to relocate or transfer them safely to other fishing banks where , furthermore , it would compete with other European boats .
Nor can we leave 4400 fishermen redundant and the coastal communities that live mainly from fishing are not in a position to find new ways of earning a living overnight .
We must not accept that their future lies in early retirement for the older people or in emigration for the younger ones .
The communities I represent demand that the Commission returns to the negotiating table to conclude the fishing agreement with Morocco .
They demand that the Member States , specifically the Spanish Government , abandon their passive or complicit attitude and bring into play the political and economic resources necessary to conclude new negotiations .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we are facing a European problem that is affecting European citizens and which is undermining the very credibility of the Union ' s institutions and their ability to address a critical aspect of international relations for which they have responsibility , such as fisheries .
There is no reason to consider the agreement to be in conflict with preserving Morocco ' s fish stocks . I am convinced that this will benefit the collective interests of the Moroccan people .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , my group would like to thank you for all the efforts that you have made in these negotiations , even more so when we think that what was lacking was not a fishery negotiation strategy , but an overall strategy .
In 1995 my group maintained that the fisheries agreement with Morocco should be included as part of the text of the European association agreement with Morocco .
The reason was obvious : between partners facilities need to be established in both directions .
Morocco needs access to the Community market , and the Community fisheries sector needs access to fishing grounds that it has traditionally worked in .
Morocco ' s reasons cannot be found in preservation of resources .
Due to a lack of time , I am not going to give examples .
The association agreement took an unambiguous stand on Community concessions to Morocco and today we find ourselves without a fisheries agreement .
The consequences of the lack of an agreement are the loss of 4 000 direct jobs and 20 000 on land .
There may be a solution in seeking other fishing grounds for part of the fleet , but it is very difficult for the small-scale and inshore fleets .
If Morocco is intending to act as a partner , it should open up its waters to the Community small-scale fleet immediately .
Commissioner , among your measures , you yourself talked about increasing the European Union ' s room for manoeuvre .
Soon the association agreement will have to be revised and Morocco will surely once again make demands for trade concessions that will even affect the same Community regions that are currently being seriously affected by the lack of a fisheries agreement .
Commissioner , I hope that the European Union finds this room for manoeuvre when the time comes to revise the association agreement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as you know , this matter is of particular concern to Portugal and to Portuguese fishermen , particularly in the Sesimbra and Algarve regions .
We have been , to a certain extent , surprised , after the last debate that we held in this House , in which we were informed that an agreement was possible , at the sudden news that the whole thing has collapsed .
I understand the complexity of the problem and I am shocked at the intransigence of Morocco ' s position .
Nevertheless , I wish to ask the following questions : with regard to the difference in financial compensation between the European Union ' s proposal and Morocco ' s and according to the information I have , it has been more than compensated for by the sum of Community aid allocated to Morocco under various headings and also by the trade compensations or advantages it has gained under other agreements .
The question is whether the Commission is able to produce an overall strategy with Morocco .
I understand a country deciding to sell its resources to the highest bidder - it has political freedom to do so - but I also consider that any country that does so will have less need for international cooperation aid .
I should also like to remind you , on this subject , of what the resolution adopted in this Parliament in 1999 said : ever-closer cooperation between the European Union and Morocco cannot exclude existing relations in the field of fisheries , I should also like to know what support measures for converting the fishing fleet are being put in place .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are three observations we can make about these negotiations , which have ended in failure : the first concerns Morocco ' s great unwillingness to show flexibility in their negotiations .
I understand Morocco ' s wishing to place a high value on its fish stocks but the lives of communities and of their economic relationships are founded on compromise .
The European Union has made concessions to Morocco , by opening up its markets to many of that country ' s products , including agricultural produce , and by opening up its doors to several million Moroccan citizens who have adopted the European Union as their homeland .
This is why it is so difficult to understand this absence of any reciprocal attitude on the part of Morocco .
I hope that the European Union will draw conclusions from this episode , both for its future cooperation with Morocco and for its own common fisheries policy .
My second observation is that the effort made by the Commission and especially by Commissioner Fischler , have stood in stark contrast with the passive approach of the Council and of the various presidencies of the European Union , including that of my own country .
Can this be because the agreement directly served the interests of only two countries ?
Or can it be that the governments of those two countries were not sufficiently forceful to protect their own interests ?
These are questions that require answers .
My third observation is that we need to lay the ground for the future , but this cannot be done with financial compensation alone , when fisherman are standing idle and when we are compensated for ships to be scrapped .
The failure of these negotiations must give the European Union food for thought with regard to the future of its common fisheries policy .
I see three main routes here .
Firstly there is the need to create new political and financial instruments for facilitating new methods of cooperation and business partnership with countries that are rich in fishing resources .
Secondly , the next agreements with third countries must demonstrate serious political commitment .
Thirdly , there is a need for a genuine revolution in the management of fish stocks .
Lastly , Morocco ' s refusal is a mystery to me .
Is it possible to find out the real reasons for this refusal ?
If we can discover the reasons , why can we then not consider a possible new negotiating mandate ?
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , we are neither in a North African bazaar nor in a European marketplace .
We are in a political assembly .
We are not market traders ; we are politicians .
This is the viewpoint we should adopt when considering the failure of this agreement with Morocco .
It seems that Morocco has behaved arrogantly towards Europe and the Union must really not forget this .
I personally shall not .
It is also worth asking , however , and in fact it has been asked , whether the Council may have adopted a somewhat aloof or passive attitude .
This question remains to be answered .
We might also ask whether the fact that this issue only affects two of the Union ' s countries may have had some influence .
This is undoubtedly true , and the Union has lost credibility in the eyes of the Portuguese people - and of the Spanish people too , I presume - and this is the main political concern that I wish to highlight .
Mr President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance regrets the fact that an agreement could not be reached .
Our position has always been that we hoped an agreement would be reached , but with one extremely important proviso , namely that the agreement had to be mutually acceptable and beneficial to both sides .
It turns out that such an agreement is not possible .
That is unfortunate , but we must respect the right of Morocco to determine how to exploit its resources in its own waters .
It has the right to self-determination and it has the right to look for the best deal possible for itself .
In its Green Paper , the Commission sets very great store by the legitimate aspirations of developing states to develop their fishing industry , and the Greens very much agree with this principle .
Another issue in the Green Paper is the commitment of the European Community to the precautionary principle and the conservation of stocks .
The April 2000 report by the Scientific , Technical Economic Committee for Fisheries reviews the status of the stocks off Morocco , as well as other countries in west Africa .
They do not paint a very optimistic picture for anchovy , cuttlefish , demersal fish , black hake and sardinella .
The report says that there is no information on the status of these stocks .
The report also notes that octopus and hake fisheries are over-exploited and reductions in effort are needed .
It was also pointed out that there was a huge ignorance of the amount of fishing actually being conducted by EU vessels and this is a really important and very worrying point .
There was also the lack of guarantee for the protection of small-scale coastal fisheries .
Finally , we are pleased that compensation and funds for restructuring of fleets has been made available , but we also have to look at the overall fisheries policy within the European Union .
We cannot keep searching around the world for more and more places to transfer our over-capacity to .
We have to be realistic and realise that we must solve the problem from within .
Mr President , taking account of the statements made by Commissioner Fischler , we seemed to have reached the end of a process that has been dragging on since November 1999 , with damaging socio-economic consequences for the Community fleet operating in that area and for the fishing communities that have traditionally depended on those fishing grounds .
The question I would like to put is whether it is still possible to begin the negotiation of a new fisheries agreement with Morocco , with acceptable conditions .
The Moroccan proposals on reformulating the previous agreement were unacceptable and some people in the sector even wondered whether a bad agreement was really better than no agreement .
In any event , as a result , Portugal now has around 30 boats and over 600 fishermen without any visible future .
In addition to extending aid , it is becoming crucial that the European Union guarantees compensation support for the fleet , to the fishermen and the areas affected , by supporting a programme of converting the boats that fished in Moroccan waters , guaranteeing the relocation to other fishing grounds covered by Community fisheries agreements and , of course , by considering changing the common fisheries policy .
Commission . ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to react just briefly to the very enthusiastic debate we are witnessing here today .
To begin with , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the start of a new agreement , or the start of negotiations for a new agreement , was always going to be difficult because no agreement had been reached in the previous agreement that there would be a successor agreement .
That naturally meant that , for months , the Moroccan side put forward the argument that , so to speak , there was an agreement that no new agreement would be concluded at all and that the Commission and the negotiators of the previous agreement had promised this .
Secondly , we must be clear about one thing . I do not believe we are sending out the right signal , if we say that there must be an agreement at all costs .
I have drawn your attention to the fact that the Moroccan side has said that it is not prepared to grant us more or better fishing facilities than they did last time or to back away from its financial demands .
If we accept , however , the financial demands for the fishing facilities that are being offered , then we will be creating a precedent for all the other third country agreements that we have .
We will drive up the cost for all these other agreements to an extent that would simply be irresponsible .
Naturally , the Moroccan side is at liberty to send us an improved proposal .
I told the Minister as much .
It would be a good thing , however , if that were to happen before the Council of Fisheries Ministers is held .
Given the current circumstances , I do not believe it makes any sense . You must bear one thing in mind , however .
If we conclude this agreement as it stands , there will be no economic benefit for the fishermen of Spain and Portugal , which means we will have to restructure the fleet from scratch .
That , however , would take place under conditions whereby very few resources would be available to us because most would be bound up for the next three years in a bad agreement .
I would once again like to stress just how important it is that we set about supporting the sector in question as well as we can .
We are all called upon to do that : the Commission , the budgetary authorities , Parliament and the Council .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Expenditure on CFP control , inspection and surveillance systems
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0098 / 2001 ) by Mr Jové Peres , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council decision on a financial contribution by the Community to certain expenditure incurred by the Member States in implementing the control , inspection and surveillance systems applicable to the common fisheries policy [ COM ( 2000 ) 684 - C5 ­ 0583 / 2000 - 2000 / 0273 ( CNS ) ]
, rapporteur .
( ES ) Mr President , the proposal for a Council decision represents the continuation of a policy of providing Member States with financial support to fund infrastructure required by this fundamental pillar of the common fisheries policy .
The proposal establishes the priority of implementing new technologies , using IT networks , possibly making satellite monitoring systems standard practice , training officials responsible for policing and the intervention systems which need to be introduced in order to meet the Union ' s obligations to regional fisheries organisations .
Although in general the Commission ' s proposal is acceptable , there are two aspects that conflict with the line adopted by the Committee on Fisheries and the European Parliament in other matters closely related with the one that we are dealing with .
Parliament has highlighted in recent reports on regional fisheries organisations that responsibility for control and surveillance within them should be solely that of the Community , and that it should be up to the institutions of the European Union , and particularly the Commission , to adopt the necessary measures to meet these obligations . As a result , it is logical that the action should be funded from the Community budget .
Given that the regional fisheries organisations are going to increase in importance in the future of the common fisheries policy , it is appropriate to follow the line defined by previous reports adopted by Parliament .
From the Commission proposal it can be understood that in the future the contribution to the work of the regional fisheries organisations would also be entrusted , at least partly , to the Member States , as would the tasks of inspection and monitoring .
While there is a common fisheries policy and the Community has powers in the area of fisheries , it should act as such and equip itself with the human and financial resources to deal with its obligations , as required by the principle of sufficient resources for the common fisheries policy .
Applying this principle has financial implications and requires legal developments and perhaps giving up some sovereignty , but , if a certain model of political construction is accepted , the resources need to be put in place so that the model can be put into practice .
The current situation does not exactly square with this model , as core responsibility for control lies with the Member States , and there is a need for a reasonable period for adapting the structures to the aforementioned model .
It is up to the Member States , on a transitional basis , perhaps for the three years covered by the programme contained in this decision , to continue to exercise these responsibilities as representatives of the Union .
However , this is no obstacle to reimbursing the Member States immediately for the full amount of the expenditure arising from these Community obligations , and for that reason , instead of co-funding , 100 % of that expenditure should be reimbursed .
This is the aim of Amendment No 1 of the draft report .
The reference in the Explanatory Memorandum to the decision to establishing a reduction of EUR 41 to 35 million per year in spending on control operations is surprising , since it is very likely that the establishment of an adequate infrastructure for the control and surveillance programmes will require that today ' s financial burden be increased rather than reduced in the future .
Amendment No 2 raises the percentage of Community funding for acquiring and modernising inspection and control equipment from 30 % to 35 % .
The majority of investment has already been made in this respect and the majority of future action will be in terms of modernisation .
In any case , as the investment is costly and - we should not forget this - we are talking about control of a common policy , the percentage of Community funding should be slightly increased .
To conclude , I must confess that I was tempted to begin a more detailed discussion about the future of the control system after the reform .
However , the experiences of recent reports which , by looking into the future , have lost some of their effectiveness , led me to take a more modest and immediate approach .
Mr President , once again what most stands out to me about the Commission proposal is the imbalance between the importance that it says it attaches to certain issues and the means that it then puts in place in order to resolve them .
If we believed solely in the declarations of intent , it would seem that the Commission really does see the fisheries control policy as a top priority .
The Explanatory Memorandum to this proposal commends the importance of this policy as part of the common fisheries policy , which it describes as crucial , a description that with which we all agree .
The Green Paper that was recently presented goes even further , saying that either the system must be improved , or a fatal blow will be dealt to the credibility of the CFP .
However , when the moment of truth comes , we are once again seeing that , following great declarations , two of the three essential elements are missing , and neither are the sufficient resources provided to carry out the measures , nor is the essential policy of transparency followed in order to make them credible .
It is impossible to understand how , when this policy is such a priority , and it is so essential to reinforce it , the budget allocated to it on this occasion is not only not being increased , but is being decreased from EUR 41 to 35 million per year .
Also , this being the third decision from the Commission going the same way , this time the Commission has not made the report on the results of previous measures public , so that we do not know , aside from whether the choice of the measures to be funded was more or less correct , whether they achieved practical results , including the highly desirable results of linking the sector to this policy , which until now was described as discriminatory and confused in Community waters and weak and lacking credibility outside them .
We therefore support the more than pertinent comments from the rapporteur in this respect , and all of his amendments and , more specifically , those that stress to the Commission that this House believes that , if the Commission has the powers regarding the regional fisheries organisations , it also has the political and financial responsibility for implementing the appropriate measures . This of course includes control measures , in which the European Union is putting the credibility of its supposed commitment to sustainability of resources on the line in the eyes of the world .
Mr President , as we have heard this morning , Morocco is currently eclipsing the EU ' s fisheries policy .
I can well understand this as the consequences of the failure to conclude a fisheries agreement for the Iberian Peninsula are enormous for all of us .
I had the opportunity to convince myself of that just a short time ago .
Nevertheless , we must not remain paralysed ; we must look at other important aspects of the CFP which were covered by the report tabled by Jové Peres .
Let me get straight to the point . Surveillance of fisheries is not everything , but without surveillance everything else is pointless .
We know from our day-to-day experience that , without real and effective controls , the European fisheries policy would be nothing but a bubble of air .
We need to make progress and adapt ourselves to modern developments .
At a conference organised by the Commission last October in Brussels , reference was made to the international aspects of control .
We need a global approach .
The proposals tabled to this effect by the Commission are just as important as the provisions in the new Green Paper on the reform of the CFP .
Responsibility for the carrying out of controls is clearly regulated .
It lies with the Member States .
Financial support from the Community is of course imperative , particularly if we are talking about an equal , across-the-board level of control .
We need the support of the Community to bring about efficient modern controls in the future .
I am using the word ' modern ' quite deliberately and here the Commission has set the right priorities : the introduction of modern technologies , the use of information networks , the use of satellite surveillance systems and better training of surveillance staff .
We must , however , think carefully about whether reducing the resources for the implementation of control measures is the right approach .
I think that , in implementing these controls , we should be sending other signals , namely in terms of the priorities of the CFP .
So an appropriate budget is of paramount importance .
Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Peres , I am very pleased that you have accepted the Commission proposal so positively and I would like to thank you very warmly for the work you have done .
Your report shows that , by and large , we are in agreement .
The financial involvement of the Community in the surveillance expenditure of the Member States has so far yielded very positive results .
Since , however , there are still many shortcomings to rectify in the area of surveillance , it must continue .
Indeed the new measures must be adapted to current circumstances , as you called for in your report .
Now I will come to the amendments . The Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 5 and 6 as they stand .
Amendment No 3 seeks to add an additional recital , Recital 12 , on the budgetary mechanism .
We agree with you on the merits of the issue . There is no problem with that .
But we do not think it is necessary to present the entire budgetary mechanism in the form of a recital .
Moreover , it is also superfluous , because there is no equivalent in the procedural part of the decision .
The Commission is unable to accept Amendment No 4 , which calls for the reimbursement of up to 100 % of the expenditure of Member States by the Community , as this would mean that the Community would not only take on 100 % sole financial responsibility but also the accompanying sole political responsibility .
As far as Amendment No 7 is concerned , the Commission is unfortunately unable to keep to the proposed date of 30 June to take a decision on the choice of surveillance expenditure which will be co-financed by the Community .
The reason for this is that the Member States are to be given time up to this date to send us their reports on their surveillance expenditure .
And we can only take a decision afterwards .
But in future years we will be able to take our decision by 30 June .
A change to the comitology procedure in this case , as you propose , is unfortunately not impossible .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. until voting time )

Mr President , on a point of order .
I have just heard the news that one of the assistants from my office in Brussels has been robbed at knifepoint , at the edge of the woods which are only yards away from the Parliament building .
Apart from that incident , I have also had reports from my staff that they have been threatened on previous occasions near the building , both on that side and on the section between the building and the railway station , particularly in the early evening .
I would like investigations to take place to improve the security for Members of the European Parliament and their staff in the area around our building in Brussels .
I will certainly pass your request to the security service , Mr Kirkhope .
I think the Quaestors should probably get involved too .
Mr President , I do not know whether Mr Wim van Velzen is present in the Chamber .
I would like him to hear my speech , but , in any case , I feel it necessary to inform you and all the Members that the comments made by Mr van Velzen about myself were unfounded .
Mr van Velzen has criticised me twice in this House , in my absence .
According to him , I was not consistent and correct in upholding human rights while I was in Cuba with Mr Wiebenga and Mrs Eriksson for a meeting of the Interparliamentary Union .
I would like to say that , at the very moment when Mr van Velzen was making this point in this House - at about 5 p.m. on Monday in Strasbourg , which was 11 a.m. in Cuba - I was talking to Mr Elizardo Sánchez , the director of the Cuban Committee for Human Rights and National Reconciliation , who , in the hall of his house , was showing me the photographs he had taken with José Maria Aznar , Felipe González and our fellow Member , Mário Soares .
Moreover , together with Mr Sánchez were all the representatives of the Cuban opposition .
Now , this is a fact , not empty words .
The delegation of the European Parliament represented this institution correctly , meeting with all the organisations of the Cuban democratic opposition even though we were not bound to do so by duty .
I am not asking Mr van Velzen to apologise because there is no need .
I would like to thank all the Members , my group Chairman and Mr Seguro for what they said , but I am sure that there will be no need next time .
Should I be criticised over human rights in the future , there will be no need for Mr Barón Crespo or Mr Seguro to take the floor because Mr Wim van Velzen will be the first to rise in this House .
I repeat - he does not need to apologise - next time , he will be the one to defend me against any totally unfounded accusations or criticism .
Parliament takes note of your statement , Mr Imbeni , as a personal statement pursuant to Rule 122 of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , there will be no debate .
Mr Wim van Velzen , who is my deputy and a distinguished colleague , cannot be here today because he has to be in Sofia on behalf of our political group .
I would like to say to you Mr Imbeni , as Vice-President of the European Parliament that , despite all our political differences , you are also a distinguished colleague and Vice-President .
I suggest that you get together with Mr Imbeni , with my participation if you like , to discuss the background , which I and most of us here know nothing about .
We must be united , Mr Imbeni , when we are dealing with defending human rights . All of us in this House must be united .
Thank you for that felicitous proposal , Mr Poettering .
Welcome
VOTE
I would like to confirm that the Commission cannot accept any of the seven amendments proposed .
The current position includes the amendments accepted by the Commission at first reading .
The Commission considers that this common position provides a level of safety equivalent to that set out in the Commission 's initial proposal .
In addition , the Commission cannot accept at this stage the request to establish a positive list of feed materials .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Report ( A5-0093 / 2001 ) by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No. 2027 / 97 on air carrier liability in the event of accidents ( COM ( 2000 ) 340 - C5 ­ 0294 / 2000- 2000 / 0145 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0096 / 2001 ) by Mr Camisón Asensio , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation concerning the granting of aid for the coordination of transport by rail , road and inland waterway ( COM ( 2000 ) 5 - C5 ­ 0402 / 2000 - 2000 / 0023 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0094 / 2001 ) by Mrs Keßler , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the following proposals :
Council decision establishing a second phase of the programme of incentives and exchanges , training and cooperation for legal practitioners ( Grotius II - General and Criminal ) ( COM ( 2000 ) 828 - C5 ­ 0754 / 2000 - 2000 / 0339 ( CNS ) )
Council decision establishing a second phase of the programme of incentives , exchanges , training and cooperation for law enforcement authorities ( Oisin II ) ( COM ( 2000 ) 828 - C5-0755 / 2000 - 2000 / 0340 ( CNS ) )
Council decision establishing a second phase of the programme of incentives , exchanges , training and cooperation for persons responsible for combating trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children ( Stop II ) ( COM ( 2000 ) 828 - C5-0756 / 2000 - 2000 / 0341 ( CNS ) )
Council decision establishing a programme of incentives and exchanges , training and cooperation for the prevention of crime ( Hippocrates ) ( COM ( 2000 ) 0786 - C5 ­ 0753 / 2000 - 2000 / 0304 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the four legislative resolutions in successive votes )
Report ( A5-0091 / 2001 ) by Mrs Keßler , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing a European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters ( COM ( 2000 ) 592 - C5 ­ 0561 / 2000 - 2000 / 0240 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0098 / 2001 ) by Mr Jové Peres , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council decision on a financial contribution by the Community to certain expenditure incurred by the Member States in implementing the control , inspection and surveillance systems applicable to the common fisheries policy ( COM ( 2000 ) 684 - C5 ­ 0583 / 2000 - 2000 / 0273 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report A5-0117 / 2001 by Mrs Auroi , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) 1251 / 1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops ( COM ( 2001 ) 87 - C5 ­ 0083 / 2001 - 2001 / 0043 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the updating of certain legal aspects concerning intra-EU investment
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0303 / 2001 ) , by Mr Martinez and others , on behalf of TDI Group , on foot-and-mouth disease in Europe
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution ) Joint motion for a resolution on the statement of the European Commission on foot-and-mouth disease in the European Union
Before the vote on Amendment No 3
- ( DE ) Mr President , I would very much like to ask those who proposed Amendment No 9 to withdraw it .
I will explain why .
Many of us in this House , probably all of us , want the neighbouring countries of Macedonia and Greece to reach agreement on the name - whether it is going to be FYROM or Macedonia .
If a vote on this takes place today , I am afraid that it will not turn out positively , or at least with a very small majority , which would not be in line with what the proposers intended .
I would therefore like to ask that this proposed amendment be withdrawn .
The proposers ' feelings have been expressed , and these are the feelings of many of us in this House , but I believe that the amendment as it stands should not be presented today , especially since Greece and Macedonia / FYROM are on the brink of an agreement .
Mr President , over the past few weeks , we have seen how important a stable Macedonia is which is able to solve its internal disagreements .
Moreover , Macedonia has been declaring for the past ten years that it has no desire whatsoever to change its national borders .
I therefore see no reason whatsoever why Macedonia could not choose its own name . In all honesty , I do not welcome the fact that the Greek Members of the large groups have , in my view , once again managed to hold their groups hostage .
Having said that , it would be even worse if a majority of this Parliament were to declare that Macedonia should be denied this right .
That is why I am prepared to withdraw the amendment now , but I would call on the Greek Members finally to face the truth and grant Macedonia the right to choose its own name .
If I have understood you correctly , Mr Lagendijk , you are withdrawing this amendment and appealing to the good sense of Parliament .
Mr President , all I want to say is that state called FYROM exists only because of Greek support at the moment .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0246 / 2001 ) by Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation on the third UN Conference on the Least Developed Countries to be held in Brussels from 14 to 20 May 2001
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , could you please check whether Amendment No 2 of the Liberal Group on the resolution on foot-and-mouth disease has actually been voted on ?
I myself have my doubts .
Could you also inform me of what would happen if that appeared not to be the case ?
I can in any event assure you that this amendment still reflects the liberal group ' s position , and perhaps you could record this as such in the declaration of vote .
However , I have the strong suspicion that this amendment was not voted on at all .
Piecyk Report ( A5-0111 / 2001 )
The Piecyk report from the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism approves the conciliation agreement between the European Parliament and the Council on the criteria to be applied to seaports , inland ports and intermodal terminals so that they can become eligible for funding under the heading of the trans-European networks ( TEN ) .
We can support the rapporteur ' s determination to pursue the development of the infrastructure needed by port installations at European level .
European public finance for the development of public facilities , in order to achieve better land use , balance the means of transport more effectively , and fight pollution , is undoubtedly a priority .
Public funding , however , must be for public facilities and public services .
Now the ambiguity facing the European Union , which recurs in this report , revolves specifically around the future status , public or private , of port installations .
On the one hand , the Council is promoting the trans-European networks , while on the other , it is planning privatisations in these sectors , as in the directive presented on 14 February on opening up competition for port services , for example .
Europe never thinks about the needs of peoples and societies , only about opening up and competition .
Mr President , as I am sure you are aware , for you listen avidly to all my explanations of vote , I was born in Genoa , a coastal city , and I have worked as a sailor in the past .
Therefore , there is nothing so important to me as this document , which seeks to help and improve Europe 's sea- and inland ports , as Mr Piecyk 's report outlines so well .
This is why I voted for this document , in the hope that Europe will continue to concern itself with issues relating to sailors , the sea and ports .
Lehne recommendation for second reading ( A5-0090 / 2001 )
Mr President , Mr Lehne 's highly competent report on this subject includes an amendment proposed by Parliament - Amendment No 18 - which provides for an anti-money laundering check to take effect for premium amounts exceeding EUR 10 000 , whereas the Commission proposed to perform checks on these payments when the premiums exceeded just EUR 2 500 .
I feel that the European Parliament 's amendment is timely , and that is what convinced me to vote for the report .
Indeed , I feel that we must not exaggerate with our checks on money transfers , although checks are necessary , or we will exacerbate the situation by overburdening these transfers with excessively heavy regulations that can only make things worse .
Unlike what usually happens , with the European Parliament calling for stricter measures than the Council , in the case of Directive 91 / 308 / EC on legalising the proceeds from illegal activities , or money laundering , the European Parliament is basically annulling and retracting the new measures proposed .
Where they apply to new lawyers and the confidentiality which has to govern their activities , the European Parliament is entitled to call for an exemption .
However , the same does not apply to professions such as accountants , tax advisers , brokers , notaries , auction houses etc . , which must report any suspicion of money laundering to the authorities .
That is why these categories should not be approved and why I voted against the amendments in question .
The little war of amendments between Parliament and the Council throws light on the contradictions tying them both up in knots as they claim to be combating money laundering without daring to get to the heart of the matter .
If the laundering of money earned from drugs or illegal trafficking is to be effectively combated , banking confidentiality and business confidentiality have to be eliminated , not just suspended in a restricted way , and not just in court .
That would mean , however , revealing to public opinion the multitude of ways of accumulating capital and using it that are legal but still criminal in terms of the elementary interests of society .
That would be unacceptable to those who champion profit and the right of those who benefit from it to make what use of it they like .
They should not be surprised at their own powerlessness against those who push the logic of profit to the point of criminality .
We have no intention of endorsing these ineffective measures with our vote , any more than the laundering of capital , which is legal certainly , but acquired at the price of exploitation and used to the detriment of society .
The directive on combating money laundering is a step in the right direction and responds , at least in part , to the aspirations of citizens ' movements and the proposals made by the judges most concerned about the issue .
Unfortunately , apart from one amendment , Amendment No 2 , which extends the obligations of the directive to chartered accountants , and one other , Amendment No 27 , which mentions OLAF and a possible European public prosecutor , Mr Lehne ' s report does its best to reduce the scope of the directive .
As he , himself , puts it : ' the right of clients to confidentiality must not be undermined , even when the aim is to fight money laundering ' .
Absurd pretexts are then added to that argument ( complicated and completely useless obligations ) , and escape clauses which allow the professional associations to establish the necessary rules themselves .
For our part , we are in favour of total transparency in capital operations .
We recognise the absolute need to maintain the right to be defended but in no case should this mean impunity for anyone committing a crime .
So we are voting against certain utterly deplorable amendments , which represent so many obstacles to a vigorous fight against money laundering .
I am sure that I speak for all Members of this House when I say that I support greater coordination and cooperation to combat criminality and cross-border crime .
In particular I recognise the importance of common standards and rules in helping to overcome the legal obstacles that can be put in place of successful prosecution .
In Ireland , in order to combat the types of crime mentioned in the debate , we established the ' Criminal Assets Bureau ' ( CAB ) which is a multi-agency organisation , headed by a legal officer and a chief superintendent of the police .
These have been very successful in seizing the assets of drug dealers and other criminals as well as gathering evidence for further prosecutions .
This has worked to bring a lot of criminals to justice and to follow the money trail to seize the proceeds of those criminal activities .
However great our desire may be to prosecute criminals , we must ensure that the normal rules of procedure and justice are not ignored .
In the present report , the desire to put accountants and auditors on the same level as lawyers is important to maintain this right of defence .
The move within the common position to allow information gathered in a ' money laundering case ' to be put to other uses for prosecution goes too far I believe .
Finally I am against the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor 's Office as we already have OLAF , the Court of Auditors as well as the national agencies with responsibility for prosecution . .
The issue we are dealing with today is of capital importance for the future of our democracies .
The war against money laundering can no longer be waged by an isolated government .
For it to be effective , cooperation between the Member States must be organised .
It is essential to extend the definition of money laundering , because restricting it to drug-trafficking no longer corresponds to today ' s reality .
Account must be taken of every type of crime that generates major financial flows , fraud against the financial interests of the Communities , and any kind of corruption .
It has become absolutely necessary to involve the legal professions in the operation against money laundering , otherwise the European system of preventing and combating dirty money will be ineffective .
There is no question , however , of lawyers accepting any threat to professional secrecy or the confidentiality of their relationship with their clients .
So those amendments are unacceptable .
Indeed , professional secrecy remains the fundamental rule in the exercise of the profession of lawyer .
It is incompatible with the expression of suspicion , worse still , the expression of possible suspicion .
What is more , restricting professional secrecy amounts to restricting citizens ' fundamental rights .
Lawyers are officers of the courts , not police officers .
. ( PT ) The position adopted in this report constitutes a step backwards from the previous position .
Attacking organised crime is simply one part of the issue .
It is equally important that we adopt practical measures on crime against the economy , which results , specifically , from money laundering .
It is also significant that no practical measures have been proposed on the ' offshore ' issue , the breaking of banking confidentiality during a judicial inquiry or even on the situation of assets acquired through money laundering , which is a criminal act , to prevent the use of financial funds created by such activity , at the inquiry stage .
Finally , it is important to note that the report contains some confusion about the concepts of consultancy and accountancy , by creating get-out clauses and opportunities to escape providing information .
Unfortunately , the Council of Ministers has presented us with a text which will lead to a further delay in amending the Directive of 1991 .
We had hoped that this new version would be pushed through in first reading .
It now seems likely we will have to go through a mediation process , because we simply cannot accept the academic and impractical position adopted by the Finance Ministers , which Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs do not agree with either .
It is impossible to impose the transfer of existing money laundering rules for financial service providers lock , stock and barrel to all other professional groups such as lawyers and tax consultants and then insinuate that we simply wanted to protect the guild of lawyers .
This is just not the case .
It makes no sense that lawyers cannot settle an insurance claim or that brokers cannot draw up a plan until they have established their credentials .
It makes just as little sense to demand that cash only be handed over from person to person .
Such a demand would mean that bank night safe-deposit boxes would have to be set up immediately .
This would cause problems , however , for business people , especially from small and medium-sized businesses , who , for obvious reasons of security , deposit their day ' s takings in the safe-deposit box of their bank after the banks have closed .
That , however , has absolutely nothing to do with the laundering of money from criminal activity .
I fully endorse the reasonable position adopted by the rapporteur , which the Finance Ministers could also live with .
They at least should know that any further delay in amending the money-laundering Directive is irresponsible , especially since the money-laundering mafia is becoming increasingly adept .
As a Member of the European Parliament who comes from Luxembourg , the effectiveness of the fight against the laundering of money from criminal activity lies very close to my heart , as the Grand Duchy has some of the strictest laws on money laundering .
These laws and their application as well as the cooperation resulting from the 1991 Directive must not be undermined by a too broadly interpreted definition of ' criminal activity ' , which is what is called for under the common position adopted by the Council .
For reasons of efficiency , the directive should essentially be limited to combating the laundering of money from organised crime , which was its original objective .
Money flows which remain invisible to taxation and government statistics are still what many in business aim for .
Their view is that the government should not interfere in their profits and possessions .
Attempts are once again being made , rightly so , to get a tighter grip on money-laundering practices .
On the one hand , that requires the proposed measures to be as fool proof as possible , without escape routes for profiteers who refuse to meet the legal requirements .
I have the impression that the Council ' s proposals are still too weak in this respect , and even the adjustments proposed by the rapporteur at second reading still leave something to be desired .
On the other hand , there is the fear that lawyers have been required to act as investigation officials at the expense of their clients .
In this case , this may be justified .
Nonetheless , this sets an undesired precedent .
Lawyers should not be required to act against those whom they have to protect .
By , however , drawing a distinction in recital 16a between the actual role of lawyers and this profession ' s other activities , it might be possible to avoid this precedent .
I will therefore give the proposal the benefit of the doubt .
I support measures to tighten controls in the fight against money laundering by obliging banks and professionals to report clients under suspicion to the authorities .
Billions of pounds are lost every year across the European Union due to money laundering and fraud .
When we think of crime , an image of burglaries , violent muggings and knife attacks by gangs of youths on our streets often springs to mind .
Money laundering is an unseen crime , but it costs the taxpayer dearly and those found guilty should pay the price .
Those misusing the financial system should be caught and punished .
Moreover , money laundering is responsible for financing the evil trade in drugs , trafficking in humans and other horrific crimes .
We should not turn a blind eye to crimes of this kind .
We must crack down on banks and professionals , encouraging them to report clients under suspicion to the authorities .
We should even extend the scope of this proposal to include high-spending gamblers and auctioneers at the top end of the market .
Madam President , this issue is an important one at a European level .
Money laundering is not simply restricted to Manchester or to Madrid .
It knows no borders , and tainted money changes hands across regions and countries .
It is not enough to enforce purely British legislation , but measures must be taken across the EU .
We must work together to tackle this challenge .
Therefore , I applaud the efforts of this House to curb the use of the financial system for money laundering .
Graefe zu Baringdorf Report ( A5-0079 / 2001 )
We have voted for the recommendation for the sole reason that it advocates some sensible measures , like , for example , ' the positive definition of permissible feed materials ' .
Even if the Council and the Commission were to end up accepting the amendments tabled , however , and at the moment they are rejecting them and dithering , that would not acquit the leaders of the European institutions of the massive responsibility for the propagation of BSE they incurred by refusing to take precautionary measures as soon as the threat represented by that endemic disease became tangible .
That was not even mere negligence or carelessness , it was a deliberate choice , under pressure from the agrifood lobbies .
It is yet another tragic demonstration that the vocation of protecting the profits of capitalist groups is incompatible with effective defence of the interests of the majority of the population .
Mr President , I voted for the report presented so well by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
' Why is that ? ' you may ask , Mr President .
I listened very carefully to both Commissioner Fischler 's words and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report .
This report tells us that the maximum quantity for guaranteed dried feedingstuffs is being increased and that the rate of yield for peas is being increased by EUR 6 .
Well then , the fact that these amendments have been included makes me particularly happy to have voted for the report , for I feel that they will be very useful for the progress of European common agriculture .
As the rapporteur states , it is important that the manufacturer of compound feedingstuffs , or whoever is responsible for labelling , provides a detailed list of all the raw materials used . The compulsory definition of acceptable raw materials in compound feedingstuffs for animals is also crucial , bearing the BSE and dioxin crises in mind .
We must also ensure that all materials that put human and animal health at risk are banned .
Nevertheless , this report was framed during a broader discussion of animal feedingstuffs , on which the Commission made a statement regarding the options for encouraging the planting of protein crops in the EU , taking account of the Agricultural Council of December 2000 , which bans the use of animal meal in feedingstuffs for breeding animals , and insists on the need to replace animal protein with vegetable protein .
The Commission ' s proposal is based mainly on budgetary consequences , forgetting the basic principle of the sovereignty of food , when it states that the best and cheapest solution is to increase Community soya imports by 5 % . This will make the EU more dependent for its vegetable protein , particularly soya meal , which could threaten food safety , on imports of genetically modified soya from the USA .
Using the pretext of WTO rules and costs , the Commission is refusing to increase aid for growing oilseed crops because they contravene the Blair House agreement . Similarly it refuses to support the use of fallow land under the set-aside system , because this would be in conflict with the WTO ' s blue box that requires agricultural aid to be conditional upon production-limiting measures .
In this way , the Commission is refusing to encourage production within the EU . This is an unacceptable position , which we should reject , although we support the report , for which we have voted .
Politics is like drilling through thick planks of wood and , far too often , the only way forward is bit by bit .
We all know that , in times like these , it is a political imperative that we give people a feeling of security .
We need openness , labelling and transparency .
Politically mature citizens want to decide for themselves what to eat .
It is clear that this demand cannot relate solely to the end product .
So we have a fundamental interest in documenting the history of our food and making it transparent .
Farmers on the ground are responsible for animal protection and food safety .
They must be held accountable for what they feed to their animals , not only to secure their own economic success ( though this is a factor we should not lose sight of ) but also to satisfy consumers .
When I look at individual actions , I sometimes get the impression that time is running away from us .
My own land in Germany , Rheinland-Pfalz , has introduced a seal of approval for beef which aims to guarantee not only the origin of the animal but its history and what it has been fed .
The feedingstuffs industry has come on board of its own free will and offers an open declaration of feed materials and stronger controls .
Farmers would otherwise buy their feed elsewhere : only with this information can they get the seal of approval .
I hope in future there will be more such self-imposed obligations .
This would set the wheel in motion and feedingstuff manufacturers would be practically forced to make an open declaration out of economic necessity .
In the here and now , however , it is a question of taking a political decision and establishing the legal bases , which must be the same for everybody .
That is why we need the open declaration .
We need traceability and we also need controls .
I hope that the report by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf will set the wheel turning .
I do not understand the Commission ' s position in opposing a positive list at all .
Sanders-ten Holte Report ( A5-0093 / 2001 )
Mr President , like many of the Members , including yourself , I am sure , in two hours ' time I will be on a plane .
I have read Mrs Sanders-ten Holte 's report , which is rightly concerned that compensation should be provided in the unfortunate event - excuse me a moment while I touch wood - of a plane crash .
However , I call upon Mrs Sanders-Ten Holte to ensure , in the future , the application of more effective control measures to avoid aeroplane accidents , so that , whenever I take a plane , I can think of Mrs Sanders-Ten Holte , whose photo I will stick to the seat in front of me , not just as the rapporteur of a document providing for our compensation in the case of an accident , but , above all , as the rapporteur of a document which will reduce the number of aeroplane accidents .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to point out how important it is that the Regulation is implemented in conformity with the provisions of the Montreal Convention .
A uniform Regulation on liability in air transport creates transparency .
It protects the interests not only of passengers but also of carriers which can maintain the generally recognised standards in international air transport .
The competitiveness of European air carriers must not be impaired through liability rules which are not covered by the Montreal Convention .
In order to create a uniform Regulation in conformity with the provisions of the Montreal Convention , I call on the Member States to ratify this Convention as soon as possible .
Camisón Asensio Report ( A5-0096 / 2001 )
Mr President , this document coordinates rail , road and inland waterway transport .
How delightful , Mr President , for me , the representative of the Pensioners ' Party in Italy , to be able to vote for this document .
You might think , Mr President , that it has nothing to do with pensions and pensioners , but that is not the case .
It does concern pensioners .
If these measures are implemented , then , indeed , transport will be heavier on railways , inland waterways and roads , freight will be moved more quickly and the level of toxic emissions emanating from congested motorways and badly organised communications , toxins which , when inhaled by our citizens , cause serious diseases , will be reduced .
In actual fact , there are many pensioners who have been made ill by this bad road circulation , and that increases social security costs in our States , which is not a good thing for pensioners .
That is the connection , Mr President .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report aims to divert goods transport from the road to rail , inland waterways and combined transport with the aid of subsidies .
I find this fundamentally questionable . For one thing , Article 87 of the EC Treaty quite clearly states that subsidies in this form are not permissible .
For another , we have guaranteed a situation whereby subsidies will have a diverting function .
I find this fundamentally questionable .
I also wonder why , ten years after liberalising the transport markets , we are now starting to use taxes and subsidies to divert and control .
In principle , this cannot be positive for the future of the transport market .
Kessler Report ( A5-0094 / 2001 )
I concur with the gist of Mr Costa ' s opinion .
However , there is one element which I am struggling with .
Recital 14 and Article 4 provide for the possibility of government aid being deployed for the use of infrastructure .
This is also possible pursuant to the amendments .
In my opinion , this exemption from the ban of government aid is undesirable .
First of all because the starting premise is wrong , for transport by road already pays the lion ' s share of the external costs .
Secondly , it is not judicious to grant extra support for the use of infrastructure .
Take rail , for example : the costs are not the most important reason why transporters do not opt for rail .
We need an increase in quality and reliability , and market discipline is then the best incentive .
I fear that this incentive for a modal shift , of which we are of course in favour , is counterproductive , brings about distortion of competition and undermines the work that has been done in the framework of the rail liberalisation package .
I will therefore be voting against recital 14 and Article 4 .
They do not belong in this Regulation .
The first part of the report by Mrs Kessler - a name that , in the minds of us Italians , invokes two beautiful , excellent , very famous German ballerinas and which therefore lifts my spirits , despite the fact that the subject of the document is somewhat tedious - states , with regard to Grotius II , that there are funds for training , work experience placement exchanges , studies , research , meetings and seminars in the field of judicial cooperation , money which will go to judges , public prosecutors , lawyers , law officials , experts and interpreters .
I hope that the next document will stipulate that these funds are also to go to pensioners from these professions , who will certainly be able to give expert opinions on judicial cooperation .
. Given the seriousness of problems concerning crime , no one can doubt the need for greater cross-border cooperation , networking and mutual recognition in criminal matters .
However , I had a certain reservation in supporting the report because at present there is an alarmingly one-sided quality in our approach .
Too little attention is given in our debates or in the instruments upon which we vote to vital issues of civil liberty .
These concern the rights of persons accused of crimes who are entitled in all our systems to the presumption of innocence until guilt is proved .
These rights are guaranteed under Articles 5 and 6 of the European Convention of Human Rights .
Experience shows , however , that interpretation of the rights in question is variable throughout the Union .
Sometimes prosecuting authorities ignore them with apparent impunity .
I call for greater and better attention to these points .
For example , when are we to see proposals for a EuroBail system ?
Mutual recognition should facilitate common provision for conditional release pending trial .
It is a scandal that in many Member States people awaiting trial may spend many months needlessly in detention prior to trial .
This requires the most urgent attention of everyone in this Parliament .
Kessler Report ( A5-0091 / 2001 )
Mr President , I supported this document on the establishment of a European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters , particularly because it lays down that information sheets - vade-mecum - are to be issued so that those who are involved in this European Judicial Network know how to apply it practically .
I therefore hope that this vade-mecum , this instruction sheet , will also include the procedures that European citizens who have pension issues to resolve can follow in order to contact the European judicial authorities established in a network in civil and commercial matters , for civil matters include pension issues as well .
I wish to state briefly the reasons why I am supporting the Kessler report .
With the expansion of the single market and with the introduction of the euro currency , there are now greater opportunities for cross-border trade and commerce in Europe .
Also , with the wider globalisation of the marketplace , there is a necessity for a greater co-operation and understanding of different legal systems .
In any democratic system , the arm of justice must not only operate effectively but must be seen to do so and it must command the respect of the people .
The quicker and easier it is for the resolution of legal conflicts , then the better it is for the protection of legal rights and also to guarantee the conditions concerning the certainty of trade .
Therefore , the setting up of the EUROJUST programme with the co-operation of the judiciaries within the various EU Member States is a very important movement towards building a greater understanding of justice .
However , this should not be seen as an attempt to subvert or subjugate the systems operating within the various Member States of the EU .
Rather , it should be seen as an enhancement to implementing a speedy resolution of disputes by introducing a greater clarity in legal judgements .
I particularly recommend the point in relation to the establishment of a centralised electronic European Union judgment registry , which has been initiated by an Irish lawyer Twinkle Egan .
This will make it easier to understand differing judgements and to help build a greater consistency in how precedents operate .
May I congratulate my Socialist colleague Margot Kessler on her report which extends the existing European judicial network in criminal matters to civil and commercial law .
I fully support this common-sense strategy which broadens the system of cooperation between national authorities .
This will not only simplify judicial cooperation between the Member States , but it will also facilitate cross-border legal procedures .
Increased judicial cooperation is an important step forward for my constituents in the North-West who are sometimes desperate for help with a case in another EU country .
For example , a young parent whose children have been abducted by the other parent from the UK to France , will certainly be assisted by greater understanding between the British and French legal services .
So would the elderly couple who have exchanged their hard-earned cash for a holiday home in the south of Spain and have faced legal battles with the purchase .
It is significant that this network becomes part of the existing trans-European network for the electronic exchange of data .
In light of enlargement , the applicant countries should also be allowed to participate in the contact meetings .
Data will therefore be exchanged on the European judicial network from England to Estonia , making life remarkably easier for the authorities .
Madam President , I very much welcome increased judicial cooperation which will be of tremendous benefit to all our citizens seeking legal advice or bringing forward cases across the European Union .
Jové Peres Report ( A5-0098 / 2001 )
Auroi Report ( A5-0117 / 2001 )
. ( PT ) I welcome the rapporteur ' s proposals amending the proposal for a Council decision on a financial contribution by the Community to certain expenditure incurred by the Member States in implementing the control , inspection and surveillance systems applicable to the common fisheries policy .
Control is important in guaranteeing a form of fishing that is responsible , sustainable and fair and the Community must therefore finance its costs and the necessary investment , bearing in mind that each Member State is responsible for implementing the system in its own economic area .
The Council ' s proposal maintains the continuity of the cofinancing system , but limits the time framework , the financial participation and the type of actions funded .
The rapporteur proposes increasing Community cofinancing from 30 % to 35 % in training and investment actions , with 100 % financing of eligible expenditure disbursed by the Member States for control and surveillance activities under EU participation in regional fishing organisations .
Furthermore , I think it is unacceptable that here too , the proposal for a decision is attempting to make budgetary savings , by reducing the budget for these actions from EUR 41 million per year to EUR 35 million per year , which is in conflict with the need to create an appropriate infrastructure to cover control and surveillance programmes that may involve an increase in the actual financial burden .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I just want to thank all the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
They voted unanimously for the six amendments that allow this report to go beyond the Commission ' s proposal , which only sought to unfreeze land for organic farmers and primarily to remain within the context of the COM agreements .
The whole of Parliament wanted to go further and send a positive signal to breeders generally and also , at least initially , to farmers doing environmental work .
I venture to hope , on behalf of my group , and no doubt on behalf of many others , that the Council will understand and follow our lead in the matter .
As I said yesterday , Mrs Auroi ' s report points in the right direction although , of course , the context is such that the proposals cannot measure up to our vegetable protein needs .
Reading the Commission ' s report on vegetable proteins in the context of the ban on meat and bone meal , I was deeply shocked by the authors ' apparent contempt for their fellow citizens .
First , contempt for consumers : the Commission ' s position takes no account of the clear , strong and growing demand on the part of consumers for traceability and visibility in product origin .
Here the proposal is simply to go on buying the proteins we lack as cheaply as possible in the great world supermarket for agricultural surpluses .
So what if they contain GMOs ?
Then , contempt for farmers : the Commission ' s resignation is an insult to European farmers , suggesting they are incapable of producing the vegetable proteins we need on our own soil .
The measures proposed in the Commission ' s seven- point plan ( authorising the production of fodder legumes on land set aside on organic farms ) is sympathetic but in no way commensurate with the challenge .
Between organic production and massive imports of genetically modified soya , there is a margin for the creativity of European farmers .
In fact one could say the Commission is trying to find technical , regulatory and budgetary arguments for refusing to act .
It is presenting us with a ' non-plan ' for proteins .
The Commission is demonstrating an accountant ' s logic which is not even economically relevant : the fact that soya is cheap at the moment does not mean it will always be cheap .
A price rise is bound to come .
( The President cut the speaker off pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
The rapporteur has improved on the Commission ' s initial proposal as far as she can and bearing in mind the emergency procedure , which was laid down in the package of seven measures to combat the crisis in the beef and veal market .
The Commission ' s proposal was one-sided and limited and sought to make it possible , only for organic farms , to grow fodder on land set aside under the COM in cereals .
Given the Community deficit in vegetable protein production , the limitations of the Blair House agreement and the ban on the use of animal meal in feedingstuffs for breeding animals , it has become necessary to create a genuine internal system of support for the production of fodder legumes and protein crops .
The rapporteur ' s proposal , which I support , seeks to open up the same opportunity for conventional livestock farms and for farms covered by any agro-environmental programme in order to achieve a broad concept of fodder legumes , bearing in mind the importance , as we proposed for Portugal , of beans , sweet lupin and yellow lupin .
Nevertheless , the proposal lacks a real system of incentives for fodder legume and oilseed production , which might require the use of aid under the set-aside scheme or tying this partially to the production of fodder legumes , or through a change to set-aside assistance when fodder legumes are grown there .
The Commission would need to present specific proposals to this effect and not remain bound by budgetary constraints and by the World Trade Organisation .
Following the recent discoveries of the dangers inherent in feedingstuffs , especially in the economically advanced countries of the EU and , in particular , the problem of BSE caused by using animal proteins as feedingstuffs , meat and bonemeal should have been completely banned as a feedingstuff and replaced with vegetable proteins produced in the Community , so that Community farmers would not be dependent on soya from the United States .
In other words , the CAP should have been reviewed in its entirety , encompassing both the feedingstuffs sector and the farming sector which produces feedingstuffs .
In our view , the quota system should have been reviewed , especially in the Mediterranean countries , and in Greece in particular , where quotas are far below self-sufficiency and potential production levels and where the method of producing animal proteins is far healthier than the method used in the economically advanced countries of the EU , where quotas far exceed requirements , with the result that they export the dangers inherent in their feedingstuffs to all the countries with shortfalls , including Greece .
We should also examine the system for pricing and subsidising fodder crops , so as to support fodder legumes , with a view to guaranteeing cheap , top quality vegetable proteins and protecting the environment , given that legumes restore the soil and are ideally suited to crop rotation programmes , especially with the soil and climate in the Mediterranean .
Instead of which , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has used various tricks , believing that the problem of BSE will be forgotten in time , in an endeavour to restore animal protein in animal feedingstuffs in six months ' time .
In other words , it is endeavouring to restore meat and bonemeal which , it has now been proven , is responsible for BSE , disregarding public health in order to serve the interests of the Community feedingstuffs industry .
These endeavours are confirmed by decisions on the matter so far and discussions taking place in official circles .
The alibi which the Committee is using for these endeavours takes the form of the proposal to cultivate certain land set aside from arable crops with fodder legumes , allegedly in order to increase the production of vegetable proteins ; at the same time , however , it bans the production of seed on this land and restricts it solely to hay production , and unsubsidised hay production at that .
Under this proposal , little or no vegetable proteins will be produced , even in countries with extensive set aside .
For Greece , however , and perhaps for other Mediterranean countries , the proposal is meaningless because they have little or no set aside .
The Commission proposal does absolutely nothing to resolve the problem of protein in Community fodder , and , as a result , it deliberately and consciously finds a ' solution ' either in the Community meat and bonemeal responsible for BSE or in modified soya from the United States , which may well be equally dangerous to public health , as well as making Community livestock farmers dependent on the multinationals which market soya and soya products .
Because the Commission proposal does not make use of the productive potential in the Member States in order to resolve the problem of proteins , and feedingstuffs in general , once and for all and in a way which safeguards public health , because the purpose of the proposal is to mislead farmers and consumers , so that the dangerous method of producing proteins for animal feed can continue , and because I have no desire to help , even indirectly , in perpetuating this serious public health problem and deceiving arable and livestock farmers , I shall not vote in favour of the Commission proposal . I believe that my vote will act as an incentive and that the production of healthy and suitable feedingstuffs will become the subject of an objective fight on the part of the people of the Community .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , among the package of seven measures proposed by the Commission in order to deal with the BSE crisis is the modification of the basic regulation on herbaceous crops in order to permit , in the context of organic farming , the use of set-aside land for growing some leguminous fodder crops for feeding livestock .
As a background we have the ban of the use of meat and bone meal - a temporary ban that many of us trust will become permanent - and the now long-term EU deficit of vegetable proteins .
The Commission proposal is going in the right direction but it limits itself to proposing a symbolic modification , the impact of which , limited solely to organic farming , is not going to give visible results .
Mrs Auroi ' s report , with the amendments adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , correct this timid proposal by extending it to farms that operate in accordance with Regulation 1257 / 99 on rural development , and by including , from 2002 , the growing of leguminous fodder crops on land left fallow in conventional livestock farms .
In this way we may be able to effectively counteract the EU ' s dependence on supplies of proteins that are in many cases genetically modified and , as they are used to feed livestock , are introduced into the food chain without any opportunity for control on the part of consumers .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists therefore supported the amendments adopted in the Committee responsible and there is nothing more for us to do than hope that the Commission will take them into account along with the successive requests from members of this House for effective progress to be made towards a visible correction of the European deficit of vegetable proteins .
Foot-and-mouth disease ( RC B5-0303 / 2001 )
Mr President , I wanted to justify our vote straight away , but unfortunately you did not notice in this confusion .
This Chamber knows that I have asked for a serious debate since the start .
As Members of Parliament of the Austrian People ' s Party in the European Parliament , we have spoken out against this resolution because we believe and we are convinced that it does not reflect what we imagine European agricultural policy to be .
It is clear that , with such resolutions , the real existential anxiety and need of European farmers cannot be addressed , given that there are 80 different types of virus and 300 million animals in Europe .
I would like to point out that in Austria more than 60 % of land consists of mountains and disadvantaged regions .
We rely on exports and we must do our utmost to ensure that these regions remain inhabited .
I actually find it frivolous to make policy on a day-to-day basis at the expense of farmers .
I cannot imagine how animals that have been vaccinated can be labelled .
Mr President , consumer protection is a matter of great concern to all of us in this House .
I do not believe that consumers would pay tribute to us for that , as it would only lead to further loss of confidence .
The European Parliament ' s resolution on foot-and-mouth disease deserves to be approved , notably because it steps back from the policy of slaughter , which can be useful selectively , but scarcely seems effective in a case like that of Great Britain .
Public opinion is doubtful , and it is right .
So the resolution we have just voted on is rightly geared towards authorisation of urgent vaccination , either in a particular region affected by foot-and-mouth disease , or in a ' buffer ' region , or in the case of rare breeds .
Beyond these urgent measures , we might wonder why foot-and-mouth , once common in the countryside of Europe , and not usually fatal to animals ( let alone humans ) , should now be producing a national crisis .
The answer is two-fold .
First , the disease spreads faster than before because agriculture has become massively geared towards production , and is therefore highly specialised and fragmented .
One animal can spend different stages of its life in several parts of a country , or even of Europe .
It is transported many times , the link with the original breeder is broken and traceability becomes unreliable .
So we think it is important to re-establish more stable rearing , where everyone knows who is responsible and where animals are not treated like inert merchandise .
That is part of the agricultural reform we are proposing for the years ahead .
Secondly , the massive slaughter seems to be motivated by economic reasons which are not always transparent .
One of these appears to be a determination to maintain exports at any price , because some purchaser countries regard meat from vaccinated animals as indistinguishable from meat from sick animals .
Under those circumstances vaccination would be useless from the economic point of view , because in both cases the meat is worth less . I find this financial reasoning absurd .
Surely exports could be accompanied by a vaccination certificate ?
And why must absolutely everything be subordinated to exports ?
That just contributes to productivity-driven farming and necessitates subsidies which cost the taxpayer dear , all to achieve , ultimately , the destabilisation of farming in less developed countries .
The system is verging on insanity , and things will have to be put back on an even keel in the near future .
With ' mad cows ' agri-industry created a new disease fatal to humans , and we still do not know how to cure it .
Foot-and-mouth , though , is an ancient disease .
It does not affect humans and the majority of animals recover from it .
With the development of the world market in cattle and meat , however , agri-industry has given it an international epidemic dimension it did not have before .
The market imposes its own health requirements too , with tragic consequences .
The use of vaccine has been banned on purely economic grounds , ' economic ' here being reduced to commercial regulations and an estimate of the financial costs which is in some respects questionable .
Hundreds of thousands of healthy ( or curable ) animals are being slaughtered purely in the name of an accountant ' s calculation of profitability .
The decision-makers have only the market rules they have invented themselves to set against the despair of the farmers whose herds are being destroyed .
Elementary respect for life , protection of local economies , maintenance of a thriving social fabric in the rural environment , and the living and working conditions of country people have all been ignored in the definition of health policies in response to the foot-and-mouth epidemic .
All that remains is the power of the market and its laws of bronze . It is definitely high time we freed ourselves from that power .
.
( DE ) In view of the fact that foot-and-mouth has broken out in at least four Member States , the foot-and-mouth vaccine which was adopted throughout Europe in 1991 must be screened and even abandoned .
Politicians such as the German Agriculture Minister , Renate Künast , who reject foot-and-mouth vaccination must reconsider .
The reasons for a ban that were valid then do not apply today , since improved foot-and-mouth vaccines have been introduced .
Nonetheless , research into the development and manufacture of foot-and-mouth vaccines must continue .
In particular , the following vaccinations should be authorised by the European Commission : emergency vaccinations ( ring vaccinations ) in regions hit by foot-and-mouth and in zones which are contiguous to regions hit by foot-and-mouth and for zoo animals .
The outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease , which has followed on from ' mad cow disease ' , has made the crisis in the livestock industry worse . It has penalised farmers and has increased people ' s lack of confidence in the safety of agricultural produce .
The liberalisation of agriculture and the free movement of goods have increased the risk and the spread of animal diseases with a CAP that , in the name of competitiveness and constant price reduction has promoted the concentration , intensification and centralisation of production .
In the current context , those who have been penalised most heavily are the producers , although we have not seen the necessary aid for compensation or sufficient contingency measures , in this case for foot-and-mouth disease .
I have therefore proposed the creation of a specific budget line within the EU budget , to support farmers and measures for eradicating animal diseases , given the food , health and veterinary crisis .
Given the spread of the disease , it makes sense to temporarily suspend the movement of animals between Member States and to increase controls on meat that is sold , and it is regrettable that the recent Agricultural Council did not take a decision on this matter .
In addition to short-term measures , however , we also need a new type of agricultural policy , which protects production and supports changes in production methods .
We need a policy that promotes the quality and safety of food in line with the precautionary principle .
We need a form of farming that is sustainable and which promotes the specific characteristics of each region and a greater variety of aid for agricultural produce , bearing in mind the varying levels of agricultural development .
We need a form of farming that contributes to economic and social cohesion and which is based firmly on family farming and on small and medium-sized holdings .
While I am not happy with every aspect of the compromise resolution , it does reflect the determination of the European Parliament to urgently address the serious threat of foot-and-mouth disease .
I have voted against sections of the resolution which deal with general vaccination and supported amendments which allow protective emergency vaccination , at the request of Member States .
Given that the source of Britain 's first outbreak originated outside the EU , I have called for an urgent review of cross-border controls to prevent a similar occurrence in the future .
From an Irish perspective , we strongly favour a non-vaccination policy , and have made every effort to contain the country 's single outbreak - so far with success .
As an island nation , exporting 90 % of the country 's beef production , our animal health status is a priority .
This resolution makes clear that any resort to protective vaccination during the present outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease would be at the request of a Member State .
In view of the confinement of FMD to one corner of Scotland , in Dumfries and Galloway and nearby , the Scottish National Party has taken and will continue to take a strong line in favour of maintaining the policy of culling and destroying to restore disease-free status in Scotland according to present international standards .
This is vital to Scotland 's capacity to maintain its worldwide reputation for high-quality meat .
We have condemned dodges by Mr Blair 's government that appear more calculated to secure electoral convenience than to serve the public interest and I repeat this condemnation here .
My willingness to support the resolution was entirely conditional on incorporation of an oral amendment extending a commitment to financial help to trade and tourism where these have been adversely affected .
I am delighted that my amendment was unanimously accepted , and that the resolution with this amendment was carried .
Commerce and centralism are the backbone of the European Union ' s current policy .
Based on the notion that this will strengthen Europe ' s position on the global market , silly measures are being imposed on all Member States .
The course of affairs with regard to foot-and-mouth is the latest illustration of this failing .
Between 1956 and 1992 , we had managed to control this animal disease effectively thanks to a massive preventive vaccination campaign .
Due to the one-sided consideration of export interests , we are back where we were half a century ago .
Instead of introducing preventive vaccination and banning the transport of live animals over long distances , a choice is now being made in favour of pointless mass slaughter in order to destroy healthy animals .
In the absence of the possibility of vaccination , this primitive approach is considered to be the only means of curbing the further spread of the disease .
Even rare animals in nature reserves and zoos are now being sacrificed to the mad ban on vaccination .
Farmers are bewildered and at their wits ' end .
Restricted emergency vaccination and taking time out for further research are not solving the problem .
In my opinion , the Member States can no longer adhere to the vaccination ban and must carry out vaccination immediately , even if this should lead to an even further setback in exports .
I find myself with some difficulty in supporting this proposal as it stands .
While I have changed my mind about vaccination in an emergency , I have some problem with the view that it can be used without the eventual slaughter of those animals vaccinated .
It is clear to me that to adopt such a policy would not be in the best long-term interest of the European export industry .
The Standing Veterinary Committee makes it clear that no vaccine has yet been developed that would differentiate between vaccinated and non-vaccinated animals .
I agree that we should encourage the development of new vaccines that would give us more flexibility , better tracing and would ensure that we could continue to export to other countries , and we should develop improved controls on imports into anywhere in the EU , for it is clear we imported foot-and-mouth in the UK illegally .
Stockholm European Council : Economic and social aspects ( RC B5-0237 / 2001 )
Mr President , before explaining why I voted against this document of the Stockholm European Council , I must explain why I am speaking in English .
It is to make a present to the Italian interpreters , the Italian workers who , every day , have to work much more than the others to translate and put in writing my explanations of votes .
I am doing this in recognition of their hard work .
I voted against all Stockholm resolutions because there is no mention of the fact that European workers want to work less and have more time as pensioners .
We cannot accept the conclusions of the Stockholm European Council because , as I said during the debate , they amount to a ragbag of all the issues in no order of priority .
They give the impression of a Europe with its tentacles in everything , which does not distinguish big issues from small , or the national level from the European .
That is damaging to the whole Union .
The European Council , which is taking on increasing weight in the institutional balance , ought to present especially clear conclusions .
To make the necessary improvements the preparation for Councils must be reformed , but also , more profoundly , European powers must be clarified and lightened , and those issues should be on the agenda for the next Intergovernmental Conference .
In our view , rational and well-ordered conclusions ought to consist of three parts :
the first part should be devoted to certain vital issues of strategy , which the Council would have discussed thoroughly , and on which it would have taken some real decisions .
The second part would give instructions for implementation to the various Councils of Ministers .
Finally , the third part , which should be the most substantial , could set out certain guidelines that the Heads of State and Government intend to follow in their respective countries , particularly as regards managing the economy and social affairs - which was on the Stockholm agenda .
These guidelines would not be restrictive , and the expression of contrary opinions would be tolerated .
They would thus demonstrate a determination to develop free , informal and open coordination , respectful of national democratic choices .
Reading the Stockholm conclusions , we can see how far away we are from that .
In fact our motion for a resolution calls for thorough reform of the Treaty , involving the restoration of numerous powers to the Member States .
Every summit goes one step further in damaging the workers ' interests and the Stockholm Summit was no exception .
Yet again , the summit ' s sights were set on pension and social rights , with workers being called on to work more and receive less .
It is clear from their joint declaration that the Heads of State or Government of the ÅU are anxious about the increase in the number of pensioners , which they feel " will create substantial pressure on social welfare systems , in particular pensions , health care systems and care of the elderly " ; .
In other words ' prosperity ' is being jeopardised by the increase in longevity .
And the solution is to increase employment in the 55-64 age group by 50 % by 2010 , at a time when workers , especially young people and women , are suffering from the scourge of unemployment and under-employment .
On the subject of the Balkans , they are continuing their policy of controlled destabilisation and , alongside their supposedly friendly stance towards the FYROM , they are endeavouring to promote the KLA as an equal negotiating partner with the government of the country .
It is perfectly obvious that the imperialist plans for the region have not yet been completed and that the people will be unable to live in peace until ÍÁÔÏ withdraws .
As far as Palestine is concerned , they are continuing their policy of maintaining the same distance from the state terrorism being applied by Israel and the just fight of the Palestinian people for a homeland .
On the economic front , they have limited state aid and subsidies , taken further steps to liberalise telecommunications , postal services , the railways and energy and have prepared to complete the sell-off of the public sector to the multinationals .
The joint motions for resolutions not only accept the summit conclusions , they also welcome the arrest of former President of Yugoslavia , Mr Milosevic , and call for him to be handed over to the ' International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ' in The Hague , which is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against them .
The Stockholm European Council is happy with the European Union ' s achievements and has announced that its ' strategic goal ' remains " to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world " .
The working classes certainly have nothing to be happy about .
To say that ' unemployment has fallen to its lowest level since 1991 ' is an involuntary way of recognising that it is still as high as it was ten years ago , when it was already catastrophic .
In addition , the balance sheet for these ten years includes the widespread introduction , throughout Europe , of poorly paid casual work and the decline of wages as a proportion of national income .
Only big companies and their proprietors and shareholders , can be happy about the exceptional level of profits , because that result has been obtained at the expense of working people , as well as public services and social provision .
As to the future , we are promised a continuation of current policies .
Some points even threaten a worse situation , particularly in terms of longer working hours and attacks on retirement age .
We refuse to give an endorsement for the future to European institutions entirely at the service of industrial and financial groups .
For public opinion and the media , Stockholm had all the hallmarks of a routine summit .
In fact , had it not been for the announcement of the joint Franco-German decision to postpone setting a deadline for the full liberalisation of the energy market until there is greater mastery of all the consequences and all the effects , the summit would certainly have been overlooked by the newspapers and TV .
It was an important summit in economic and social terms , however , and entirely in line with the Lisbon Summit , with the reaffirmation of the need to take action to secure full employment and skilled jobs in Europe .
As it turns out , those guidelines have immediately run up against the brutal announcement of redundancy plans at Danone and Marks and Spencer , with no consultation and without even having any genuine economic reasons .
Veritable ' dictatorship ' by the stock exchange and frenzied profit-seeking to the detriment of employees , when they are in fact the prime wealth creators , has demonstrated - to anyone who did not already know - what a vast gap there is between the soothing speeches of politicians and the reality experienced by employees on the ground .
So unless we want to acknowledge the death of the European social model , we cannot stand by and do nothing , and personally , since 31 March , I have been lobbying the highest European and French authorities to propose measures to end this diabolical spiral .
I am now waiting , like many in this Chamber , for precise and relevant responses .
If these are not forthcoming , there will be no point in organising any summits on employment and social policy in the future .
In the meantime , I support Francis Wurtz ' s proposal to create an ad hoc structure within the European Parliament , a sub-committee or observatory to monitor and analyse the adjustment strategies that powerful economic groups base entirely on staff reductions .
There should be a European summit on this vital issue for the equilibrium and future of Europe , in the course of 2001 .
That is the spirit in which I have voted today for the joint resolution tabled by the left .
Yet another summit serving private interests .
In Stockholm , the fate of Macedonia would appear to have been dealt with in a few minutes .
Farmers must make do with European ' solidarity ' to cope with foot-and-mouth disease and rule out a return to the vaccination programme , cancelled a few years ago to save money .
This time financial services emerge as the great victors .
Between now and 2003 a single market in securities will be established to allow a few profiteers to speculate in shares and bonds .
So , in the utmost opacity , financial dealings are encouraged and will revolve even more rapidly in the hands of a few industrialists , playing with the fate of millions of employees in passing .
We demand , at European level , suspension of banking confidentiality , opening of account books , and transparency in all operations .
That would be an effective means of combating money laundering and controlling the financial enterprises of companies , like Danone and Marks and Spencer , which persist in sacking people while making record profits .
Finally , the private operators have obtained confirmation of the liberalisation of juicy public services - the post office , electricity and gas .
Current social mobilisation calls for another type of summit , to bring together the efforts to ensure the establishment of a high quality European public service that responds to the fundamental needs of the peoples .
Stockholm European Council : Financial Markets ( B5-0244 / 2001 )
Stockholm European Council : Foreign affairs ( B5-0248 / 2001 )
Despite the belittling of the results of the Stockholm Summit by most of the media , progress was made , responding to the objectives of the economic and financial groups that dominate the European economy , as the Commission ' s proposal made very clear . The path has therefore already been mapped out .
As in the story about the half-cup of water , some will see it as half full and some as half empty .
The Lisbon strategy to speed up liberalisation , particularly through privatising transport , postal services , electricity , gas and telecommunications , was , despite everything , consolidated at the Stockholm Council .
Furthermore , the process of integrating the financial markets was also speeded up .
With regard to recovering ' full employment ' , this does not necessarily mean an increase in the number of quality jobs , particularly if this increase takes place at the expense of greater job insecurity .
With regard to the so-called ' modernisation of the European Social Model ' , new attacks were made on the pensions system and changes to social security , with the method of open coordination in this area being started up and with this objective being included in the EU ' s annual economic guidelines .
It is worth highlighting , however , that the tiny echoes from the social part of the Lisbon strategy are due to the efforts of the workers and all progressives who want to see an economy that pays more attention to people ' s problems and sustainable development . This is what I too hope for .
Although many of the items here do actually move the agenda towards our vision of Europe , we simply cannot accept that there should be any enhancement of the role of the political institutions of the EU , especially the Commission , and development of what is termed ' The Community method ' .
Third UN Conference ( B5-0246 / 2001 )
The EPLP has voted for the motion for a resolution on the Stockholm European Council .
However , we have reservations about paragraph 13 .
The EPLP continues to have reservations , as was expressed at first reading of the framework directive on informing and consulting employees .
The EPLP supports the view of the UK Minister for Trade and Industry , Stephen Byers , that it may be inappropriate to have European-wide legislation in the area of information and consultation .
Mr Byers stated that for the UK , " our whole system of corporate structures is quite different from that on the continent .
However , in many respects , the directive reflects the continental system of corporate governance , not that in the United Kingdom .
The directive is not appropriate for several reasons , but the issue is important and we should deal with it in our domestic setting . "
( Commons Hansard Debates 18 January 2001 )
The Stockholm Summit will not be remembered for its successes , the endeavours of the Swedish Presidency notwithstanding .
It did not manage to set up a European Food Safety Agency , despite the spread of foot-and-mouth and BSE .
It did not manage to agree on a common European patent system .
It continues to rely on the USA for a satellite location system , now that the Galileo programme has come to a standstill , and questions relating to the electricity market are no further forward than they were at the Lisbon Summit .
However , the main problem lies in the guidelines issued by the European Council on dismantling social protection mechanisms .
By obsessing on notions such as the ' ageing population ' , the need to ' modernise the European social model ' and the priority of ' the sustainability of public finances ' in relation to social systems , they are covering , strengthening and legalising the attempt being made by numerous governments in the European Union - such as Greece - to dismantle social protection systems and hand the workers over to private insurance companies without so much as a guarantee .
I believe that the labour movement should react decisively to these negative guidelines from the European Council in Stockholm .
The June Movement will not vote in favour of rules which mean that officials are enabled to legislate instead of elected representatives in open assemblies whose work can be monitored .
With regard to the resolution that has been adopted today on the ' external relations ' of the Stockholm Summit , against which I voted , I must mention some aspects in a explanation of vote that I am obliged to keep short .
First of all , where the Balkans are concerned , I must criticise an unacceptable and flagrant example of interference and blackmail towards the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by the USA , which is trying to whitewash and cover up the responsibilities of NATO and all those who waged a war against Yugoslavia , in blatant breach of the UN Charter and from within the Security Council itself . This was a war in which arms containing depleted uranium were used , the chemical and radiological effects of which on the population and on the environment have still not been fully assessed .
The causes of the current situation in the Balkans are complex and deep-seated , but I must highlight the interfering role of the USA and the EU , which have significantly and , at times decisively , contributed to undermining a process whose consequences for the situation throughout the region are far from resolved . A strategy of selectively and arbitrarily criminalising certain political leaders is therefore unacceptable .
Secondly , and bearing in mind the extremely serious situation in the Palestinian territories , I consider the resolution ' s provisions to be quite inadequate .
The resolution does not clearly and explicitly condemn the escalation of aggression by Israel , the bombings and the repression by the Israeli army against the Palestinian population or the intensification of the blockade imposed on the Palestinian territories .
Thirdly , we must be extremely concerned about the absence of criticism of the current militarisation of the EU , which has the instrument of the common defence policy , as the European pillar of NATO , and the absence of criticism of the North-American anti-missile shield project ( AMS ) whose completion would contribute to relaunching the arms race and to greater insecurity throughout the world .
Although the decision announced recently by the United States to reject the Kyoto Protocol has not come as a surprise , it is nonetheless extremely serious .
It comes as no surprise because despite the fact that the United States signed the Kyoto Protocol in 1997 , at successive United Nations Conferences designed to finalise the rules for implementing the Protocol , it has presented various excuses to block negotiations .
This is serious because national self-interest has won the day .
It is unacceptable that , given the increasingly dramatic predictions of the effects of global warming , the country mainly responsible for greenhouse gas emissions has refused to participate in the only international instrument designed to limit these effects .
As serious as this decision is , however , we cannot waver or hesitate over the need to implement the Kyoto Protocol , with or without the United States .
It is crucial that we put a brake on climate change and the Kyoto Protocol - and no other type of agreement - is the most appropriate political instrument to achieve this objective .
The non-participation of the United States does make the Protocol less comprehensive , but does not detract from its raison d ' être .
This may make application of the protocol more difficult , but it does not make it impossible .
The statement by the United States and the fact that COP6 part II , a conference designed to adopt the rules for implementing the Kyoto Protocol , forces the European Union to redouble its efforts and demonstrate effective leadership in this political dossier .
Both internally , by countering the very harmful developments in greenhouse gas emissions in most Member States and externally , by negotiating the rules for implementing the Protocol with as many countries as possible to ensure that it is ratified and implemented by 2002 .
The European also has the task of fighting to ensure that the rules of fair trade are implemented so that the United States cannot gain any illegal economic advantages from not ratifying the Protocol .
At the moment therefore , rather than insisting on a dialogue of the deaf with the United States , the European Union must implement an action plan that will enable us to implement Kyoto across the board , in other words , with as many countries as possible , and as a matter of urgency , by 2002 .
This action plan must enable us to achieve the following set of timetabled goals :
I ) To negotiate , even before COP6 part II , the rules for implementing the Kyoto Protocol with Russia , Japan , Australia , Canada and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , in order to reach an agreement that can be ratified by more than 55 countries , corresponding to more than 55 % of emissions , which is the minimum level required for the Kyoto Protocol to come into force ;
II ) For the EU to ratify the Kyoto Protocol by the end of 2001 ;
III ) To adopt National Reduction Plans for greenhouse gases by the end of 2001 ;
IV ) To present the directive on the implementation of the European Emissions-Trading System by the end of 2001 ;
V ) To present , under the European Programme for Climate Change , a raft of copper-bottomed directives on policies and measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the industry , energy , services , agriculture and mainly , transport sectors , in which emissions are increasing most rapidly .
VI ) For the European Commission to draft an economic study on the competitive advantages that American products , particularly in the field of energy , will gain illegally over European products as a result of the European Union not implementing the Kyoto Convention ;
VII ) For the European Commission to draft a legal study to determine the way in which , within supranational institutions , particularly the World Trade Organisation and the Transatlantic Economic Partnership , these illegal advantages , to which I referred in my previous point , can be minimised .
Ladies and gentlemen , that concludes this morning ' s agenda .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
UN Human Rights Commission and the People 's Republic of China
The first item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0268 / 2001 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group ;
B5-0269 / 2001 by Mrs Frassoni and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0277 / 2001 by Mrs Frahm and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0285 / 2001 by Mr McMillan-Scott , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0294 / 2001 by Mr Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
on the United Nations Human Rights Commission and the People 's Republic of China .
Mr President , I am rather disappointed .
I can greet the Commission but I cannot greet the Council whose absence I deplore when this resolution on human rights in China is primarily addressed to the Council .
I would like to tell the Council , or whoever is reporting to the absent Council , what a failure , not to say disaster , the EU ' s China policy has been .
We all know there are growing social and political contradictions in that country .
The risk of explosion is imminent and we can all imagine the disaster that will represent in a country the size of China , not only in regional terms , but also in world terms .
Our duty as elected representatives and citizens is to make the Chinese leaders , legal , yes , but certainly not legitimate , understand that only democracy and the rule of law can guarantee stability not just in China itself but also in the whole of the Asian continent .
I think it is our duty to remind the Council , and the Commission where it is appropriate - that the right way to bring the Chinese Government round to the basic principles of democracy and the state of law , is this resolution tabled by the United States due to be voted on in the next few days by the Human Rights Commission in Geneva .
It is our duty to remind the Council that the European Union cannot continue to take a hypocritical stance and that it must support this resolution , sponsor it and work actively in the Human Rights Commission for its adoption .
Without intending to be either anti-Chinese or pro-Chinese , I repeat that China is a fundamental country in a regional and continental context where Indonesia , the Philippines , Malaysia and many other countries are experiencing enormous problems , and where Vietnam and Laos too are still ruled by a one-party regime .
China can play a fundamental role providing it finally adopts a democratic system based on the rule of law .
That is what we must make clear to the Chinese leaders . We have two goals : democracy for the Chinese , the Tibetans , the Uigurs and the Mongols , and the stability of the entire continent of Asia .
Mr President , it is often said that Europe is not capable of producing a foreign policy , just as it is not capable of adopting a unified position on international affairs .
I feel that if the countries of the European Union stick by their decision not to sign the resolution on human rights in China , that would only be confirmation of that inability .
There is absolutely no reason , other than hypocrisy and defeatism , why we should not sign this resolution , for in not doing so we are not achieving anything at all that could justify taking this standpoint on a subject upon which there is such wide consensus from our public .
Therefore , our resolution - which is not the first and , I believe and fear , will not be the last - seeks to make the Council change its mind , thereby ensuring that , at least at the level of condemnation from the civilised world , this time , China gets what it deserves .
Mr President , China is very much in our minds at the moment following the incident involving the American EP-3 reconnaissance aircraft .
This is a matter which should be resolved with great urgency by the Chinese authorities before its consequences spiral out of control .
The US Administration has expressed its regret , which we share , particularly over the loss of a Chinese fighter pilot , but now is the moment to bring this matter to an end by releasing the American aircrew and enabling recovery of the American aircraft .
Otherwise this matter will become a running sore , poisoning international relations at a very sensitive time .
The Chinese Government seems anxious to play a fuller part in the international community , particularly in terms of economic development and eventual membership of the WTO .
But it has not yet realised the need to adjust attitudes in other areas or recognise that political confrontation needs to be replaced by a more conciliatory approach .
This applies not just in the field of international relations , but in terms of domestic policy as well .
It will be an enormous leap forward when we no longer have to table resolutions on human rights abuses in China but we see very little progress being made and the catalogue of abuses continues to expand .
The Falun Gong movement is violently suppressed and some 80 of its members are reported to have died in custody in China in the past 18 months .
The sustained violence and intimidation against Tibetan Buddhists is little short of a programme of ethnic cleansing .
A great country like China is surely sufficiently robust and forward-looking that it can give real freedom to all the peoples living under its authority .
It must show that it recognises the individual humanity of its citizens and will exercise the duty of good government by providing protection for all under the rule of law .
We urge the Council and the Member States to take strong note of the likely resolution of this Parliament and to support the resolution of the United States at the UN Commission in Geneva deploring the state of human rights in China .
Mr President , we are looking just now towards China in the hope that the incident involving the American aircraft will be resolved without too much rhetoric and political point-scoring .
Even setting aside this event , reports from China are , nevertheless , pouring in thick and fast .
They almost always concern acts of cruelty against its own citizens .
Commentators the world over are agreed that the human rights situation in China is becoming worse and worse .
We are talking here about the situation in Tibet and Sinkiang and about the widespread increase in the torture and persecution of dissidents , active trade unionists and representatives of democracy .
We are talking about the frequent use of the death penalty and the opposition mounted against freedom of expression on the Internet .
We are talking , in particular , about the arrest , torture and persecution of Falun Gong practitioners .
The Chinese régime ' s objective of breaking this movement will not succeed .
The persecutions must therefore be halted immediately and a dialogue entered into .
Parliament agrees about the situation in China .
I know that the Commission shares this view , and Commissioner Patten has defended human rights in China several times in this Chamber .
The world ' s most populous country is systematically violating its citizens ' rights .
Europe cannot remain silent and watch this happen .
The signals coming from the Council are , however , conflicting and hypocritical and help weaken the international struggle to get the Chinese régime to change its policy .
This lack of unity benefits none other than the Chinese régime , and at the expense of the Chinese people .
The Council must therefore get its act together and show that all the talk about unity is not just idle chatter but can also be expressed in action . It must also support the resolution against China in Geneva in a couple of weeks ' time .
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists would have liked to have seen the Council , in other words all the Member States together , submit a motion during the 57th sitting of the UN Human Rights Commission .
We had also asked for this earlier in the European Parliament .
But we did not get that far .
We are not too keen ourselves on co-sponsoring with the United States , and would have preferred to have our own European position .
We will be voting in favour of the resolution because , ultimately , we are naturally all agreed on the human rights situation in China .
That is why we are delighted about the fact that the European Member States have decided in the Council to vote jointly for a resolution after all , if it is submitted .
Apparently , it is not up to us to submit this resolution , but if the United States submits one , then we can support it .
That is an advance on last year , when the Member States were still divided .
Although he cannot speak on behalf of the Council , maybe Mr Lamy can give us this information here .
The exciting thing for both Europe and China is , of course , that we have an incredibly strong financial market .
We need a sound human rights policy to match .
Foreign policy and the economy must be consistent and , in a completely different way , this also applies to China .
China is extremely generous when it comes to giving free rein to economic processes .
At the same time , the country is incredibly oppressive and dictatorial in its political policy .
This will , of course , generate impossible tensions , fundamental also in terms of human rights .
They sign international conventions , which they struggle to implement and then contravene .
It would be extremely positive if we could encourage all those powers in China which inject more consistency into the fabric .
Any partnership which we as Europe can enter into with China in this respect is very welcome .
At the same time , we must continue to speak in clear terms on human rights and condemn as and when appropriate .
That is why this resolution is so pertinent .
Mr President , I realise that the questions on this point are addressed more to the Council than the Commission and that we are a poor substitute .
Nonetheless , the Commission is examining the problem in depth and we share many of the concerns which have just been voiced .
Broadly speaking , our position can be summarised as follows .
The living conditions of the bulk of the Chinese population have improved over the last twenty years as economic reform and liberalisation have given citizens a certain degree of economic and social freedom .
Unfortunately - and I do stress unfortunately - the same cannot be said of civil and political rights , and the human rights situation still falls considerably short of the commitments that China has entered into internationally .
As you know , back in 1996 we set up a bilateral dialogue with China , which provides a suitable forum for frank exchanges of views which I can bear witness to , having attended the last summit meeting between China and the European Union during the French Presidency .

A number of positive signs have emerged , such as the ratification of the UN Covenant on Economic , Social , and Cultural Rights on 28 February and the signing , last November , of the outline agreement with the UN High Commission for Human Rights which , we hope , will now be implemented .
We are clearly concerned , however , to see more tangible results on the ground .
Our main preoccupations are the same as yours , the continued persecution of political dissidents , the restrictions imposed on religious freedom , the application of the death penalty , the ratification of the UN covenants and their implementation , especially as regards political and civil rights , the treatment of ethnic minorities , arbitrary detention and so on .
As far as the United Nations is concerned , during the General Affairs Council meeting on 19 March , we decided to back the resolution on China tabled by the United States within the Human Rights Commission in Geneva , should that resolution be put to the vote .
We also agreed that the European Members of the Human Rights Commission would vote against any non-action motion that is tabled and would lobby to ensure the other members did the same .
We feel that the very notion of non-action is totally opposed to the spirit of dialogue that we have tried to establish .
We restated our position in Geneva on 29 March that we take the issue of the violation of human rights seriously wherever it occurs in the world .
As to the question of co-sponsoring the resolution , we feel that the dialogue on human rights between the European Union and China is a privileged channel of communication working to improve the situation in the many spheres of concern to us .
This is in fact the position which was endorsed by the Council , because we feel that it may have a positive impact .
As regards this year ' s decision , namely that we will support a motion for a resolution which we do not co-sponsor , this does not mean to say that we rule out the possibility of returning to this mechanism at a later date .
Dialogue is clearly an acceptable option only if it leads to progress on the ground .
This is the position which was adopted in January on the EU-China dialogue and in the conclusions of the General Affairs Council meeting on 19 March .
We will therefore support this resolution if it is put to the vote .
We will not co-sponsor it since we think that direct dialogue still has potential .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Kyoto Conference objectives
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0267 / 2001 by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0270 / 2001 by Mrs Hautala and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0278 / 2001 by Mr Wurtz and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0287 / 2001 by Mr Moreira Da Silva and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0291 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0295 / 2001 by Mr Davies and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
on the Kyoto Conference objectives .
Mr President , by refusing to implement the Kyoto agreement on climate change , the President of the United States is waging an assault not only on people outside the United States but also on his own citizens .
Mr Bush ' s decision to withdraw from the Kyoto Protocol is an indication of his immense lack of responsibility regarding the future of humanity .
The Social Democrats also wish to strongly emphasise the fact that his attitude is , more than anything , irresponsible with regard to the developing countries .
The USA ' s own emissions of carbon dioxide account for around a quarter of those now produced around the world .
The USA produces per head of population more than ten times the amount that would represent sustainable development if that were the average figure for everyone on earth .
The unilateral decision taken by the American President will tend to have an adverse effect on dialogue on either side of the Atlantic .
To avoid any greater confrontation Bush should reverse his decision and embark on an active dialogue with the EU and other parties to the agreement on climate to ensure that we can together take adequate action to prevent climate change .
However , in any event , the European Union must keep to its obligations .
Europe , and presumably the United States also , today have all the technical facilities to ensure that emissions from industry can be reduced by a third from the levels for 1990 by the year 2010 .
Now enormous effort , greater than ever before , must be made in the energy production and traffic and transport sectors .
There is no economic justification either for abandoning the aims and obligations of Kyoto .
Sustainable development does not threaten economic prosperity , on the contrary , it promotes the rational use of natural resources and is an assurance of prosperity and jobs for generations to come .
Mr President , the Social Democrats in the European Parliament would like to make a strong plea in favour of strengthening the action to prevent climatic change , ensuring that it does not in any way weaken and that the Gothenburg summit will send a clear message regarding the wishes of Europeans .
Mr President , it is scandalous that President Bush is boycotting the Kyoto Protocol .
Major American oil concerns , such as Exxon , Texaco and Chevron have helped Bush into the saddle .
Their hand in this boycott is obvious .
Bush is not only thick , he is as thick as two short planks .
The EU must respond by ratifying the Kyoto Protocol before the summer of 2002 .
More than 20 countries have already done just that .
The EU can and must ratify Kyoto , together with our Eastern European partners , Russia , Japan and countries such as Brazil .
These 55 countries combined account for 55 % of emissions .
Even without the US , the Kyoto Protocol will be legally valid .
Worldwide negotiations have taken place for nearly ten years .
The time has come for action and deeds .
Europe must take the lead with energy savings and renewable energy .
The new technologies - wind power , biomass and solar energy - will also yield economic benefits for Europe .
Windmills are Denmark ' s second export product .
European actions should persuade the developing countries to accept the climate objectives in time .
Those same developing countries already made it clear at the failed climate summit in The Hague that they did not want nuclear energy , even if it were subsidised .
European and American citizens can break Bush ' s Kyoto boycott by boycotting fuel and diesel from Exxon , Texaco and Chevron .
The political pleas by Commissioner Wallström and the troika were to no avail .
The majority of MEPs refuse , on principle , to sign such a boycott .
But MEPs from Sweden and the Netherlands have in the past called for a boycott of the apartheid regime in South Africa .
Citizens , show your anger and boycott Bush .
Boycott Exxon , Texaco and Chevron .
Capital punishment in the US may be ethically unjustified , but in the final analysis it is a matter for the American people .
However , the demise of the climate which Bush is bringing about for the whole world is unacceptable .
Mr President , Mrs Myller is the rapporteur in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , for the 6th European Union environmental action programme , which is the environmental strategy for the next ten years .
And one of the objectives of this debate is to comply with the decisions made in Kyoto , which we consider to be an unavoidable objective for the European Union .
The European Union set an example when , in Kyoto , it asked for a greater reduction .
It is true that later , in the discussion and debate , this reduction ended up lower than we all thought , given that the European Environment Agency said that instead of the 8 % reduction from 1990 , it should be 30 % , if we wanted to go along the right path .
I , therefore , share in the two amendments tabled by my colleagues in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , that is , we have to tell the United States that it is immoral not only for it not to comply with the Kyoto protocol , but also for it to rely on developing countries , saying that only they need to reduce pollution .
It is immoral , and we have to say so here loud and clear , because while the annual average CO2 emissions of a European are 10 tonnes , the average for an American is 24 tonnes and developing countries are way below the average .
We need to use this argument in the transatlantic relations that we have with the United States .
We need to act unilaterally , not only on the basis that we need to look after the competitiveness of companies , but also on the basis that , from an economic point of view , the most reasonable thing to do is to support the Kyoto Protocol and take specific and clear measures aimed at implementing and ratifying the Kyoto Protocol .
I think that in Europe we can once again set an example if all the European countries ratify the Protocol , if they start to take unilateral measures and if they force the United States , in transatlantic relations , not to continue acting in such an immoral way .
Mr President , there was palpable shock and disappointment at President Bush 's recent announcement that the US will not cooperate with efforts to decrease carbon emissions in the endeavour to stave off the real threat of global warming .
The US , with 5 % of the world 's population , produces 25 % of the world 's greenhouse gases .
For President Bush to tell the EU delegation in Washington this week that he acknowledges both the problem and the need to find a solution is hollow rhetoric , when the US distances itself from the only solution on the table , and that a partial solution at best .
Kyoto is only the beginning of the way forward .
What is President Bush afraid of ?
Many of the Kyoto signatories , including my own country , are failing to meet our agreed targets ; but we must keep trying , we must keep talking - at Bonn next in June or July - and endeavour to reach the targets set for all the difficulties posed in the short term .
The longer-term consequences will be far more difficult to resolve .
It is not a question of the environment , or of employment .
The promotion and protection of economic competitiveness is inextricably linked to the protection of the environment .
Well-managed environments are themselves a source of wealth creation through agriculture , tourism and the maintenance of assimilative capacity .
Environmental protection is therefore a matter of enlightened self-interest for the future economic wellbeing and competitiveness of Europe , the US and the entire world .
Viewed this way , environmental protection becomes part of a virtuous circle whereby a high-quality environment is sustained by wealth , which in turn is sustained by competition , which in turn requires a high-quality environment .
Yes , environmental orthodoxies must be constantly scrutinised and re-evaluated to ensure that the protection required is proportionate and effective .
What Kyoto requires of us all is just that : proportionate and effective responses to the global threat of climate change .
And developed countries and communities have a particular responsibility .
Great sensitivity , tolerance and compassion must be employed when it is proposed to apply the environmental standards of the developed world to the economies and environments of emerging economies .
We need to acknowledge the resilience of natural systems and their ability subsequently to recover once a plateau of economic stability has been reached .
This has been the pattern over most of the developed world .
Productivity and profitability are important prerequisites for environmental protection and enhancement .
I acknowledge the need for sustained economic competitiveness to provide the very resources required for a high-quality environment .
President Bush , there does not need to be any contradiction between these two objectives .
It is not jobs or the environment .
Please come back on board Kyoto , and be sure you do not mortgage all our children 's heritage .
Environmental pollution , climate change , is no respecter of borders .
Mr President , I have requested the floor first and foremost to express my full support for the resolution that has been tabled by the various groups and for the battle which I hope the European Parliament and the entire European Union will wage firmly and resolutely on this matter .
It is with deep regret that the Europeans and all those who are sincere friends of the United States see a great country , which ought to be the leading light not just of economic progress but also of human civilisation in all fields , abandon one of the fundamental principles : the protection of the environment , of health and of the world that , in years to come , we will be leaving to our children and heirs .
However , the current problem is not just deciding upon a position which , it appears , has been adopted by these bodies with a very wide majority , but how to move forwards .
We must , in fact , ask ourselves whether a political position such as that we are adopting , a position putting pressure on the public , is enough in this matter , or whether more tangible action might not be required .
Now we come to the question we are already , at this stage , putting to the Commission , to the competent bodies .
Certainly , an initial recommendation has already been made : ratify Kyoto , in any case , and assume all our responsibilities before the world .
But will all this be enough to make it clear that , without the cooperation of the United States , the battle on the world stage is a difficult one ?
As of today , therefore , I am posing a question . Will the European Union genuinely stand 100 % firm on this issue , or , as I regret to say has happened on other occasions , for example , in certain matters such as the death penalty , will it put up a good fight and then fail to achieve the key objectives at the decisive moment ?
This , Mr President , is the question we wish to put to the representatives of the Commission today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , even though the worst scenarios involving ongoing climate change are not being depicted , it is the populations of the poorest countries of all that are hit hardest by these changes .
It is therefore extremely odd that the country responsible for a good quarter of the earth ' s total carbon dioxide emissions should not be contributing to the reduction of such emissions .
It is dreadful and a big disappointment , but it is not exactly surprising .
It was hardly by chance that President Clinton did not establish the Kyoto Protocol firmly in the American Senate .
Time after time , and most recently at last year ' s Climate Conference in The Hague , the United States has shown its unwillingness to negotiate about the American life-style .
Now , President Bush has spoken his mind and said openly that the United States does not intend to participate in the Kyoto process because the Protocol , as he puts it , excludes 80 per cent of the world and would seriously damage the American economy .
It is deeply shocking to see the world ' s largest democracy knowingly sacrifice the long-term interests of the majority of the earth ' s population on the altar of its own greed .
Mr President , I wish to express my support for the positions put forward by our fellow Member , Jorge Moreira da Silva , who led our delegation at the Hague Conference on Climate Change and who demonstrated enormous commitment to achieving the compromise that we reached , fortunately , on this resolution . I wish to make four brief points .
First of all , I must strongly condemn the unfortunate unilateral decision rejecting the Kyoto Protocol , which warrants our criticism , announced by President Bush .
Secondly , although this is a serious development , it comes as no surprise ; the Union should have forearmed itself a long time ago with alternative strategies .
Thirdly , we must not waver or hesitate over the need to implement the Kyoto Protocol , with or without the United States .
My fourth and final point is that the European Union must now redouble its efforts and demonstrate effective leadership , both within the European Union , by fighting against the increase in emissions that we are seeing today in most of our fifteen Member States and beyond the Union , by ensuring that Kyoto is ratified by as many countries as possible so that it can enter into force before 2002 .
Mr President , since the Bush administration has taken up office , the entire world is being shaken up by his highly conservative policy .
His first action , abolishing aid to third-world countries in the field of birth control , was promptly followed by the transfer of social security in America to the churches .
You cannot get any food in America unless you say your prayers .
Subsequently , we witnessed America ' s withdrawal from the Middle East peace process .
That is literally a life-threatening development .
And now , to cap it all , Kyoto .
Bush thinks he can afford not to adhere to the worldwide agreements on CO2 reduction .
The interests of the American oil industry thus apparently outweigh the environmental interest .
All these retrograde steps surprise progressive Europeans and people worldwide .
Our group is of the opinion , therefore , that it is of the utmost importance for all European institutions , but also the European Member States , to continue to take a firm stand against this development .
Mr President , Commissioner , although it was distressing to hear in The Hague of the failure of the signatories to the agreement on global warming to implement the Kyoto Protocol , we must nevertheless welcome the healthy political reactions condemning the shameful provocation by President Bush who , by trying to blow the commitments of the fight against greenhouse gas emissions out of the water , is simply rewarding the American oil lobby which financed his electoral campaign .

Commissioner , we must save the Kyoto Protocol .
The survival of the planet is at stake .
That is why we must set an example .
With or without the United States , the European Union must sign the Kyoto Protocol .
We must show and we must prove to the whole world that , as one of the parties responsible for currently polluting the planet , we are genuinely committed , in practical terms too , to combating greenhouse gas emissions .
Public opinion supports us in this .
We must convince the American public that its President is making an historic mistake .
Mr President , in the light of the unilateral decision made by the United States , I would like to remind you of the conclusions of the intergovernmental group of experts on climate change , which said that if nothing is done to put a brake on the current trend , temperatures may increase by between 1.4 and 5.8 degrees by 2100 , which will have disastrous consequences for the planet .
Sea levels will rise ; there will be more severe droughts and more brutal floods ; islands , coastal regions and deltas will disappear ; we will see famines and epidemics and entire species will become extinct .
The poorest populations will be most affected . And this is not necessarily the worst-case scenario .
That is why Parliament must take a stand on this issue and express , in the strongest terms , its deep indignation at the decision taken by President Bush to reject the Kyoto Protocol .
At a time when populations are quite rightly apprehensive about the prospect of climate change , the consequences of which would be disastrous , the United States , the major consumer of energy in the world , has taken a decision which is totally irresponsible and dangerous .
Furthermore , I think that all honourable Members are aware of the fact that the United States has even gone so far as to authorise an oil company to drill for oil in an Alaskan nature reserve .
This attitude of allegiance to the interests of multinational companies shows total contempt for both humans and nature .
All nations must assume their responsibilities .
I welcome the protests made by the European Union , other major countries and Member States .
The United States , which signed the Kyoto Protocol in 1998 , must be called to account .
We must reject any re-examination of the Kyoto commitments . We must ratify and apply the protocol even without the United States .
Commissioner , as we know from past experience that a verbal protest will not be enough , in order to apply effective pressure it would be judicious to include environmental clauses in international commercial negotiations .
It is the future of the planet and of our children that is at stake .
I do not think it is employment which acts against the environment .
Once again , it is the primacy of money that militates against humane and sustainable development , which is the undeniable ambition espoused by the European Union .
Mr President , naturally the blow dealt to us by the US President has affected us deeply .
The worst thing would be if we were now to cast doubt on our own objectives in Europe .
This must not happen .
I would like to remind you that we have a great many documents , such as the White Paper on Renewable Energies , and a great many directives which we have not fully applied and implemented .
The more credible we ourselves are , the stronger our arguments will be in relation to the United States .
We must also try , by bypassing the US administration , to convince the American intelligentsia of the benefits , especially the obvious ecological benefits , of reducing pollution .
However , there are also massive economic and social advantages .
If we open up this channel of communication we have the chance to prove that our economic future also lies in implementing ecological objectives .
Mr President , President Bush ' s decision is deeply tragic .
For more than ten years , negotiations have been under way concerning measures to protect the climate .
The United States has participated the whole time and privately forced compromises , especially on the part of us Europeans .
Now that they are jumping ship , it is like throwing ten years of negotiations out of the window .
It jeopardises the whole of the international negotiation system in the environmental sphere .
President Bush states that the United States ' s economy would be damaged .
At the same time , we know that the United States consumes more than twice as much energy per produced unit as is on average the case in the EU .
The potential for energy saving in the United States is enormous .
What has happened is deeply tragic .
The United States ' s action means that we Europeans bear that much heavier a responsibility for taking the lead in climate work , for the work must continue , with or without the United States .
We must then hope that the United States ' s political leadership will listen to reason , for positive cooperation on the part of the United States is crucial in the long run if we are to be able to stabilise the climate .
We must not therefore stop at merely criticising and condemning the United States , because we at the same time need a dialogue if we are to succeed in changing President Bush ' s decision in the long term .
Mr President , here is the world leader , who has such an irresponsible attitude towards the environment and towards our future ; it is completely unacceptable .
I would fully support any call for the boycotting of US oil companies right throughout Europe .
The only way we are going to have any effect on the United States is if we use bullying tactics .
It is clear that President Bush is only representing the interests of US industry .
He does not care about the planet , nor about the future for ourselves and our children .
Considering that the US is the world 's biggest consumer of energy , it is completely unacceptable for it to take this totally irresponsible approach .
President Bush is not a world leader , he is actually a prehistoric monster because he cannot understand what is happening in this world .
If he does not understand , we are in big trouble because America is the biggest power in the world and , if it has such an irresponsible attitude , what is going to happen with the rest of the world ?
It is completely unacceptable .
He is an absolute disgrace and I pity the American people .
The decision by President of the United States to reject even the cautious commitments of the Kyoto Protocol on emissions of six greenhouse gases into the atmosphere is clearly totally irresponsible from the point of view of the environment and the interests of humanity .
However , the verbal clashes on this subject between the United States and the other industrial powers are hypocritical .
The behaviour of America ' s leaders is only the reflection of the behaviour of an entire social class which monopolises the means of production of the entire planet , in the United States , in Europe and elsewhere .
Mr Bush is just doing the dirty work for large US corporations in the oil and coal industry .
He is applying the philosophy of an economic order based on the quest for profit .
Were European governments , however , which , by the way , claim to be defenders of the environment , able to prevent the Erika disaster ?
Were they able to prevent many continental rivers being turned into sewers ?
Were they able to prevent Seveso ?
Are they even able to force industrial companies to respect the working environment and the health of their own workers ?
Just like the Government of the United States , their main concern is to create the political conditions which will enable large companies to maximise their profits and not to curb them , even in the interest of society at large .
For our part , while condemning the Government of the United States , we condemn the governments of all industrial powers and , beyond that , the current economic order , in which profit is everything and human beings count for nothing .
Mr President , it is clear that , like Parliament , the Commission is extremely disappointed by recently announced rejection of the Kyoto Protocol by the United States .
As you know , we took the initiative of condemning this rejection .
Mr Prodi and Mr Persson wrote to President Bush on 14 March to voice our indignation .
Mrs Wallström and our Council colleagues spent some of this week in the United States with Mrs Wittman and Mr Armitage , who are the competent persons in the American administration .
We are not going to settle for these contacts , and we have also decided that this troika will hold talks with Canada and will initiate talks in the coming weeks with Russia , Iran , China and Japan .
We have decided to do everything within our power to keep the Kyoto process on track .
Be that as it may , the American administration has confirmed its unwillingness and hence its refusal to ratify the Kyoto Protocol .
It has given no indication of the content of the recently announced re-examination of its policies on climate change or the date on which this information will be made public .
The problem is very serious .
The only good news , if you can call it that , is that , up to now , nobody has challenged the current state of scientific knowledge on climate change , which is an achievement , and the United States has indicated that it will continue to be involved in future international negotiations .
Mrs Wallström clearly pointed out to our American counterparts that abandoning the Protocol would be a mistake .
To start from scratch would not only be a waste of time but would also risk breaking the fragile balance that the Protocol had succeeded in establishing between the industrialised world , which had greatly contributed to the problem , and developing countries whose emissions per inhabitant were far below those of industrialised nations .
At the same time , the European Union declared its intention to continue negotiations within the Kyoto framework , despite the fact that the United States had dropped out .
The Protocol could come into effect if the European Union , the applicant countries , Russia and Japan ratified it .
Like Mr de Roo , we believe that the impact of the Protocol will be lessened because of the absence of the biggest polluter on the planet , but we cannot , and we must not , wait for the Americans .
So we have clearly reaffirmed our commitment to ratify the Kyoto Protocol in 2002 at the latest and , to this end , preparations are under way .
This requires us to adopt a consistent approach , which means continuing our efforts to combat climate change .
The European programme on climate change that Mrs González mentioned is now in existence .
It is under development .
We are going to make every effort to move the Protocol forward .
We will ratify it and we will ensure that we are consistent .
You can count on the Commission to continue to fulfil its role as the driving force in matters of climate change , which Mrs Isler-Béguin called for . We will also continue to ensure that the European Union is the driving force at an international level both in terms imparting our values to other countries and also in terms of our own implementation strategy .
Like Mrs Myller , I am in no doubt that the two issues will feature on the agenda of the summit between the United States and Europe , which will take place in Gothenburg during the next European Council which , as you know , will be mainly devoted to the environment .
This is therefore an important date for us all .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Abduction of Mr Tsiakourmas in Cyprus - B5-0266 / 2001 by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0271 / 2001 by Mrs Frassoni and Mr Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0279 / 2001 by Mr Wurtz and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0286 / 2001 by Mr Zacharakis and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0296 / 2001 by Mr Davies , on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
on the abduction of Mr Tsiakourmas in Cyprus .
Violence towards Catholic nuns- B5-0261 / 2001 by Mrs Karamanou and others , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0272 / 2001 by Mrs Sörensen , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0280 / 2001 by Mrs Morgantini and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0298 / 2001 by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
on violence towards Catholic nuns .
Pakistan- B5-0265 / 2001 by Mr Fruteau and Mrs Erika Mann , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0273 / 2001 by Mr Rod and Mrs Maes , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0281 / 2001 by Mr Cossutta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0288 / 2001 by Mrs Martens , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0299 / 2001 by Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0302 / 2001 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group ,
on the situation in Pakistan .
Rights of homosexuals in Namibia- B5-0264 / 2001 by Mrs Swiebel and others , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0274 / 2001 by Mr Lagendijk and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0282 / 2001 by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0300 / 2001 by Mrs Van der Laan and Mrs Dybkjær , on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
on the rights of homosexuals in Namibia .
Abduction of Mr Tsiakourmas in Cyprus
SE ) . ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Tsiakourmas has been wrongly accused of drug dealing .
As far as this accusation is concerned , allow me to read , in English , the report by the police stationed on the British bases , which are British sovereign territory , on the circumstances surrounding his arrest .
The British police investigated the matter and they say :
In spite of the statements of the Turkish Cypriot police to the contrary , all other available evidence indicates that Mr Tsiakourmas was taken from his vehicle .
The vehicle was abandoned well within the eastern sovereign base areas .
There is absolutely no evidence , forensic or historical , to indicate that Mr Tsiakourmas had or has ever had illegal drugs in his motor vehicle , or in his possession .
I think that if the Greek Government had said this , I would believe it , but others might not .
If the Government of Cyprus had said this , I would believe it , but others might not .
But these are the words of the British police .
I think that draws a line under the question of what happened .
As to the political significance of what happened , Mr Tsiakourmas was a building contractor who went into the British base , which is close to a Turkish-Cypriot village , and collected Turkish labourers for building work .
In other words , this was a man with contacts with both communities , which the Turkish and Turkish-Cypriot leaders wish to keep apart and at loggerheads .
It was because he was in the delicate position of dealing with his Turkish counterparts in Cyprus that he became the target of this criminal abduction .
May I say that it is a sorry spectacle to see an arbitrary power which has claimed to be a state for 25 years , which has not been recognised by the international community for 25 years , now trying to impose its de facto presence by engaging in gangster-type abductions .
Commissioner , I turn to you .
Concern for the fate of the individual is one of the most noble traditions of France , your country and homeland .
We need only think of the Dreyfus case , we need only think of Flaubert ' s trial , we need only think of Zola ' s ' J ' accuse ' trial .
Tsiakourmas is , of course , no Dreyfus , Zola or Flaubert .
But , in his own small way , he represents the very same problem .
Which is why I call on you and the Commission to evince an interest in his case .
Let me assure you that , in fighting and claiming his freedom , Tsiakourmas is claiming freedom , peace and reconciliation for the two communities in Cyprus .
Mr President , I would like to express my agreement with Mr Katiforis .
This is a really bad case of an unjustifiable seizure of a person outside the territory to which he was then taken and in which he has been illegally detained since 13 December last year .
We want to take account of the fact , do we not , that Turkey has advanced towards candidate status for membership of the Union and that so long as we have sores of this kind weeping in the corner of the Mediterranean and problems of this sort , Turkey puts itself outside of reasonable consideration .
This is a grievous attack on human rights , it is a totally unacceptable insult to a human being and we call for the President to let us put this resolution forward with the support of the whole of Parliament .
Mr President , the accusations against Mr Tsiakourmas are groundless to the point that they must surely be thrown out even by the kangaroo court in which he is being tried .
The question , of course , is where the illegal occupying regime in northern Cyprus finds the nerve to take such action , especially in an area under British sovereignty .
Obviously , if the so-called international community wished to put an end to the occupying regime , it would have the means to do so .
This comment applies even more so to the European Union , given that Turkey is a candidate country and Cyprus is already engaged in accession negotiations .
The European Union has the means to exert pressure and could use them .
At the same time , however , the European Union has huge economic , political and military interests in Turkey and it is obviously these interests that dictate its conduct .
Furthermore , it would appear that the very procedure to integrate Cyprus into the European Union is probably complicating the Cyprus question , rather than helping to resolve it .
In all events , we call on the European Union and on the Government of the United Kingdom to , at least this once , let Turkey feel the sharp edge of its tongue and ensure that Mr Tsiakourmas is released unconditionally .
Mr President , I should like us all to vigorously support the motion for a resolution on the liberation of Mr Tsiakourmas .
This is not the time to confine ourselves to polite recommendations to Turkey , whose forces illegally abducted him from inside the British base at Dhekelia in Cyprus and have been holding him in prison ever since , despite the fact that he is seriously ill and his life is in danger .
I honestly wonder how Great Britain can accept this breach of its sovereignty without reacting decisively and effectively , which it is perfectly capable of doing , if it so chooses .

Ladies and gentlemen , the abduction of Mr Tsiakourmas , the incursion of Turkish occupying forces on to neutral soil in Cyprus , the claim on Greek islands and Turkey ' s constant threats that , if the Republic of Cyprus becomes a member of the European Union , Turkey will react violently , as the Minister of the Interior , Mr Cem , stated a few days ago , prove that Turkey saw the decision by the Helsinki Summit as an expression of weakness on the part of Europe .
That is why , instead of falling into line with the terms laid down for it to become a member , it has become even more audacious .
It is time for the European Union to prove that Turkey cannot pour scorn on our courtesy , tolerance and efforts to help it become a true democracy based on the rule of law before we accept it into the European family with impunity .
Mr President , this is a straightforward case of illegal actions .
Mr Tsiakourmas should be released and treated properly and his case should not be a weapon in a propaganda war between Greek and Turkish Cypriots , the latest manifestation of which is about which side has destroyed more of the other 's culture .
I am pleased to represent both communities as residents of London , and both deserve equal respect for themselves and their culture .
I refuse to choose one side or the other .
Our interest is in a united European Cyprus .
The EU must get more engaged in the search for a political solution and it should press for mutual respect .
We could perhaps give some funding to the preservation of both sides ' cultural monuments .
But in the meantime Mr Tsiakourmas must not be held hostage .
Illegal action is illegal wherever it happens and this case must be solved without it becoming a weapon in a propaganda war .
Mr President , the Tsiakourmas case should never have happened and it must quickly be brought to an end .
It involves infringement of British sovereign territory and the wrongful arrest of a vulnerable individual who has no record of wrongdoing .
It seems to have been an ill conceived tit-for-tat .
With some regret , therefore , I have to say that we will support the resolution and I call on the Turkish authorities to release Mr Tsiakourmas now .
I have also to say that it is a pity that the resolution contains some unfortunate language .
When I spoke to the Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister , Mr Kasoulides , last week , I said to him that now was the time to build bridges to Turkish Cypriots , to find ways of reducing the economic isolation of northern Cyprus and to use language that might encourage support for Turkish people for genuine bi-communal and bi-zonal Cyprus as called for in the United Nations resolutions .
I say to Turkish Cypriots : avoid stupid incidents and get into constructive dialogue .
I say to the Greek Cypriots : stop seizing on opportunities for confrontation and stretch out a hand of friendship .
Violence towards Catholic nuns
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , the truth here is extremely painful .
The conspiracy of silence has been broken and it has come to light that Catholic priests and bishops are guilty of criminal acts against nuns in at least 23 countries .
The report , which was published in the American periodical ' National Catholic Reporter ' , talks of rape , sexual abuse , contamination with AIDS , forced abortions and blackmail and persecution of anyone who has the courage to report these acts of violence to the officials in charge .
However much the Vatican official , Joachim Navarro Vals , has attempted to play down the issue or restrict it solely to Africa , sexual abuse and violation of the fundamental rights of women are a fact of life and , of course , neither bishops nor priests are above the law .
That is precisely why my political group is calling for the perpetrators to be handed over to the authorities and for the judicial authorities in the 23 countries in which these crimes were committed to deal with all the cases of violence against women .
For its part , the Holy See should release the five reports on the matter , strip those responsible of all official titles , work with the judicial authorities , restore the expelled nuns to their positions , give the victims the necessary protection and compensation and , above all , take measures to prevent similar situations from arising in the future and , of course , instruct priests in the fundamental rights of women .
Mr President , instead of standing in judgment as a politician , I would like to quote two paragraphs from one of the reports which speak for themselves .
Highly placed generals were extremely alarmed about the sexual intimidation to which nuns were subjected in certain regions .
One mother superior from a diocese where several nuns became pregnant by priests was unable to find a suitable solution .
In another community , 20 nuns had to be dismissed because they had become pregnant , in many cases by priests .
Secondly , nuns have been harmed in various countries .
When one sister became pregnant by a priest , she had to leave the community , whilst the priest involved could carry on with his calling .
Is this social justice ?
The sister is being abandoned in a situation in which she has to raise the child as a single parent and is for the most part subject to considerable stigma in deplorable social circumstances .
Examples have been quoted of certain countries where they were obliged to become second and third wives in a family as a result of losing their social status in the local culture .
The alternative , in order to survive , is to walk the streets as prostitutes and to expose themselves to the risks of HIV , if they have not already been infected by the priest .
Mr President , I think that we were all shocked when both in the Balkans and in Africa rape was used as yet another weapon of war .
However , I must confess my surprise that an organisation respected across the world should have hidden for so many years what happened to the women that were working for it .
I am therefore completely in agreement with the resolution that we are going to put forward here today and that those responsible should be tried and punished like any other citizens who infringe people ' s dignity .
I think that we all , both men and women , are sorry for what happened , but I also think that as women we understand the degree of pain , humiliation , powerlessness and indignity involved in being forced to keep quiet in the face of such an attack on human dignity .
Therefore , Mr President , I think that this resolution is necessary and that we should send it to all the bodies mentioned at the end of it .
Mr President , the Vatican is not immediately known for its progressive view of sexuality .
Not only does contraception give women throughout the world control over their own bodies , but condoms could also save the lives of tens of thousands of people in the African countries hit by AIDS .
The Vatican opposes such measures .
It is also trying to stop women who have been raped in Bosnia , for example , from having access to abortions .
Against this background , it is extremely shocking to study the report showing how Catholic priests have committed acts of cruelty and actually raped nuns and other women .
This is something the Vatican has known about since 1994 , but it has tried to play down what has happened and silenced the women when they have tried to speak out or been forced to have abortions .
A number of them have also reportedly been infected with AIDS .
This is no isolated incident . It has happened in at least 23 countries , and there is only one word to summarise what has happened , and that - emphatically - is ' disgraceful ' .
The Vatican must lose no time in punishing those responsible , apologise to the women affected , investigate properly what happened and publish the report in its entirety .
Mr President , our group has decided against supporting the present resolution .
In our opinion , sexual abuse of women is too serious to be used for political ends and for placing religious communities , in this case the Catholic Church , in a bad light .
We consider rape and sexual abuse to be violations of fundamental human rights and of human dignity . We reject any form of aggression against women and are of the opinion that offenders need to be punished , irrespective of their profession .
We are united in solidarity with the victims .
Our group is expressing grave concern with regard to the sexual abuse committed by priests , medical doctors , politicians and others in positions of trust and moral authority .
The Catholic community of faith and the Holy See have always rejected violence and sexual abuse , both on the basis of Christian values and of international treaties and obligations .
Via its official representatives , the Holy See has acknowledged and condemned the actions , and has , in cooperation with the responsible bishops , superiors of religious orders and communities and other competent authorities , taken measures against the priests in question . This was done to support the victims and to prevent these eruptions of violence from being repeated .
Sexual abuse by priests must be condemned and penalised without delay .
However , we should not generalise .
There are more than 404 000 priests and nearly 820 000 nuns worldwide .
The fact that irresponsible members of the clergy have committed these acts of abuse , especially in developing countries where women often play a subordinate role culturally compared to men , does not mean that the majority of nuns and priests in the world are not dedicated : they are often the first to be self-effacing in the fight for peace and justice and against poverty .
Our group welcomes the open debate in this matter and we regret that the response to sexual abuse has hitherto been inadequate .
We want an effective response to all incidents and expect churches and other responsible organisations to step up their efforts to do everything in their power to prevent this from happening in future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal is seriously unfair , poorly thought out and out of all proportion .
It shows complete disregard for the victims and is nothing but inappropriate chicanery .
In these cases of rape , which are reprehensible , the catholic nuns ' suffering was twofold : they suffered both as women and as nuns within a holy order . Their vocation to serve others was offended against , as was the God in whom they believe .
The Catholic Church has also been offended by the reprehensible actions of some of its members .
When reality is exaggerated , facts are distorted and attempts are made to attack not the rapists but the church to which the nuns belong , many nuns feel violated a second time , now by this grotesque act of political manipulation .
In dealing with this matter , understanding and respect for religion are required .
Clearly this is not the position of those tabling the motion .
This proposal attacks those who have attacked the problem , betrays a complete ignorance or scorn for the organisation of the Catholic Church itself , which is not the centralised European superstate that many people consider it to be . It is profoundly decentralised , both its Diocesan College and in its numerous institutes and religious congregations , as well as in other areas .
This resolution could have attacked those who have violated and betrayed the service of God .
But no , in an instant it passes swiftly over these , these few bad examples , and rains blows down on the Church as a whole .
It was the Church that discovered these cases , debated them and then dealt with them as soon the facts were known .
The Church deserves our appreciation for this as well as for everything else it has done for the communities it helps .
It certainly does not deserve this misguided attack .
Furthermore , it was the Church that brought these cases to our attention , not the frenzied proponents of a paradoxical text that attacks the solution instead of the problem .
I voted against the proposal .
It is completely lacking in humanity and is nothing but a monument to cynicism and hypocrisy .
I speak on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group and , particularly on behalf of the Irish delegation , who expressly asked me to do so .
Mr President , the Catholic media are reporting on extremely harrowing incidents .
My heart goes out to the abused women within the Roman Catholic Church when I read about their plight .
I therefore sincerely hope that this debate will help put an end to these wrongs for good .
I assume that this is the intention of those submitting the resolution and that they are not being led by anti-religious feelings .
In my opinion , the resolution not only addresses the Vatican , it also appeals to all church authorities to act in line with Christian ethics .
The individual ' s responsibility should not disappear in the anonymity of large institutions .
There are no mitigating circumstances for the behaviour of the African priests involved .
Neither their young age , nor different cultural notions regarding celibacy could justify these acts of violence .
Any Christian denomination based on the Bible knows that abuse of women cannot be covered by the cloak of charity .
We dishonour the name of Christ if we deal with these issues in this way .
The joint resolution calls for a judicial procedure to provide a full account of the events - and rightly so .
Based on my Christian faith , I should like to give my unqualified support to this appeal .
As to the extent of this problem , we can only guess at the moment .
The American magazine ' National Catholic Reporter ' lists 23 countries where sexual abuse occurs .
In any event , it is more than a marginal phenomenon .
As long ago as 1994 , there were reports of cases of abuse , but so far it has been unclear as to what action was taken to prevent violence against women .
The Vatican must recognise the relevant issue and must give a clear account of the measures which are being taken to ban such practices in future .
Finally , I would like to express my appreciation for the scrapping of recital H from the original resolution .
If this had not been done , I would have had no option but to vote against the resolution .
However much I denounce the distressing cases of abuse , these should not simply be associated with the Vatican ' s policy on women ' s reproductive rights .
Bringing a pro-life approach to these issues into discredit in this way is inappropriate .
Mr President , naturally we condemn these disgraceful deeds , whoever perpetrates them .
But this resolution contains inaccuracies , distortions , lies and half-truths and so cannot be accepted .
I believe this issue is too serious to be used as a party-political and ideological football .
However , that is exactly what is happening .
The Vatican has neither a global police force nor a global court to pursue these matters . But above all this is an issue for the state authorities .
Of course , we support the Holy See in its efforts to combat these practices .
We must be clear , however , about one thing . As Mrs Malmström has stated quite openly , this resolution clearly aims to weaken the role of the Holy See in international organisations where it is used on behalf of the family , for the protection of life , and against sexual abuse .
This is often not the case with the governments of many Member States .
This resolution is hypocritical and unacceptable . I therefore consider it to be dangerous because this issue was all too often abused in the twentieth century by totalitarian powers in order to discredit the Church .
We must not go down this path .
The people of the Church who lend their support to other people do not deserve such defamation .
Mr President , I and everyone in this House condemns sexual abuse of women , or of anyone for that matter , and any delay in bringing to justice those who perpetrate it , whatever their creed , nationality or profession , should rightly be condemned .
I cannot , however , support this resolution which targets one specific church ; a church which has acknowledged and condemned the cases in question and which has made clear it is taking measures in cooperation with the competent church representatives and civil authorities against the perpetrators involved .
It is also supporting the victims , as it does sexual-abuse victims , through its outreach programmes through the world and it is taking steps to prevent a repetition of these terrible incidents .
Regretfully , it must be said that resolutions of this nature suggest an ulterior motive for political reasons , which appears to be the deliberate discrediting of the Catholic Church and the Holy See on an international level and possibly forcing its removal from international forums , where it is actively promoting the dignity of women and mothers .
Mr President , the declaration by Mrs Martens could be mine entirely .
I would , however , like to add the following . This sensitive and appalling issue came to light thanks to the openness of the Catholic press and to Catholic researchers who had drawn up a report .
Eventually , the Catholic Church hierarchy reacted to , and condemned , these events .
I also remember bishops , from the Netherlands for example , making statements .
So why are we rubbing salt into the wound of the Roman Catholic Church ?
As a Protestant , I must say that I am very surprised about this , to say the least .
I read an interview in the Dutch press with one of the people who started the ball rolling and in which the background was explained .
She says : " We are against the Pope visiting the European Parliament .
We must make it more difficult in this way .
Secondly , we would really like to give as good as we get with regard to all the Pope ' s admonitions in the moral sphere . "
If that is the background , there is so much false fire on the altar , to put it in Protestant terms , that it is absolutely impossible for me to back this resolution .
I also think that those nuns who suffered in the course of these events are now also being abused politically , something about which I am ashamed .
Mr President , on such a sensitive issue as that of the urgent subject under consideration , we are genuinely perplexed .
There is absolutely no doubt that the act itself is to be utterly condemned .
However , to use this to create a theory which is tantamount to a political attack , which , in effect , this is , on the Catholic Church and the Holy See is a wholly inappropriate action in respect of the moral authority exercised by the Holy See throughout the world .
What we find even more worrying is the way in which the concept of accountability is being used to state that what happens to a man must be considered to be the moral responsibility of the Holy See .
We are truly perplexed because , if such sensitive matters are exploited in this way , we will ultimately lose sight of one of the tasks that the Church is carrying out with such difficulty in the world , the safeguarding of human dignity .
Mr President , I would like to make it quite clear that the way this subject is being exploited for political ends is totally unacceptable , particularly the attempt to undermine the role played by the Catholic Church and the Holy See in those international bodies from which some would like to see it removed in order to further lobbies such as those behind this motion .
I would like , first of all , to point out that the Holy See is one thing and the individual people belonging to the Catholic Church are another .
The Holy See is not a State of which every Catholic is a citizen ; the Holy See serves the universal community through its authority but it cannot be held responsible for every action of all the Catholics in the world , whether priests or lay people .
This must be clearly understood to be a fact when we form opinions in a delicate matter such as this .
Therefore , when the motion makes several explicit references to the responsibility of the Holy See , it is entering the realms of political exploitation , which must be totally rejected .
Pakistan
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , twenty years ago , when the SAARC was established , the South Asian countries and the European Union laid the foundations of an ambitious partnership of development and freedom of expression .
The recent arrests of politicians in Pakistan are , unfortunately , a cruel statement of failure .
These mass arrests of more than a thousand people are a good illustration of the determination of the regime of General Musharraf to quell the democratic aspirations of the Pakistani people and to prevent political parties from carrying out their legitimate activities .
In 1999 , a few months after the coup , in my capacity as Vice-Chairman of the South East Asia delegation , I met the ambassador of Pakistan , at his request , who ensured me that the military junta which had just snatched power from Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif would quickly prepare the ground for a democratic Pakistan .
We are now , however , witnessing the intolerable radicalisation of this regime and the words ' democracy ' , ' human rights ' and ' political pluralism ' are being written in letters of blood in Pakistan .
The inspiration born of democratisation - that we had longed to see - quickly gave way to intolerance and arbitrary arrests .
The European Parliament cannot remain silent when faced with a situation which holds sway in a country with which the European Union has cooperated for so long .
We owe it to ourselves to make it clear to General Musharraf that respect for human rights and democracy is what makes a policy of cooperation meaningful .
We owe it to ourselves to ask him to organise free , pluralist and transparent elections as soon as possible , which the Supreme Court of Pakistan has also called for .
Mr President , Commissioner , as we heard from our fellow MEPs , such a long time after the military coup in Pakistan , we are further removed from real democracy and rule of law .
We also note that the Pakistani military junta is providing active support to the inhumane Taliban regime in Afghanistan .
Following Commander Massud ' s visit to the European Parliament , the Pakistani Embassy addressed the President of our Parliament with a plea for a negotiated solution in Afghanistan .
We too call for a political solution to the Afghan conflict .
We too realise that the sanctions against the Taliban regime could end up harming the population and could bring about streams of refugees .
We value Pakistan ' s condemnation of the destruction of the cultural heritage by the Taliban , but we expect more .
The Pakistani Government should put an end to its support for the Taliban regime and the fundamentalist groups .
It has to help Pakistan on its way to the rule of law and strive towards a sustainable peace in the region .
Mr President , what an undignified national day it is when the incumbent ruler of Pakistan calls on his own people to actively support the social model when , on the eve of this event , thousands of citizens were incarcerated .
The police arrested the very people who fight for solidarity and justice and , instead of arresting activists who have gone underground , they arrest their family members .
Among those arrested was Nasrullah Khan , the leader of the democratic renewal movement .
The behaviour of the military regime in Pakistan is absolutely unacceptable .
Credence can no longer be given to the reassurances and declarations of intention given by its ruler .
Pakistan must fulfil its obligations as a member of the United Nations .
These obligations include securing freedom of speech and freedom of assembly .
The position of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is that it is no longer enough for the international community simply to complain .
We call on the Commission to exert all its political clout and fight for the early release of the prisoners .
The leader of the military regime , General Musharraf , is responsible for continuing to obstruct a return to democracy and humanity .
The stability of the ruler of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan both at home and abroad is just for show .
It will only be for real when the ruling of the Supreme Court to allow free national elections is implemented .
The deadlines for these elections to take place must be adhered to .
Independent parties must be allowed to field candidates .
They must stop being exposed to constant pressure .
These elections must take place under the supervision of international observers .
In the sphere of human rights , the European Union must be active in Pakistan and must involve people who often risk life and limb in campaigning on behalf of human rights issues , namely the NGOs .
We are obliged to do this .
This would be our contribution to a great national day in Pakistan .
Commissioner , we hope we will succeed .
Mr President , thanks to General Musharraf ' s rule , the Pakistani population is jumping out of the frying pan into the fire .
There is nothing left of democracy , and the prospects are gloomy .
The announcement of elections appears to be no more than a diversion to mislead the international community .
Active party members of the opposition are being apprehended .
Election campaigns have been rendered impossible , and the independence of the judiciary has been compromised .
Whilst the World Bank is agonising over economic reform in Pakistan , the military regime is wrecking democracy .
No democracy means no stability , and no stability means no economic recovery .
Pakistan is becoming increasingly isolated on the world stage .
The financial and military support granted by the military regime to the Taliban barbarians in Afghanistan is repugnant .
According to the Afghan opposition leader , who is on a visit here today , only political reform in Pakistan can lead to the downfall of the Muslim extremists in the neighbouring country .
The European Union was right to halt the negotiations with Pakistan .
As long as democracy has not been fully re-established , there cannot be any hope of a cooperation agreement .
The political dialogue can only be continued on an ad hoc basis and , in this connection , the regime has to be put under great pressure to hold fair elections soon .
The Pakistani population must not be left in the lurch .
European development aid must remain focused on education and other social programmes .
Aid for elections can only be granted if it contributes to a fair course of events .
The chance of that happening appears extremely remote for the time being .
Pakistan is an important country in the region but , unfortunately , its Government appears to alternate between corrupt regimes and military juntas .
The population must be freed from this .
It deserves sunnier prospects .
Rights of homosexuals in Namibia
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to read you a newspaper report : Today , President X from country Y has called on that country ' s regional authorities to point out Jews and black people in their regions so that they can be arrested .
According to this President , Jews and black people have to be arrested , gaoled and exiled .
End of quote .
You probably wonder which country this report is about , and the timeframe in which it is set .
After all , we are only too aware of the historical examples .
Replace Jews and blacks by homosexual men and women , and you will realise that I am referring to the very recent statements by the President of Namibia where it appears , not for the first time , that a witch-hunt is being launched .
Namibia ' s President made his appeal to cleanse his country , as he said , of homosexuals , on 19 March .
Despite numerous protests , both from Namibia and elsewhere , he repeated this appeal earlier this week .
It is thus not a slip of the tongue but a deliberate campaign .
On previous occasions , the anti-homosexual rhetoric uttered by the Namibian President could be laughed off .
It seemed to be a personal hobbyhorse of a frightened man who was desperate to hold on to traditional village life .
The President ' s statements conjure up an image of a community which seems to be losing the battle against sexual promiscuity .
However , the criminalisation of homosexuals , mixed in with a generous portion of xenophobia , and the call on Namibian women to know their place , do nothing to address the problem .
On the contrary , exploiting the fear of AIDS in this manner is playing with fire .
Straightforward advice and the distribution of condoms would be a better solution .
Namibia ' s anti-homosexual campaign forms a threat , not only to the physical well-being of the potential victims , but also to democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
Amnesty International has declared that it considers people who are gaoled on the grounds of their sexual preference or for exercising their right to freedom of expression and assembly to be prisoners of conscience .
Namibia must be reminded of its international obligations , which signify that human rights apply to everyone and are universal and indivisible .
It is crucial , therefore , for the European Union to ask Namibia , in no uncertain terms , to halt this witch-hunt .
Let Namibia follow the lead of its neighbour , South Africa , where the rights of homosexuals are explicitly guaranteed in the constitution .
Surely , a country which has fought for its own freedom and against racial discrimination and apartheid cannot embrace sexual discrimination and apartheid .
Mr President , as Mr Swiebel asserted a moment ago , the statements by the Namibian President , Sam Nujoma , regarding homosexuals in Namibia , are nothing short of a witch-hunt .
Sexual orientation towards people of the same sex is of all times and all cultures .
Discrimination against , and persecution of , people with this orientation who openly acknowledge it are no longer of all times and all cultures .
Fortunately , there is a steady decrease in discrimination in a large number of countries .
Incitement to exclude , and use violence against , people of this orientation is increasingly becoming less acceptable .
A good example is South Africa .
After the apartheid regime was abolished , a clause was included in the constitution which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
The argument used by the Namibian President that homosexuality is a Western phenomenon , an aberration of the West , is a nonsense argument .
He only needs to look at his South African neighbours , something which , in fact , his colleagues Mr Mugabe and Mr Museveni should also do .
Mr President , Europe is not only an economic union , it is also a union of standards and values .
According to my group , the protection of human rights inside and outside Europe forms an integral part of this .
Homosexual rights are human rights .
We in Europe must , therefore , take a firm stand against any development , wherever in the world , which encourages slander against , or the exclusion or persecution of people , on the basis of sexual orientation .
I am for that reason proud that my group is one of the initiators of this resolution which is directed against Namibia this time , and which clearly states that the developments in that country are unacceptable in our eyes .
Mr President , while the Netherlands allows homosexuals to marry , Namibia despises them .
This is the year 2001 .
Mr Lagendijk was right to point out that , unfortunately , Namibia is not the only African country which is taking things to such extremes .
President Mugabe of Zimbabwe terms homosexuals and lesbians , in his own words : ' animals which have to be exterminated ' .
His henchmen will take care of the rest .
It is , of course , unacceptable that people should be discriminated against simply on the basis of their sexual preference . However , I appreciate how very delicate and difficult this debate is .
In Africa , I found out that many people consider homosexuality as something which goes against their culture .
Respect for culture , however , comes up against its own boundaries when fundamental human rights are at risk .
Homophobic actions , largely orchestrated by the Government , must be unequivocally condemned .
However , this should not be all that is done .
In the spirit of the new Cotonou Agreement , I believe that the persecution of homosexuals should be taken into consideration in the assessment of our cooperation with developing countries .
After all , the persecution of homosexuals is often not the only violation of human rights in the countries concerned .
Despite their elevated ideals , certain SADEC countries have recently been repeatedly showing their less attractive sides .
It is high time that a fresh wind blew through Windhoek and that the homosexual wall in a number of frontline states was razed to the ground .
As regards the first item , which is the abduction of Mr Tsiakourmas , the Commission is familiar with the circumstances surrounding the arrest of this Greek Cypriot citizen last December .
It has emerged that Mr Tsiakourmas was abducted on the sovereign territory of a British base in Dhekalia .
The British Government raised the issue on a number of occasions both with the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community and with the authorities in Ankara .
The General Affairs Council is going to look into this case when it meets next Monday .
For our part , we in the Commission are still keeping a watchful eye on developments in the situation from our delegation office in Nicosia .
According to our information , the proceedings which were opened against Mr Tsiakourmas resumed this week in Famagusta and a verdict is expected shortly .
Like Mr Katiforis , I think that this case , like many others , must be seen in the context of the political situation in Cyprus .
We are taking every opportunity to contact the parties involved in order , as you know , to try to promote a political solution to the partitioning of the island .
As regards the Turkish side , which Mr MacCormick and Mr Alyssandrakis mentioned , you can rest assured that this topic is amongst those we will be dealing with within the framework of the political dialogue between the European Union and Turkey , which was strengthened by the European Council in Helsinki .
Coming to the second item under the heading of human rights , which is your motion for a resolution on violence against nuns , we feel that the case of the Catholic nuns constitutes a serious violation of the fundamental rights of women and is a dreadful example of violence against them .
As those who have taken the floor know , the European Union is firmly committed to combating violence against women .
In all the institutions we are firmly committed to upholding the principles contained in the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women , and , in particular , to working to ensure that the commitments entered into in Beijing not very long ago during the fourth women ' s conference are respected .
As far as human rights in Pakistan are concerned , the Commission shares the view of the honourable Members who tabled resolutions on this subject when they state that the recent arrests of so-called political activists belonging to the Alliance for Restoration of Democracy are a major concern .
During talks with the Pakistani Government last November , the EU troika called on the administration to lift restrictions on the activities of political parties , in particular , the ban on public demonstrations .
Political parties cannot and must not be excluded from political life in Pakistan any more than elsewhere , since it is clear they are called upon to play an important role in the country ' s future .
We are expecting to see tangible progress in the restoration of representative democracy at all levels , beginning with the holding of elections in provincial and national assemblies on the basis of a clear and credible timetable .
The Pakistani authorities have given a firm commitment to the EU troika that it will respect the timeframe , which was established by the Supreme Court , of three years following the military coup until the organisation of these elections .
Although the Government has confirmed that the political parties will be authorised to take part in provincial and national elections , as a number of you have said , it is clear that only the rapid lifting of the ban on public demonstrations will boost confidence in the process to restore democracy in Pakistan .
As far as the last item is concerned , which is the situation of homosexuals in Namibia , like the authors of this resolution , we were amazed and concerned to read the recent statement on homosexuality which was given by the Namibian President , Sam Nujoma , calling for the persecution of people identified as homosexuals .
We have always upheld the position that all individuals are entitled to benefit from human rights and fundamental freedoms .
We believe that all nations must protect and promote these rights and actively contribute to abolishing any form of discrimination on grounds of race , gender , political opinion , religious beliefs and so on .
Our position also reflects the position which was publicly adopted by the Government of the Republic of Namibia , evidence of which can be found in its constitution and in all the international conventions on human rights which this country has ratified .
As a result , we are in favour of any overtures made to the Namibian authorities to try to clarify this matter and to express the wish that these recent statements do not constitute a repudiation of Namibia ' s existing constitutional provisions , which ban such discrimination .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Lamy .
I would like to take this opportunity to announce to our visitors that on Thursday the European Parliament always takes two and a half hours to discuss acute problems and acute violations of human rights around the world .
We naturally also discuss many European issues .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Situation in Mexico
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0262 / 2001 by Mr Seguro and Mr Naïr on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0275 / 2001 by Mr Knörr Borràs and Mr Lipietz on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0283 / 2001 by Mr Marset Campos and others on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0289 / 2001 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and others on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0297 / 2001 by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and others on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
on the situation in Mexico .
Mr President , Commissioner Lamy , ladies and gentlemen , I rise to speak in this debate in order to express my agreement with the entire resolution that has been tabled by various political groups and on which I have worked , to say that , on this matter , the European Parliament has followed developments in political relations between Mexico and the European Union very closely .
Parliament did so because it approves and welcomes the conclusion of a global agreement , and I think it is time that the European Union concluded a decent agreement with Mexico , not only on trade issues but also in the fields of cooperation and , most importantly , political concertation .
We have maintained good relations with all the non-governmental organisations in Mexico , which is an ally of ours .
Obviously , we are paying close attention , as we have always done , to developments in the situation in Chiapas and last year , as chairman of Parliament ' s delegation to Central America and Mexico , I myself led a European Parliament delegation that visited Chiapas . We had also hoped to hold a meeting with representatives of the Zapatista movement , which we were not able to do .
I wanted to hold this meeting because I feel that , one of the basic principles of this Parliament is to hold dialogue with everyone and , whilst respecting national sovereignty , making our contribution to a positive solution and to an end to disputes .
It is in this context that we welcome first of all the attitude of President Fox of Mexico and the way in which he has made himself available . Secondly , I welcome the correctness , the action and the willingness to enter into dialogue demonstrated by the Zapatista movement in the person of Commander Ester in the Mexican Congress .
What I particularly want to say for the moment is that we are encouraging and supporting this dialogue , because dialogue undertaken in accordance with the rules of democracy is the only instrument that can help to find a solution to problems .
I will say once again that we respect the sovereignty of the Mexican people and that our message is one of support for this dialogue .
I shall conclude by saying , with an appeal that I think is important , that talks must continue to persuade the Mexican Congress to support the law on indigenous peoples reached in the San Andrés Agreements .
Lastly , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to say that only yesterday , the delegation which I chair was bound , after deliberation by the Conference of Presidents , to issue an opinion on a possible visit to this Parliament by representatives of the Zapatista movement .
Unanimous approval was given , with all the main political groups present , to this Parliament , through its delegation and as a follow-up to what it did last year , restating its willingness to enter into dialogue within the rules of procedure of this Parliament , with all organisations , including the Zapatista movement .
Mr President , I would also like to highlight the words of Mr Seguro , in that President Fox and the Zapatistas should be congratulated for the dialogue that they have undertaken .
The other day I was in the sitting of the Mexican Congress , an historic sitting - and I should point out that it was also brought about by the votes of a sister group of ours , The Green Ecologist party of Mexico - and a vote that gave rise to a calm , respectful and I would say historical dialogue which demonstrated the maturity of the Mexican people and legislators and also the maturity of the Zapatista movement , which offered peace for peace .
This agreement opens the way for dialogue and understanding .
It was a great day for Mexico , for the indigenous people within and outside Mexico , and for the establishment of a culture of dialogue , understanding and cooperation between all the political and social forces as a means of solving conflicts .
Our group would also like to make it clear , in line with what was expressed yesterday in the delegation , that we have no hesitations about the indigenous Zapatista movement being present in this House .
And it is possible that some of our colleagues in Parliament will throw up their hands in horror , and even say that we need to keep up appearances , and that they are against hooded men and women appearing in Parliament .
But let us see if we can end the great hypocrisy that prevails in international politics , because the same people who go to see Mr Putin , or who sing songs to the Chinese after they have invaded Tibet , cannot throw up their hands in horror .
It is not a case of discussing appearances or whether or not they wear hoods .
There is no greater hood than that which has been imposed on a people , on the indigenous people in and outside Mexico .
They have had more than a hood imposed on them .
Millions of people and human beings have been under a yoke of repression , which we are now going to begin to see lifted .
Finally they are going to have their rights and they are being recognised in the constitution .
Mr President , an event of such importance for Mexico and Latin America as the presence of the Zapatista commanders and the members of the National Indigenous Congress in the Mexican Congress , with the aim of setting out the reasons for adopting the ' Cocopa Law ' and the appropriate constitutional reform , should be supported , without any doubt , by the European Parliament .
This was the reason why last week three MEPs , Mr Sami Naïr , Mr Gorka Knörr and I were present in Mexico to support this event by our presence .
This joint resolution that we are putting forward is positive , important , encouraging and also represents support for the actions of President Fox and the ZNLA .
We also think that it goes in the direction of the agreement between the European Union and Mexico to promote a series of greater democratic freedoms and support for the political culture in Mexico , which is very important .
We therefore think that this resolution would be improved if two amendments that we propose were accepted : on the one hand , recognising that it is important that the Members from the ZNLA appear in Congress and , on the other hand , inviting representatives of the Zapatista movement to come here , through the delegation for relations with Central America , or also through other committees , such as the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy or the Committee on Development and Cooperation , according to our customs , and to explain their points of view .
In that way we can support a great hope for Mexico and Latin America .
Mr President , I join my colleagues who have welcomed the fact that we have come to a time when there is recognition of an indigenous people that for a long time has been isolated and , what is more , in a complex situation , because there were people who considered themselves to be their representatives and who actually were not .
I think that we must congratulate President Fox , his political group and all the Mexican political forces that have been capable of understanding that there needs to be direct understanding with minorities because democracy requires representatives and direct spokespeople and , at the same time , the acceptance of a culture of diversity , something that Europe is defending and which is part of our identity .
I would also like to say in this vein that I think that the climate of dialogue that has been created is one that Europe should generously join in with and , in this respect , I think it is right and proper that whoever necessary should be received , that the Zapatistas should be received , that they should be welcomed in Europe and that we should offer them our hand .
Now what I would not like at all would be for us to understand that we are creating a parallel relationship .
I think that the democratic openness that the Mexican Government and the Assembly have shown by receiving the Zapatistas in their symbolic building , Parliament , is an institutional triumph and we should therefore understand that the Zapatistas should also be included with the invitation that has already been extended to President Fox . This is because we consider that we are in favour of strengthening institutions - because without strong institutions there is no democracy - and , at the same time , of the presence of all minorities , groups and associations who wish to knock on our door to ask for our help , to tell us about their specific characteristics and diversity .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the motion for a resolution that we are presenting today is positive from a political point of view , because it fosters the process of integrating more than 10 million Mexican citizens that belong to the indigenous community and who represent 10 % of the population , into the social sphere of present-day Mexico . We therefore trust that living together peacefully will now become the norm for social behaviour , and also that there will be standardisation in Mexican political life .
We must agree that the recent meeting between the indigenous communities and the Mexican politicians is a good example to follow in this political phase which began in July 2000 , in which progress is being made , overcoming old contradictions .
On these shores , on the old continent of Europe , many of us are pleased to see this political change that is taking place in Mexico in terms of recognising this minority , which has been historically marginalised .
This attitude means that we should thank President Fox and his Government , as well as the Zapatistas and obviously the indigenous communities .
Mr President , the Commission fully supports the opinion of those Members of Parliament who have signed the resolutions you are considering on the recent events in Mexico .
The new Mexican Government and the Zapatista National Liberation Army have confirmed that they are committed to finding a political solution and we believe , as you do , that they have opened up the way to finding a peaceful solution to this conflict .
In this context , we obviously welcome the fact that the new global agreement which was signed by the European Union and Mexico has recently come into force .
As Mr Seguro reiterated , this agreement will enable us to continue to support the process that has recently been initiated in Mexico .
As you know , this agreement goes well beyond objectives that are related purely to trade and cooperation .
This agreement includes a clause entitled ' human rights ' , which now stands at the heart of EU-Mexico relations , and also includes a clause on respect for commitments , which enables us to take into consideration developments in the human rights situation in Mexico and its states .
In addition , this agreement puts in place a mechanism to allow the parties to take action if the objectives set out contractually are breached .
In addition to cooperation on human rights , democracy and the proper management of public affairs , this agreement also provides us with a legal framework for cooperation in cultural matters , education and training , and which pays particular attention , as is the case given Mexico ' s needs , to the most disadvantaged sections of society .
We also have a framework of regional cooperation and , last of all and most importantly , we have a spotlight on social affairs and poverty , which includes vulnerable groups such as the indigenous population , whilst taking into account the need to respect the fundamental rights of these indigenous Mexican people as distinct groups .
Out in Mexico , in order to apply all this in practice , and in line with the Country Strategy Paper for Mexico , which has now been adopted , we are working on an important project to develop the Lacandonia forest , in the state of Chiapas , and the practical aim of this project is both to work with the communities involved , and to seek to enlighten them on the concept of sustainable development , that is , by combining both action to sustain the environment and social action .
This is an example of the practical measures we are taking at the moment .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
Situation in Somalia and attack against " Médecins sans frontières
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0263 / 2001 by Mr van den Berg on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0276 / 2001 by Mrs Maes and others on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0284 / 2001 by Mrs Morgantini on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0290 / 2001 by Mr Van Hecke in behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0292 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0301 / 2001 by Mr van den Bos on behalf of the ELDR Group ,
on the situation in Somalia and attack against " Médecins sans frontières "
Mr President , I am happy to say that the remaining two hostages , two humanitarian workers , British citizens , were released yesterday . They had been captured on 27 March last together with a further seven westerners and a Somali by the warlord Musse Sudi Yalahow .
Of course , we are reassured by their release , but it does not diminish our concern at the failure to respect human rights and our condemnation of the continued acts of violence and banditry perpetrated by the armed militia in Somalia .
It is vital that the temporary Somali Government does everything possible to initiate constructive dialogue working towards peace , stability and national reconciliation with all the parties involved , Somali community leaders and the authorities of Somaliland and Puntland .
We all need to renounce the use of arms in order to be able to address the country 's serious political , social and economic problems , so that all the parties tackle the issues of the management of aid , education , health and the economy together .
The donor countries must all step up humanitarian aid and cooperation activities , ensure that the embargo on arms is fully respected and require all the parties concerned to cooperate to re-establish peace .
The European Union , in particular , must provide all the financial and technical assistance necessary to guarantee the success of the peace initiative of the Intergovernmental Development Authority and Djibouti , but , in particular , it must , as it did in the case of the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea , undertake a coherent political initiative and speak with one voice to promote dialogue and negotiation to resolve the country 's most urgent problems .
Civil society , the local communities and the non-governmental organisations , which are fighting for national reconciliation and peace , must be supported .
We must disband the armed groups which have caused the death of at least 20 civilians in recent weeks and step up mine-clearance operations . We must also show our complete solidarity with and support for the organisation " Médecins sans frontières " , which , as I said , was attacked on 27 March last .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 26 March , ten humanitarian workers from the United Nations and Médicins sans Frontières were taken hostage by a militia leader in Somalia , which should give the international community some idea of how far into the abyss this country has fallen .
When banditry or acts of war - I am not sure how to distinguish between them in this case - afflict missionaries , even those working for peace and charity , which these Westerners are , and when these become bargaining chips for the warmongers , civilian populations are using this type of violent action to make the most desperate appeal for help to the international community .
What sort of situation can this anonymous mass of people be in , if even those who are helping them are harmed in this way ?
What can be the cause of their complaints ?
Were these people not able to contact us in any way other than by kidnapping 10 UN and MSF workers , who are exemplary in their commitment but subjected to intense media coverage simply because they are from the West ?
The hostages have now all been released , but this appeal must not be allowed to fade away and we must give the most effective and committed reply in response .
In other words , we must take immediate action to ensure that humanitarian workers can work in safety in Somalia , this long-suffering country , and provide a long-term policy of support to democracy and human rights against a background of national reconciliation .
Somalia , which is in a desperate situation , must be put at the core of the European ideals of democracy and solidarity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although , as Mrs Isler Béguin has said , the hostages have been released , I think that what we must consider here is that we can in no way regard the taking of hostages as a political act .
I believe that this is above all an act of cowardice , of barbarism , which is unacceptable .
The message that should have been given when the hostages were taken must remain exactly the same one now .
Therefore , Mr President , we must continue to give our solidarity , with the same conviction , to all those working behind the scenes , to all the NGOs which are easy targets for one simple reason - and that is because they often work in a non-partisan manner .
Their members bring relief to all those in need , regardless of their political beliefs , and I think that this is what makes them extremely easy targets -vulnerable targets .
We must therefore continue to give them our unwavering support .
Next , Mr President , I believe that we must appoint a permanent representative for this affair who can monitor the situation in Somalia , as we did during the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea .
Initial progress has been made with the appointment of the interim democratic Government , a Government that is recognised in the international courts and which has managed to quell the unrest throughout the region .
I believe that we must now go further by also forcing this Government to take its place around the negotiating table with all the parties , all the political parties , involved in this conflict .
Most importantly , we , be it the European Union , the UN or the Organisation for African Unity ( OAU ) , must ensure that there is a total weapons embargo and that this embargo is strictly complied with .
We must condemn in the strongest possible terms any supply of illegal weapons .
Somalia is unfortunately experiencing a period of great instability due to all the fighting between various factions , which has caused the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people .
It is the people who are paying the price .
Violence is bringing about famine , famine brings about wars , and wars are bringing about disease , against a background of general indifference .
We must send an equally powerful message .
Mr President , for years , Somalia has been left to fend for itself by the international community .
After all , there was no credit to be gained .
Today , Somalia is a fragmented country ruled by a fragmented Government .
The warlords are those who now wield power .
The Arta peace talks brought renewed hope .
A national transitional Government was installed , but it struggled to establish any authority .
The European Union - and I believe Mr Sylla is right - has no choice but to give its emphatic support to this Government , without , however , misjudging the reality in Somalia .
A constructive dialogue between the Government and the other leading figures is the only realistic solution .
The Governments of Somaliland and Puntland must also be involved in this , and third countries , such as Ethiopia , must be warned against disturbing the peace process in any way .
To be able to play a leading role , the Union must , in my opinion , appoint a special envoy for Somalia as a matter of urgency , just as it has now already done in the cases of Ethiopia and Eritrea .
In fact , as far as I am concerned , this could be one and the same person .
Now that there is at long last a prospect of sustainable peace between Eritrea and Ethiopia , we must avoid an unstable Somalia at all costs .
We must employ all available means to stop the balkanisation of Somalia , and the Union can play an important role in this .
Mr President , I would like to begin what will be a brief speech by clarifying that the Commission roundly condemns all attacks against any member of humanitarian staff and this condemnation is made in similar terms as those used by Mr Sylla .

Having clarified this issue , we are relieved to have learnt , as is Mrs Ghilardotti , that the two remaining hostages have been released .
Nevertheless , we believe that these kidnappings highlight the need to bring an end to the violent tensions in central and southern Somalia , as each of the previous speakers have also stressed .
You may rely on the Commission to take prompt action in offering aid to help to rebuild the country in every aspect , and God knows that this needs to be done .
We are doing this and shall continue to do this in close collaboration with all the other parties involved , whilst making use of aid coordination by the Somalia Aid Coordination Body , which also includes United Nations agencies .
The Commission has granted substantial amounts of humanitarian aid for rehabilitation to Somalia .
The aid receives the full support of all the political authorities of the European Union , and the troika mission that the European Union recently sent to Somalia enabled us to witness the extent to which Commission aid is both indispensable and appreciated in the regions that were visited .
We have decided to continue to support rehabilitation in all the areas of Somalia where peace has more or less been established , and , in particular , Somaliland and Puntland , by applying the approach that was adopted and which is known as ' dividends of peace ' .
At the same time , we are supporting the transitional government in its efforts to establish an environment of peace and security in the area of the country that is still affected by the conflict and where there are no administrative structures .
There are regions in Somalia where rehabilitation is not possible under the current circumstances , and in these regions , we shall continue to provide humanitarian aid in the form of ECHO , which is working with the NGOs and United Nations agencies .
The European Union has adopted a policy , in particular in the statement made on 8 September 2000 , and this policy , I would reiterate , urges the transitional Government to enter into immediate dialogue with the current authorities - I mentioned Somaliland and Puntland earlier - in order to avoid losing the momentum created by the Arta process , in line with the resolutions made at the Summit of East African Heads of State .
We would also stress the importance of including all those who did not take part in the Arta conference in this process of national reconciliation , with a view to trying to re-establish national unity .
In any case , and I would reiterate this as far as we are concerned , we shall not support any attempt , from any quarter , which seeks to establish the authority of a government in Somalia through the use of force and which would threaten the situation of peace and stability , albeit fragile , but real nonetheless , that has been attained and which is present in various regions of Somalia .
We cannot accept a peace process that leads to further conflict in regions where peace has been established with the active support of the international community , and on this issue , we support the speakers who have called for this resolution .
Thank you , Commissioner Lamy .
Today the Commission was very disciplined and spoke for less than normal .
That is why we must have a 20-minute break .
According to the agenda , the next two items are to be taken at 5.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5.10 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Fishing accidents
The next item is the report ( A5-0087 / 2001 ) by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on fisheries : safety and causes of accidents ( 2000 / 2028 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , this report that I am presenting today to this House on safety in fisheries and the causes of fishing accidents analyses , ladies and gentlemen , the reasons for the high accident rate in this sector , and examines aspects such as the European legislative framework , the problems surrounding the work of fishermen and preventing risks .
Although the initiative to deal with this issue in Parliament came from the Group of the Party of the European Socialists , the work that is being presented to you today is the fruit of the work of many , including that of my colleagues , members of the Committee on Fisheries in the European Parliament , who worked very hard with me , and who finally adopted this report unanimously .
There was also the hearing with experts in September , the invaluable contributions that I received from officials from the Directorate-General for Employment and Social Affairs and the European Parliament Directorate-General on Research and also the contributions made by the Advisory Committee on Fisheries .
Everyone agreed on describing the job of fisherman ( 270 000 in the European Union ) as a very dangerous profession , and also largely on the analysis of the reasons why fisheries has an accident rate that is up to 25 times higher than other economic sectors , and that one fisherman in seven in the European Union is involved in an occupational accident each year .
This very high rate is due to a combination of very different causes : bad weather , long , very intense working days , payment systems , such as the so-called ' catch-share payment ' , which are not very comparable , a lack of collective negotiation , difficult working conditions , bad living conditions on board , isolation , separation from families and from the social environment , the remoteness of fishing grounds , the age of the fleet , etc .
I reject the sceptical position and fatalistic view of those who think that fishing accidents are inevitable and that the victims of them are a price we have to pay to the sea .
I think that we need to look for the causes of these accidents and deal with them .
We need to make safety a priority .
We have unacceptable accident rates and we need to step up controls , raise awareness among ship owners and fishermen and , if necessary , encourage legislative changes in order to reduce them .
We need to consider the social and labour conditions of seafarers and improve their working conditions , as they endure irregular rest times and working patterns based on working days of more than 14 hours .
This sector needs to be given a right to constant weekly and daily rest and , if necessary , the public authorities should intervene in order to impose what is the fundamental right of any worker .
These hard working conditions mean , for example , that young people do not want to join the industry , which prevents the new generation from taking over .
We need to establish social dialogue in the sector , at European level , in order to reach collective agreements incorporating these issues of safety at work , consult more with the sector , provide those working in fisheries with social protection similar to that of other workers and develop a culture of safety among employers and workers .
The European Union does not even have statistical data ; only five countries provide figures and they are not comparable .
This issue should be taken into account when launching the third phase of the ' European statistics on accidents at work ' project so that the Community can have reliable and complete data , harmonised at European level .
My group has always thought that in this House we should talk not only about issues associated with fishing resources , but also about the human problems that affect seafarers .
Therefore , my report asks that the conclusions reached should be included in the regulations on the reform of the CFP , so that the triangle made up of legislation , training and social dialogue can be included .
I also urge the Member States who have not yet done so to ratify the international conventions and improve the Community directives which at this moment in time do not cover up to 90 % of the fleet .
I also point out in my report that flags of convenience do not provide work or safety guarantees to their crews , which entails serious risks for fishermen working on board these vessels .
In summary , ladies and gentlemen , this is a report about an issue that has not been dealt with so far .
It is the first of these reports and will possibly be followed by second and third reports on accidents in fisheries .
I hope that , as it is the first one , you will look tolerantly upon its defects and support it .
Mr President , our Dutch colleague , Mr Maat , is shadow rapporteur for my political group for the report by our distinguished colleague , Mrs Miguélez Ramos .
He apologises for his absence and has asked me to step into the breach .
I will make his statement in English :
' Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur for her report .
It is a very important initiative , because safety is a subject of great importance to the fisheries sector as a whole .
Mrs Miguélez Ramos says that each year worldwide a great number of accidents take place and many are fatal .
In the European Union alone more than 2 000 accidents occur every year .
It will be impossible to decrease this number to zero due to the special features of the sector , but at least we should try and decrease the number of accidents as much as possible .
This could be accomplished by improving some preconditions : first of all , better control on working conditions and safety on the fishing vessels that operate in the waters of the European Union .
Furthermore , it is important to improve harmonisation and coordination between Member States as a whole .
Regular controls on safety and working conditions should take place on all EU fishing vessels regardless of whether they are small , large , old or new .
Besides this , further awareness regarding safety in the fisheries sector is necessary .
Information campaigns and education are important tools to achieve this .
Taking into account the increasing difficulties experienced throughout the EU in attracting young people for jobs at sea , the aspects of safety and working conditions should be given full attention .
It is highly necessary to create a safety culture in this sector , so that all the interested parties know about the situation , which is very special , and respect their responsibilities .
I , Albert Jan Maat , hope that this initiative report will be integrated in the discussion about the Green Paper and in the proposals for the new fisheries policy after 2002 . '
I would like to add a few personal comments . I agree with all these statements .
Recently I was on board a shrimp trawler in Greenland .
The icy polar wind was blowing and many small one-man boats were lying in the harbour in thick ice .
I respect the fishing profession and admire fishermen who go about their daily business under the most impossible and most difficult conditions .
Fishermen need our active moral and legislative support especially in the area of safety at work .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Miguélez Ramos , the fisherman ' s profession or vocation , call it what you will , has always been one of the toughest and most dangerous in the world .
History , chronicles and the literature of all maritime and fishing nations are full of references to acts of heroism , to suffering , to tragedies and shipwrecks at sea involving both small and large fishing boats .
Fishing communities keep alive the memories of tragic events , which they pass on from generation to generation .
Today , fortunately , modern technology can substantially reduce the danger , the uncomfortable conditions , accidents and shipwrecks .
We now have the means to act , as long as there is the desire to act in this field .
Mrs Miguélez Ramos ' s report is one of the most useful , appropriate , intelligent and well-drafted own-initiative reports that I have had the task of reading and studying amongst the many own-initiative reports that abound in this Parliament .
This is not an empty rhetorical exercise . It is an exemplary text and the rapporteur deserves our utmost praise and gratitude .
I therefore support not only her diagnosis , but also all the proposals , recommendations , encouragement , suggested measures and warnings contained in the report and I fully agree with its motives .
If the Commission and the Council give a favourable welcome to the content of the report and put it into practice , in a few years we will have fewer accidents , fewer deaths , fewer shipwrecks and less risk at sea .
We will not , of course , be able to eliminate risk entirely , but the accident rate will be greatly reduced , fishing will take on a more human face and its workers will be given more dignity .
Congratulations , Mrs Miguélez Ramos .
Mr President , I would like this report to contribute to the Commission giving up once and for all its obsession that a modern fleet runs counter to the protection of resources .
Protection of resources is a priority objective of the CFP , which can under no circumstances be put before any measure that promotes the safety of fishermen , because this is a fundamentally false approach .
There are many measures for maintaining and even reducing the fishing effort , while at the same time enabling living and safety conditions for crews to be improved .
The report that we are debating today , like all those that have been drawn up regarding safety , shows that the fact the fleet is so old is the main cause both of accidents on board and of sinking , and that sinking often has very serious consequences .
The Commission ' s plan to reserve the structural measures for the fleet almost exclusively for destroying it , while the surviving fleet is condemned to sail under increasingly precarious conditions , is therefore ridiculous .
The only thing that is unfortunately achieved through this policy is that the Community fleet features more strongly in terms of accidents than in terms of savings .
Also , there is no point in having a battery of safety standards if it is not required that they are complied with .
This is doubly concerning because the fact that this compliance has to be monitored and required makes us wonder what perception the sector has of its own safety .
The last FAO report on the world state of fisheries and aquaculture says that a safe working environment is not something that can be imposed easily and that measures for improving safety can only be effective if there is the will to put them into practice .
We therefore need to remember the responsibility that we all have as politicians , governments and fishermen , to end the fatalism that seems to surround this sector , a responsibility that cannot of course be escaped by the Commission or its narrow view on the modernisation of the fleet .
Mr President , admittedly , we owe this report to the determination of Parliament ' s Committee on Fisheries but also to the tenacity of Mrs Miguélez Ramos who has been able to convince everyone on this subject , because the Committee on Fisheries is often , if not always , obsessed with protecting fishery resources ; we should not forget about the lives of our fishermen .

I would reiterate that , according to the International Labour Organisation , 24 000 sea fishermen die every year throughout the world - we do not , admittedly , have a global responsibility - as a result of accidents at sea .
As a result of this report and also because of the timetable set out by the new fishing policy , we now have the opportunity to include this point in the Green Paper and we will later be able to include it in the common fisheries policy .
This has been mentioned by numerous speakers and I think and hope that the Commission will include it .
Since we obviously have no commitment to achieve specific results , we cannot do this , but we do have a commitment to resources in this matter , and we can make use of many of them .
For example , I am thinking of direct legislation in the area of fishermen ' s safety and safety at work , ship and equipment design or introducing rules for managing resources , which may have , and can have , implications for fishermen ' s safety .
We must also urge ship-owners to make use of technological developments .
We must always be at hand to help Member States and the fisheries sector to include these requirements in both initial and in on-going vocational training .
Lastly , I shall conclude by repeating the simple terms that Mrs Miguélez Ramos suggested , that is , the safety culture - it should be used to the maximum .
In this sector , there is a tradition of fatalism , which is related to the natural elements .
We must fight against this tradition , in the name of the safety culture , because there is no reason why , at the beginning of the twenty-first century , we cannot reduce the number of accidents at sea and the number of deaths amongst our fishermen .
Mr President , fishing is an activity which takes place in a naturally hostile environment , and is clearly associated with risk-taking .
Risks are inherent in almost every decision made by a skipper or individual fishermen : on when and where to go fishing , what gear to use , when and where to land the catch , and so on .
The level of marine accidents is unacceptably high .
In the UK , for example , the fatality rate among fishermen is 20 times higher than that for workers in the manufacturing industry .
Fishermen work in an unpredictable environment and are confronted with daily challenges from bad weather , fires on board , loss of power , poor vessel construction , poor communications and sometimes out-of-date navigation equipment .
Casualties at sea have , unfortunately , become an integral part of the fishing profession .
But the accident toll could undoubtedly be reduced if the fishing industry and individual fishermen , national authorities , the EU and international organisations faced this vital issue with enough thought , consideration , political will and economic means .
I welcome this initiative , I congratulate the rapporteur and I hope that the Commission will follow up the recommendations in this report with positive action to improve safety and to reduce the number of accidents .
It is also important that safety be one of the key priorities in the forthcoming review of the CFP .
It is essential that we do not create a management regime which forces fishermen to go to sea when the weather is bad , for example , in complying with days-at-sea restrictions or attempting to land fish in a designated port cut off by bad weather .
High prices in periods of bad weather may also drive fishermen working under quota systems out on risky fishing trips , which may be the only way to obtain the best prices for what they land against their quotas .
Such risks are preventable if safety forms an integral part of fisheries management .
I welcome the recent developments in Scotland , where changes in fishermen 's safety training mean that an age exemption for older catchers will be a thing of the past and that basic sea survival , first aid and survival training will soon be mandatory for all fishermen .
Finally , although a gradual ban on vessels more than 20 years old can be supported , the latter part of paragraph 4 in the report says , and I quote : " . . . except for those proven to be in perfect condition " .
It would be better if that section read : " . . . except for those that have passed annual safety tests " .
It is more practical to use that language than to open up a variable definition of perfect conditions .
I therefore urge Members to support Amendment No 6 .
Mr President , can I also congratulate Mrs Miguélez Ramos on this own-initiative report .
When you read the frightening statistics at the beginning of her report which indicate that some 24 000 fishermen die each year throughout the world , the huge risks involved in working in this industry become apparent .
This report calls for some radical proposals such as the call to introduce a gradual ban on vessels of 20 years of age or over , which my colleague Mr Hudghton has just mentioned , except where they have passed stringent annual safety checks .
I support this proposition .
Indeed such a policy might encourage participation in scrap-and-build programmes amongst those Member States which have traditionally refused to take advantage of cofinancing for such schemes , and the UK is a case in point .
The UK fleet is now approaching an average age of 30 years and our fishermen are being forced to put to sea in vessels which are becoming increasingly risky and accident prone .
I would also like to raise a couple of additional external factors which are not covered by the report but which the Commission may wish to consider .
Too often recently , we have seen lives lost when fishing vessels engaged in a trawl have snagged their gear on undersea cables and other foreign objects on the seabed .
There must be much more stringent regulation concerning the laying of undersea power and telecommunication cables or any foreign objects on the seabed where the lives of our fishermen might be endangered .
Also there have been many cases of fishing vessels being dragged under or rammed by submarines .
Only recently we had the tragic accident involving a US submarine and a Japanese training vessel where seven students lost their lives .
There have been similar cases in Scottish waters in recent years .
There must be better coordination between fishermen and naval personnel to ensure that such accidents can be avoided .
Finally , many fishermen think that learning to swim is a bad omen .
Can I suggest that as part of the rigorous training qualifications that are being called for by Mrs Miguélez Ramos in this report , swimming qualifications would be necessary and would save many fishermen 's lives every year .
Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission , I would first of all like to congratulate the Committee on Fisheries , its chairman and , in particular , you , Mrs Miguélez Ramos , as rapporteur , on this initiative .
The Commission entirely agrees with you .
The safety of our fishermen must be given top priority .
In the Green Paper on the future of the CFP , which I will shortly be presenting to Parliament , we have not forgotten this matter of concern and have thereby met one of your objectives , which you presented under paragraph 32 of the report .
Since 1989 , on the initiative of the Commission , the European Union has made every effort to improve the health and safety of workers in the fisheries sector .
Framework Directive 89 / 391 / EEC , together with the associated specific directives , offer a solid legal base .
The following specific directives have also been issued : Directive 92 / 29 / EEC on medical treatment on board , Directive 93 / 102 / EEC concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for work on board fishing vessels and Directive 97 / 70 / EEC setting up a harmonised safety regime for fishing vessels of 24 metres in length and over .
According to your report , Mrs Miguélez Ramos , there are problems above all in two areas : firstly , the correct maintenance of vessels and , secondly , the working conditions , hygiene and the organisation of work on board .
The framework directive and the specific directives cover both these spheres of action .
Having said that , we must note that more and more accidents are occurring in the fisheries sector .
Just in the last few months , accidents have occurred which have led to a number of deaths . I would at this point like to express my deep condolences to the families affected .
The Commission can agree with you fully .
First of all , the Member States must also implement the provisions of the directives .
As far as your conclusions are concerned , Madam Rapporteur , I feel there is a need to act in the following areas . The first area has to do with the legal framework , which is covered in paragraphs 1 to 3 and paragraph 27 of your report .
The applicable directives are essentially adequate but they are just minimum requirements , and there is nothing to prevent the Member States from issuing stricter rules or establishing special requirements for specific cases .
Moreover , the directives contain a reporting duty for the Member States with different timetables .
With the help of these national reports , in 2002 the Commission will compile a summary report and , where necessary , table amendments .
In preparation for this , we have started to amend Directive 97 / 70 / EEC to ensure the harmonised interpretation of the Annexe to the Torremolinos International Convention .
The second area relates to the vocational and continuing training of workers , which is covered by paragraphs 7 , 10 , 11 , 15 , 16 , 20 , 26 and 30 . The directives already contain articles on the vocational training of workers .
Here too , however , we are dealing with minimum requirements .
It therefore once again lies with Member States to see to it that they are implemented and , if needs be , to bring about higher standards .
I can assure you , however , that the Commission will make the vocational and continuing training of workers in matters of safety one of the central issues in its forthcoming report .
However , the best rules are useless if they are not complied with correctly or at all .
Monitoring and control are the main problems . But these fall exclusively within the remit of the Member States .
We must therefore urge them to apply the provisions correctly .
Moreover , objective , reliable and comparable data on the causes and circumstances of accidents are a prerequisite for successful prevention .
In this regard , there is already an initiative on the harmonisation of data in the competent departments of Eurostat and also in the Commission ' s Directorate-General for Employment .
As regards fleet renewal , I would like to remind you that one of the objectives of all the structural programmes in the fisheries sector is to modernise fishing vessels .
In the context of the financial instrument on structural assistance in the fisheries sector , there are abundant resources available to improve safety on board .
Finally , as regards the international part of the CFP , the Commission has always insisted on compliance with the rules in force .
Safety and health on board vessels are part and parcel of our overall strategy both in the bilateral agreements and in the regional fisheries organisations , as well as in the fight against illegal fishing and flying flags of convenience .
By way of conclusion , Mrs Miguélez Ramos , I can agree with you fully .
All of us - the European Parliament , the Commission , the Council , the Member States and international organisations - must do our outmost to ensure that the risk for our fishermen is reduced to an absolute minimum .
Your initiative is an important step towards achieving this goal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Professional fees
The next item is the Oral Question to the Commission ( B5-0164 / 2001 ) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on compulsory tariffs for certain liberal professions , in particular lawyers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one normally never gets this amount of time .
I have no idea how I am going to fill the seven minutes allotted to me .
But this is a very serious matter .
Europe is becoming increasingly concerned with the role of the liberal professions .
As they are part of the single market it is clear that issues concerning freedom in the single market are also extremely important for the liberal professions .
Unfortunately , what one hears in European institutions is not always easy to understand , to interpret properly and to elucidate .
We do know that , a few months ago , the Commissioner for Competition , Mario Monti , made a number of statements in this connection .
Mr Monti was attending an international conference when he said that , in his view , setting tariffs for liberal professions , which up to a point is done according to the law in some Member States through such mechanisms as fee scales for lawyers , is not without its problems under competition law .
He also announced at this conference that the Commission would look into this problem .
We also have the situation in which an Italian court submitted a request to the European Court for an advance determination in relation to which a hearing took place last autumn , and now the European Court will have to rule on the admissibility of Italian fee scales for lawyers under European law .
We have liberalised markets in many areas of the European Union .
However , we have not normally liberalised them in such a way that we said from one day to the next , that ' s it , we are now releasing you into a world of completely free competition .
Usually there are transitional periods , statutory regulations for adjustment and so on , for example in energy policy and many other sectors .
Only in the specific area of the liberal professions does it seem that there are no , or not enough , political considerations of this kind at the level of the European Union .
I think it is extremely important that , in the future , the Commission takes a closer look at the liberal professions and starts to deal with their specific demands .
They must deal not only with the people who work in the liberalised professions but , most decisively , with consumers as well .
Fee scales were issued by national legislators in the Member States in order to provide reliable protection for consumers when they made use of the services provided by the liberal professionals .
I think this aspect is gaining increasing influence in the policy of the European Union and must be integrated into any strategies that are developed .
We know that the Commission has just presented a paper on the services sector and the problems posed by the single market .
This is very much to be welcomed .
It just strikes me that this paper follows a completely horizontal approach and does not deal with the specific interests of the individual branches in the services sector , which is very big .
In my view , the medical and legal professions , for example , cannot be dealt with according to the same criteria as the supermarket round the corner whose social task is quite different .
We must not forget that the liberal professions are largely subject to specific special provisions attached to their profession in terms of competition , advertising , standards of behaviour and other obligations .
Today at midday , we voted in second reading on the money-laundering directive which dealt with such obligations .
That is why I believe that a specific political approach for the liberal professions is appropriate .
We want Parliament to deal with this issue and we want to force the Commission , by means of this oral question , to tackle the issue of the liberal professions head on , which it has so far failed to do .
That is why we have introduced this oral question with the text you have before you , which you are all familiar with and which I do not intend to go into any further .
I would now like to say a few words about the task my political group feels we have to take on , which is the reason why this resolution was introduced .
It is not enough just to talk about it ; we must take advantage of this part-session to announce our demands in a brief Commission resolution .
From our experiences in committee , the Commission normally complies with such requests .
On the basis of this resolution , therefore , I expect the Commission to make concrete proposals and statements on the development of policy with regard to the liberal professions .
I also expect it to answer the question of how , from a political viewpoint , it intends to deal with the modern developments that society entails . The liberal professions cannot ignore progress ; they must of course bear in mind that times change and the world moves on .
I have one final comment . Most liberal professions are also small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is why there is special interest in protecting these groups and also a special obligation on the part of the Commission to deal with this issue .
I have now spoken for six minutes .
I will forego my last minute .
Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , promoting competition amongst the liberal professions in the interests of consumers is one of the avowed priorities of my colleague , Mario Monti .
I welcome this opportunity to be able to present our policy to Parliament on his behalf and to comment on it .
The Commission agrees with you that guaranteeing the quality of services is of the utmost importance because customers , that is , consumers , are often in a weaker position than those who provide these services .
A rule which is solely targeted at guaranteeing top quality services without distorting competition is clearly in the interests of consumers .
This holds true regardless of whether the rule is introduced by the state or by a professional organisation .
The Community ' s competition rules do not therefore apply to purely professional rules .
Whether a rule is a purely professional rule must be determined from one case to the next .
In so doing , account must be taken of the impact of the rule on the freedom of action of members of the profession or of professional organisations as well as consumers .
As far as determining compulsory tariffs or rates of charges is concerned , it depends , firstly , on who determines the fees or rates of charges and , secondly , on what interests are taken into consideration .
The determining of uniform fees by members of a profession is a fundamental violation of competition rules .
Justification on grounds of professional ethics is not recognised .
At the same time , Member States only have the right to determine compulsory tariffs if these fees are objectively justified on grounds of the general interest .
The Commission is of the view that this requirement is met if the mandate and the power of the authority issuing the rule in question is sufficiently clearly and unequivocally expressed in the rule itself and if there is no room for unlawful agreements to be reached between members of the profession .
The Commission does , however , have certain reservations concerning the interpretation of the case law referred to in the question , if this interpretation leads one to believe that only fees which are determined by professional bodies or associations of all members of a given profession can be subject to competition law .
What is important however is that the existing , clear , objective and justified criteria of general interest , which are determined by the state , are met .
These criteria must include consideration of the interests of consumers and not only consideration of the interests of the profession .
The quality of services should be guaranteed through other , less restrictive , means than the determining of fees .
It is therefore not enough that a fee agreement is approved or confirmed by the relevant authorities in order for it to be exempt from the applications of competition rules .
A price agreement reached between members of a given profession , that is , between competitors , is a fundamental violation of competition rules .
Moreover , a Members State can violate its obligations out of the EC Treaty if the rule in question removes the effectiveness of competition rules .
This is the case , for example , when a state obliges the profession to determine uniform fees without specifying the criteria of the common good which have to be met .
A breach of contract takes place if a Member State transfers its power to determine fees to a professional association without reserving the right of supervision .
For the sake of completeness , I would like to point out that the Commission does not support the determining of compulsory tariffs but at most tolerates it under certain circumstances .
In areas in which compulsory uniform tariffs apply , competition must result from quality .
It is therefore important for members of the profession to publicise their special fields and to be able to advertise .
The Court of Justice just recently pointed out that advertising on every market is an important competitiveness factor since , in this way , the advantages of individual market participants , the quality of their services and tariffs are conveyed more clearly .
The Court confirmed the Commission ' s opinion that a ban on comparative advertising seriously affected the ability of the most competitive members of the profession to expand their services and also had a negative impact when the customer base was confined to the single market .
Finally , on the question of the country-of-origin principle , it must be noted that this principle helps to bring about a single market .
It is anchored in the Parliament and Council Directive 98 / 5 / EEC facilitating the permanent exercise of the lawyer ' s profession and guarantees , among other things , that lawyers can establish themselves using the professional title of the Member State in which they completed their training by simply registering in the host country .
The directive aims to enable layers who practice under the title given by their country-of-origin to establish branches and subsidiaries .
In general , the Commission continues to ensure that the advantages of freedom of movement , which can be achieved through the country-of-origin principle , are weighed against the general interest , which is protected in the host country and recognised under Community law .
The Commission is currently looking into how it can make further progress concerning the conditions for the cross-border provision of certain services .
Mr President , first may I say that I am speaking on behalf of my colleague , Lord Inglewood , who is an expert on this topic and who has had to return to London at short notice .
As a liberal professional myself , in this case a doctor , rather than a lawyer , I have to say that my British experience of fixed professional fees - fixed in this case by government - such as cremation fees and attendances at coroners ' courts , is that they are artificially low and have tended to benefit the state rather than the professional concerned .
Politically I have recently been involved with asking the Commission to examine the restrictions applied by British health insurers in only paying the medical fees for treatments provided within the UK and refusing such benefits to British residents who wish to avail themselves of treatment in , for example , France .
Last year I lobbied on behalf of a British lawyer wanting to register in France as a notaire , as non-French notaires are currently prohibited by French law , and this is an activity governed in many Member States by fixed fees .
Currently I am my group 's shadow rapporteur on EMAC on a proposed directive for a single market and free movement for insurance mediators , whose commissions are often fixed .
Therefore these concepts apply to a number of different professionals other than lawyers , as I have already mentioned .
The single market is one of the major achievements of the European Community and for that market to be complete it must include services as well as goods .
I entirely agree with Commissioner Bolkestein that the services sector in Europe offers huge potential growth for competition and employment which must be to the benefit of all of Europe 's citizens .
The Commission 's initiative in this area is therefore one that I strongly support and in accordance with the so-called single market principles , it should be possible to introduce in one Member State business models providing services pioneered successfully in another , and of course they should be subject to examination under the Treaty rules on competition .
I am conscious of the need for proper consumer protection across a single market , but I also suspect that many practices which have grown up over the years , through tradition and usage , may have outlived some of their original usefulness .
It is very important , therefore , that a thorough inquiry be conducted which will lead to a comprehensive debate so that special privileges and practices and exemptions which may be attached to the exercise of the liberal professions - and not just the lawyers - are properly scrutinised .
It is necessary to ensure that they will provide a real benefit to the citizen , and are not merely privileges supporting the vested interests of all the professions concerned .
Mr President , having heard Commissioner Fischler ' s answer it gives me the impression that at the moment on this matter the Commission is completely unprepared .
I think that it is only starting to see the outer layer of the problems .
Because I was thinking a moment ago that in the last part-session , Commissioner Reding , sitting where Commissioner Fischler is sitting now , gave us a detailed explanation of the agreement that had been reached between the Commission , FIFA and UEFA .
That is a business worth many billions of euros and in that case it seems that competition gives way to quality .
At times it seems that quality is very important , and I agree with this interpretation .
We are talking about a profession , that of a lawyer , which is said to be one of the oldest professions in the world - they say that there is another profession that is older , but I am not going to mention it to avoid being accused of sexism .
The law profession is very old and the danger of that is that lawyers deal with quantities .
Using the words of Karl Marx , here quality becomes quantity , or the reverse , if you like , because lawyers are defending interests that can be quantified .
In the different countries of the Community , or at least in some of them , there is a system of protection through professional organisations , which is not perfect and could be improved but which at least establishes some guarantees , as there are too many unscrupulous lawyers who , left to the free interaction of supply and demand , could be tempted to act and abuse their position .
I have the impression that the Commission is currently at a very immature time and therefore that we should look at this subject with a degree of calm .
I think that we need to start seeing what is happening - I think that Mr Tannock was referring to this - in the different Member States , what makes it difficul